




















































Hansard: November 17, 2009


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 15A  TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 17, 2009, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3607 

 November 17, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 

and through you, I‟d like to introduce a group that are sitting in 

your gallery, Mr. Speaker, and it‟s an honour to introduce them. 

The introduction I‟m going to try to keep brief, but it‟s a large 

group and they do a very, very big job for all of us in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Joining us earlier in the building was board members, 

volunteers, and personnel who operate CBOs 

[community-based organization] across this province, many of 

whom are directly involved with providing, frankly, a better 

quality of life with people who have intellectual disabilities and 

others who need help the most, who are most vulnerable among 

us. 

 

And I probably can‟t single out all of them, Mr. Speaker, and 

introduce them to this Assembly. But I would like to highlight a 

few that are here — and apologize to those that I‟ve missed — 

that did attend the luncheon and gave us as a province the 

chance to thank them for what they‟re doing to help eliminate 

the wait-list of over 440 people with intellectual disabilities 

who are waiting for either a residence or day programming or 

respite care. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I‟m happy to announce we made a lot of 

progress. We have 60 per cent of that wait-list dealt with 

already, in part because of the resources of the government and 

the minister, but mostly because of this group of CBOs. 

 

So joining us today, especially I‟d like to highlight, Judy 

Anderson, Cheshire Homes in Saskatoon, and she spoke briefly 

at the luncheon as well, Mr. Speaker, about the passion she‟s 

had as a volunteer for 10 years in that capacity and for 20 other 

years working in various areas — and really put into 

perspective what it is these CBOs are doing on a daily basis. 

 

Also joining us in the Assembly today — and again I apologize 

for those I may miss, Mr. Speaker — is Suzanne Setaz and 

Marilynn Garnier, the Redvers Activity Centre. Delaine Barber 

and Bernice Erickson. Maybe they could give us a wave or 

stand up. That would be even better. Delaine Barber and 

Bernice Erickson of the Weyburn Group Homes; John Soyka 

and Chris Turner of the Langenburg and District Activity 

Centre; John Denysek of the Yorkton branch of the 

Saskatchewan Abilities Council; Sonja Reviczky of YAIL 

[Yorkton Adult Independent Living] Harbor in Yorkton — I did 

see Sonja there; Carol Cundall of Estevan Diversified Services, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I may have missed a few others, and it would be their 

chance now to give us a wave and the opportunity for us to 

welcome them. There‟s some folks from some of the other 

CBOs that are there. A chance for us in this Assembly to say 

thank you and welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟d like to, 

on behalf of the opposition, join with the Premier in welcoming 

the guests that were here today at lunch for special recognition 

for the leadership they have shown in working with those less 

fortunate, the vulnerable in our communities. And so we too 

would like to join them. 

 

I know I had a chance to hear Judy Anderson say a few words, 

and that was very important. And she made some very astute 

remarks about the progress that‟s gone on but the work that still 

needs to be done. And so we appreciate that opportunity to hear 

that. 

 

So on behalf of the opposition, we would like to join the 

Premier and everyone in the House in welcoming them to our 

House today. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture, the 

member from Melville-Saltcoats. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I‟d like to, to you and through you to all members of 

the legislature, introduce 18 really good-looking students from 

the city of Melville, Melville Comprehensive School, grade 10 

social studies class. And I think many members in the 

legislature will also recognize their teacher, Mr. Perry 

Ostapowich. This is the 10th class that I‟ve had the opportunity 

to meet, that he has brought in here because of his interests and 

the interest for them to understand how the legislature works. 

 

I also want to welcome Bob Simpson as one of their chaperones 

today, and just once again thank Mr. Ostapowich for his faithful 

continuance of bringing classes to the legislature and his 

interest in the politics in this building. 

 

I‟ll ask all members to welcome them here today. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

present a petition in support of wage equity for CBO workers. 

And we know those workers who work in the community-based 

organizations care for and provide valuable services to some of 

the most vulnerable members of our society, such as persons 

living with mental and intellectual disabilities, women and 

children in crisis, low-income, at-risk individuals, young 

children, youth, Aboriginal, immigrant, and visible minority 

persons. 

 

I‟d like to read the prayer today, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 



3608 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2009 

honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

development and implementation of a multi-year funding 

plan to ensure that CBO workers achieve wage equity 

with employees who perform work of equal value in 

government departments. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the signers, the petitioners today come from 

North Battleford, Star City, and Regina. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise again today to present a 

petition in support of a new long-term care facility in La Ronge. 

And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately invest in the planning and 

construction of new long-term care beds in La Ronge. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by the good people of La Ronge and area. I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition in support of fairness for Saskatchewan‟s 

post-secondary students through the necessary expansion of the 

graduate retention program. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately expand the graduate 

retention program to include master‟s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petitions are from 

the city of Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present yet another petition on behalf of rural residents 

of Saskatchewan who question why the Sask Party government 

is leaving them behind with respect to providing safe and 

affordable water, and who have yet not had any commitment of 

assistance. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to financially assist the town of Duck 

Lake residents for the good of their health and safety due 

to the exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency, and that this government fulfills its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good 

residents of Duck Lake. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition in support of maintaining quality health care services. 

Mr. Speaker, we all hope that the Government of Saskatchewan 

realizes that in order to address issues of retention and 

recruitment and to ensure safe staffing levels, that they have to 

commit to adequate funding and the installation of good faith in 

the collective bargaining process. And the prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to commit to maintaining quality health 

care services and job security for all public health care 

providers. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the petitions are signed by people from Kindersley, 

Flaxcombe, Brock, Gravelbourg, Dalmeny, Bruno, and 

Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m pleased today to 

rise and present a petition in support of affordable rents and 

housing for The Battlefords. The petition notes that residents of 

some Battlefords area apartments have been given notice of rent 

increases of about 40 per cent, which most feel are outrageous. 

The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to call 

upon the Government of Saskatchewan to develop an 

affordable housing program that will result in a greater 

number of quality and affordable rental units to be made 

available to a greater number of people throughout The 

Battlefords and that will implement a process of rent 

review or rent control to better protect tenants in a 

non-competitive housing environment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by residents of The 

Battlefords and Cut Knife, Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present petitions 

on behalf of concerned residents of Saskatchewan as it relates to 

the unprecedented mismanagement of their finances by the Sask 

Party. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to start managing our 



November 17, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3609 

provincial finances responsibly and prudently to ensure 

that it does not continue its trend of massive budgetary 

shortfalls, runaway and unsustainable spending, equity 

stripping from our Crowns, and irresponsible revenue 

setting. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by concerned residents of Regina. I 

so present. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Induction of Prince Albert Mayor and Council 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, November 9th at city hall, Prince 

Albert‟s new mayor and council were installed at an induction 

ceremony. They were piped into the council chambers with an 

honour guard made up of Prince Albert city police and 

firefighters. Once inside, the mayor and council swore their 

oath of office. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the new council consists of some new members 

and some familiar faces. Jim Scarrow was re-elected as mayor. 

In ward 1, new councillor Charlene Miller was elected. Ward 2 

saw Greg Dionne re-elected, and Lee Atkinson was acclaimed 

and returned as councillor in ward 3. New councillor Jayne 

Remenda was acclaimed in ward 4, and Cheryl Ring is the 

newly elected councillor in ward 5. Ward 6, Martin Ring was 

returned to office by acclamation. Darren Whitehead won the 

election to ward 7 to become their new councillor and in ward 

8, Councillor Ted Zurakowski was returned by acclamation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe it‟s noteworthy that Prince Albert has 

three women on its council — as many as we‟ve had at any 

point in our history. Mr. Speaker, the electorate of Prince Albert 

has shown their faith in the vision of this mayor and council and 

have placed their trust in their leadership. I know that trust is 

well placed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would also wish to acknowledge the work and 

dedication of outgoing councillors Matheson, Swystun, Gervais, 

and Williams, and express my appreciation to all those who let 

their names stand as candidates both for mayor and council. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join with me in 

congratulating Prince Albert‟s mayor and council as they begin 

their important work on behalf of the citizens of Prince Albert. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Government Funds New Group Homes 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our government 

puts Saskatchewan families first, which is why we are 

committed to eliminating the wait-lists for programs and 

services for people with intellectual disabilities. 

 

Earlier today our Premier announced funding for 21 new group 

homes across Saskatchewan. These new homes will be an 

important part of the support network for families who have 

loved ones with intellectual disabilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this funding is part of our government‟s four-year, 

$76.9 million commitment to eliminating the wait-list of 440 

people with intellectual disabilities who require residential, day, 

and specialized programs. The funding announced today will go 

to community-based organizations in 12 different Saskatchewan 

communities. Additional initiatives to further reduce wait-lists 

for people with intellectual disabilities are in the later stages of 

development in many other Saskatchewan communities. 

 

By the end of this fiscal year, projects will be under way to 

serve 264 Saskatchewan people with intellectual disabilities. 

That‟s a 60 per cent reduction of the wait-list. More than half 

the families waiting — many for far too long — have peace of 

mind that their loved ones will receive the support they need 

and deserve. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as a result of our government‟s historic funding 

commitment, combined with our many enhanced partnerships 

with CBOs across Saskatchewan, our government is on pace to 

eliminate the wait-list by 2013. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Lest We Forget 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. November 11th for 

the past 90 years in Canada has been, and I hope always will be, 

a time of remembrance. The words we heard last week repeated 

in communities right across Saskatchewan, “lest we forget,” 

must remain meaningful. 

 

But members of the Royal Canadian Legion have always told 

us, in words and in deeds, that we as individuals and as a 

society need to do more than just remember. We need to 

understand, we need to teach, and we need to learn. 

 

Although armed conflict is closer to today‟s young people than 

it has been at any time since the Second World War, there are 

still far too many young people who admit that they don‟t know 

what to think about during the two-minute silence on November 

11th. This year, at Remembrance Day services across Canada, 

the Legion has challenged provincial and territorial educators 

and governments to put an increased emphasis on Canadian 

history and to include Canada‟s military history in our 

classrooms. 

 

At a time when Canada‟s young people are participating in 

Canada‟s military in a much more dramatic way than ever 

before, maybe it‟s time that we here in Saskatchewan took up 

the Legion‟s challenge to help more people in a more formal 

way to understand and to learn so that we have more to 

remember in a more meaningful way. Lest we forget, Mr. 

Speaker, lest we forget. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

[13:45] 

 



3610 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2009 

Torch of Life Raises Awareness of Organ and Tissue 

Donation 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Mr. Speaker, it was a great privilege to take part 

in the Torch of Life event held on the steps of the legislature 

earlier this morning. Together with the Premier, members of 

cabinet, fellow MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly], 

students from Miller, Riffel, O‟Neill, and LeBoldus High 

School, the Torch of Life was passed to the Premier before it 

went on to the next leg of the relay. 

 

The Torch of Life relay works to raise awareness about organ 

and tissue donation. Currently 4,000 Canadians await organ and 

tissue donations, but unfortunately many will not have what 

they need. 

 

George Marcello, CEO [chief executive officer] and lead 

organizer of SOS The Americas and the Torch of Life, was a 

recipient of an organ donation. This donation saved his life and 

because of that he is able to help others by raising awareness for 

organ and tissue donations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank George Marcello, SOS The 

Americas, the Torch of Life, and the students from Miller, 

Riffel, O‟Neill, and LeBoldus High School for bringing the 

important issue of organ and tissue donation to the attention of 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Personally I‟ve taken the steps to ensure that my family knows 

that I wish to be an organ donor when my time comes. I would 

hope that because of the awareness raised here today that those 

of you, my colleagues on both sides of the House who have not 

done so, please speak to your families about your wishes to 

donate so as many people who are less fortunate than us who 

wait to be saved by such a selfless act. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Cheshire Homes Addition in Saskatoon 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s timely today that 

Judy Anderson is in the gallery, from Cheshire Homes, because 

my member statement is about Cheshire Homes. 

 

On September 29th, the sod was turned for the fourth house in 

the Cheshire Homes complex in Saskatoon Eastview. Mr. 

Speaker, Cheshire Homes Saskatoon has provided a 

co-operative living environment for young adults with physical 

disabilities since 1983. The mission of Cheshire Homes is to 

provide accessible, comfortable homes with personal services 

for those young adults. The new addition will provide a life 

lease opportunity for young adults to own their own home, be 

independent, but still have support services on site. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate the board of Cheshire 

Homes for their commitment and vision. Of particular worthy 

mention is Dr. John Owen, who has been front and centre from 

the beginning, bringing the Cheshire Home model to Saskatoon. 

Mr. Speaker, thanks also to the many volunteers at Cheshire 

Homes, and congratulations to all the young, new homeowners 

who will reside at the new Cheshire Homes addition. Thanks, 

Mr. Speaker. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Meadow Lake. 

 

Honouring Saskatchewan’s First Nations Veterans 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, last night in North 

Battleford my colleague, the Minister of First Nations and 

Métis Relations, had the opportunity to attend the sixth annual 

fundraising gala for Aboriginal war veterans sponsored by the 

Saskatchewan First Nations Veterans‟ Association. 

 

Over 7,000 First Nations soldiers served in the First and Second 

World Wars and Korea. They were all volunteers and enlisted 

despite their country not allowing them to vote, and during a 

time when they needed special permission just to leave the 

reserve without losing their status. Despite all that, they still 

chose to defend Canada, fighting bravely and expertly on all 

fronts. 

 

Some, such as Sergeant Tommy Prince, would be decorated 

with the highest awards for bravery. Prince served with great 

distinction with the First Special Service Force, better known as 

the Devil‟s Brigade, and was personally awarded the Military 

Medal and Silver Star by King George VI. 

 

On the return to Canada these veterans were treated very poorly 

by the Canadian government. They were refused access to the 

benefits and programs that other veterans received. 

 

For decades the Government of Canada refused to acknowledge 

the injustice done to these brave individuals. That changed in 

2005 when it was my honour to introduce a private member‟s 

motion in the House of Commons that finally officially 

recognized the courage and sacrifice of Aboriginal veterans, 

and acknowledged and apologized for the mistreatment the 

veterans suffered upon their return from war. 

 

On behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan, I wish to pay 

tribute to these veterans and thank them for their heroic service. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Leaving Town 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, well, well, well. I see according to 

today‟s news release that our Premier is off to Washington 

Wednesday to visit with some senators about climate change. 

And, Mr. Speaker, he‟s there for three days. 

 

Now no doubt our Finance minister will miss him as he 

announces the Sask Party government has spent more money so 

far this year than they‟ve taken in — we think maybe $1 billion 

more. And we call that a deficit. 

 

Now why would the Premier leave town? Some would think 

that he‟s trying to get out of Dodge when the Finance minister 

is busy delivering his bad news mid-year report. Others might 

say he wants the Finance minister to have his day in the 

spotlight all by himself. And still others might say that this is 

one parade that the Premier doesn‟t want to be in front of. 

 

Now yesterday the member from Saskatoon Northwest sang. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I‟m going to say a little poem: 



November 17, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3611 

Bad news travels fast and far, 

It doesn‟t matter where you are. 

 

You can run, but you can‟t hide. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Energy Alternatives and the Environment 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier. 

Like the public finances of the province, this government has 

totally mismanaged the climate change file. And in their 

campaign promises in 2007, those promises now have been 

broken. The $320 million that the previous administration, the 

NDP [New Democratic Party] government, had set for climate 

change has been stripped away to deal with the fiscal 

irresponsibility of this government. And really climate change 

has now become a series of photo ops. 

 

And speaking of photo ops, last year the Premier signed, at the 

Council of the Federation in Quebec, an agreement committing 

Saskatchewan to achieve 20 per cent increase in energy 

efficiency by the year 2020. 

 

Mr. Speaker, can the Premier tell us why he didn‟t inform 

SaskPower of that commitment? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the 

Opposition Leader‟s sudden interest in environmental concerns; 

it‟s the first question they‟ve asked this sitting so far. And, Mr. 

Speaker, our position has always been that we need to find a 

balance between environmental protection and economic 

sustainability of our province. And on one hand the opposition 

is concerned about the finances of our province, and the other 

hand they now claim to want higher targets, Mr. Speaker. And 

we‟re looking to have a balance between the two. 

 

And the NDP were once in favour of this as well, Mr. Speaker. 

They said in a 2002 position paper, and I quote: 

 

Saskatchewan is committed to taking action on climate 

change. But we are not willing to have our residents and 

industries pay an unfair price. Nor are we willing to accept 

a plan that penalizes our economy but fails to effectively 

address climate change. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we agreed with what they said then. They 

apparently don‟t agree with themselves now. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — My question is to the Premier because, 

Mr. Speaker, there was an agreement signed in Quebec City in 

2008. In the agreement the Premier committed, didn‟t suggest 

or talk about, he committed in a signed agreement that he would 

in fact achieve a 20 per cent increase in energy efficiency by the 

year 2020. That‟s his commitment. And what I‟m saying is, has 

the government informed SaskPower of this commitment? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, with 

respect to the hon. member‟s question, I think it‟s pretty clear 

that SaskPower and the rest of government understood the 

message that came from the Council of the Federation because 

SaskPower, under this government, under the minister, has 

undertaken a number of steps with respect to conservation, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

With respect to renewable energy, Mr. Speaker, we‟ve actually 

exceeded the promises made by that party, in a recent 

announcement on wind, for another 200 megawatts for the 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think it‟s a widely held view that the province of 

Saskatchewan is leading on the issue of carbon capture 

technology and sequestration, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a positive 

message that we have for the rest of the country and for North 

America, as we witness very recently from the first-ever Senate 

delegation to the province of Saskatchewan. They wanted to 

find out about what Saskatchewan was doing on the issue of the 

energy and the environment, and I‟ll be happy to talk about that 

if the hon. member has a few more questions. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier I‟m sure, while 

he is in Washington, will talk about the NDP‟s commitment to 

carbon sequestration which was done under the Romanow and 

Calvert government. I hope he informs those that he‟s speaking 

to that he didn‟t do that because he hasn‟t done that in the past. 

He pretends that he is responsible for carbon sequestration. I‟m 

not sure that he would even know what it means. 

 

My question to the Premier, my question to the Premier, in 

regards to the commitment by SaskPower, there‟s a committee 

of the legislature meeting dealing with the issue of energy 

future options. And in the committee hearings, the question was 

asked about the commitment to energy efficiency. And 

SaskPower said the following: by 2017, we see our energy 

efficiency program will be able to deliver 100 megawatts of 

saving, but we‟re not stopping there. We‟re actually setting a 

long-term goal of 3000 megawatts of energy saving. End quote. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that‟s an achievement somewhere between 3 and 9 

per cent energy efficiency. My question is, how can we believe 

what the Premier says when he can‟t even get SaskPower to 

deliver on the commitments he‟s made? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member has a 

problem. The hon. member‟s problem is getting Saskatchewan 

people to believe what he and his party are saying about any 

particular issue, whether it‟s nuclear power or whether it‟s 

carbon capture. 

 

Because that hon. member just stood up and took credit for . . . 

And by the way, just for the record, I think almost at every 

single opportunity, including with international audiences, I do 

mention that the Romanow administration, together with 



3612 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2009 

EnCana, yes, and Apache and the US [United States] 

Department of Energy, are responsible for what happened in 

Weyburn. And we are building on that success. The member 

should check the record. The member should check the record. 

 

But you know, Mr. Speaker, they do not have a consistent 

position on carbon capture and sequestration. Because now the 

member says he‟s all for it. He‟s the author and the perfector of 

it down in Weyburn. 

 

But his Environment critic, the Environment critic that he 

reappointed to the position after he got the job as leader — a 

decision that that party may or may not be regretting — said 

this. The critic said they committed to the expensive and untried 

technology of carbon capture. That‟s one of her many 

pronouncements on carbon capture, that it ought not to be a top 

priority for the province. 

 

Well it is. We‟ll build on the success from the previous 

Romanow administration. We‟ll build on it in an 

international-leading way, with or without the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — A question to the Premier, who may not 

know because he was busy at the time doing other things in the 

building while we did the agreement with North Dakota. 

Because I was the minister, along with Eldon Lautermilch, who 

signed the agreement with Alberta Energy, a Crown corporation 

owned by the Government of Alberta, to do carbon 

sequestration. I‟m not sure what he was doing at that time, but 

he may not have noticed when we signed that agreement. I 

happen to have been there while he was busy doing other 

projects in the building. 

 

My question to the Premier is this: before the election, he 

pretended to set targets for emissions. And he broke those 

promises. And in Quebec City, he pretended that he would have 

energy efficiency of 20 per cent. And now he comes home, and 

he can‟t achieve that. Some people are calling this Premier the 

great pretender. 

 

My question is to the Premier: why are you sending one of your 

ministers off to Copenhagen when in fact you haven‟t met any 

of your commitments? And won‟t it be an embarrassment to the 

province and to the people of this province when your minister 

goes there and argues, not to meet commitments, rather than 

raise the commitments and the bar for the climate change 

process? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — You know, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to 

the issue of the energy and the environment, carbon capture 

technology, or nuclear power, when it comes to those issues, the 

hon. member has more positions than the Kama Sutra. 

 

Here‟s what his opposition critic said about federal targets. He 

said, she said . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I think not only 

members, but I know the gallery will be having a difficult time 

hearing the Premier‟s response. So I‟d ask members to allow 

the Premier the same opportunity — order — to respond in the 

manner that the member was offered the opportunity to ask the 

question. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — With respect to the issue of carbon capture 

and sequestration, the hon. member‟s Environment critic, the 

critic that he appointed, has said this: “. . . they [meaning us] 

committed to the expensive and untried technology of carbon 

capture . . .” Apparently, she hadn‟t got the memo that that hon. 

member personally had perfected that technology, though it‟s 

true the Romanow government had actually implemented it. 

 

What else have they said with respect to this issue of targets? 

Mr. Speaker, the hon. member, the critic for the Environment, 

said this. They don‟t want to hear this, Mr. Speaker. Here‟s 

what she said, “I would say the federal targets are something 

that they should clearly be adopting.” They being us. Mr. 

Speaker, we have adopted those targets.  

 

We have laid out a climate change plan for the province that 

would ensure any levies collected from high emitters stay here 

in the province of Saskatchewan, are not transferred to Ontario 

or Quebec or other regions of the country in a wealth transfer. 

 

That member and all those members over there will have a 

chance to vote in favour of that plan, to vote in favour of 

Saskatchewan leading in this regard, to vote in favour of 

Saskatchewan retaining those benefits. He‟ll have a chance to 

stand up and vote in favour of that later this day. I hope he‟ll 

take it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Greenhouse Gas Emissions 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, last spring in the eleventh hour 

before session ended, the government introduced Bill 95, The 

Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases Act. But that 

legislation died on the order paper without receiving second 

reading and has not been reintroduced. 

 

In the Speech from the Throne, the government said it would be 

participating in the Copenhagen Conference on Climate 

Change. That conference begins in less than three weeks. Today 

the government wants us to endorse its so-called plan in the 

absence of legislation. To the minister: how can this 

government make promises to reduce greenhouse gases in 

Copenhagen when Saskatchewan has not yet passed climate 

change legislation? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our 

greenhouse gas reduction bill will be reintroduced in the fall. 

And if the member opposite is so concerned about us having 

legislation passed in this House, I would ask them to let it pass 



November 17, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3613 

at all three stages so that we can have it passed before I go to 

Copenhagen. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, the government says it wants to 

showcase its “unique and practical plan” in Copenhagen. But it 

hasn‟t shared its final plan with Saskatchewan people. The only 

legislation ever made public contained no actual reduction 

targets and no baseline year against which reductions could be 

measured. And answers to written questions on the 

government‟s consultation since last spring show a lot of 

consultation with industry, but virtually none with 

environmental groups. 

 

To the minister: will the plan the government unveils in 

Copenhagen include a legislated commitment to specific 

science-based targets, or did its one-sided consultations 

persuade the government to continue making empty promises? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, on May 11th of this year, 

we introduced legislation in this House. We also said that we 

were adopting the federal targets which are a 20 per cent 

reduction by 2020 from 2006 levels. And, Mr. Speaker, those 

are the targets that this government will be presenting at 

Copenhagen when we go. But, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to 

targets, the NDP Environment critic has asked us to adopt the 

federal targets which we have. 

 

And for them to have any credibility on this file, or claim to 

have any credibility on this file, Mr. Speaker, is incredibly 

surprising. They contradict themselves constantly, including 

their complete abdication of clean coal or carbon capture and 

storage for our province, Mr. Speaker. So if they expect us to 

reach any targets, why are they not on side with any of the 

made-in-Saskatchewan technologies that will actually help us 

achieve this? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, the minister seems to forget that 

they adopted our climate change reduction targets in their 

election platform, and then they decided to break that campaign 

promise. That‟s what they‟ve decided to do. The Obama 

administration has not backed down in its threat to regulate 

greenhouse gases as a pollutant. Britain, France, Germany, 

Sweden, and Greece have already met their Kyoto targets, and it 

appears most European countries will do so by 2012. 

 

Canada and Saskatchewan risk being left behind on the world 

economy unless we take decisive action of own. This 

government has been hanging its hat on equivalency agreement 

with Ottawa for months, and an agreement the government was 

forced to admit, in answers to written questions, that has not yet 

been signed. 

 

To the minister: will the government sign a final equivalency 

agreement with Ottawa before Copenhagen? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, it would appear to me that 

the opposition is now not only walking away from the federal 

targets which they asked us to adopt, they‟re walking away 

from their original targets and somehow want us now to adopt 

Kyoto targets. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, as far as an equivalency agreement goes, we 

have signed an agreement in principle to work with the federal 

government. And I think that the members opposite don‟t 

actually understand what an equivalency agreement is. It‟s 

based on regulations and, Mr. Speaker, as we move forward 

with our legislation, the regulations we put in place. And there 

has to be an examination between the federal regulations and 

the provincial regulations to make sure that we‟re all on the 

same place for this, so that we can actually regulate in-province, 

Mr. Speaker, and keep our money in Saskatchewan. In a 

Saskatchewan technology fund, so we can reinvest in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, the value of an equivalency 

agreement is dubious anyway, since the federal environment 

commissioner said last May that the federal government has no 

actual plan to measure greenhouse gas emission reductions. The 

government keeps predicting economic disaster if we move 

decisively on climate change, but an analysis prepared for the 

government last January revealed that there would be little if 

any difference in residential electricity rates by moving to a 

higher target. And the Pembina Institute says we could create 

50,000 new jobs. 

 

Once again independent experts tell this government one thing 

while it does the opposite. To the minister: why does this 

government always assume it knows better than independent 

experts? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, as the member opposite 

stated, we did do an examination of the impacts on our 

economy from different targets that we may or may not have 

adopted. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would point out again that the NDP had 

clearly stated in 2002 that they were not willing for 

Saskatchewan to pay an unfair price, nor were they willing to 

have a plan in place that would penalize their economy. And, 

Mr. Speaker, there was a difference between the NDP targets 

and the targets that we have adopted. But, Mr. Speaker, the 

opposition critic has clearly stated that a discussion about the 

economy . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. It‟s becoming somewhat 

difficult for even myself to exactly hear the minister‟s response. 

So I ask members to allow the minister to respond to the 



3614 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2009 

question. I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, the Opposition critic 

doesn‟t think that a discussion about our economy has any place 

in the environmental discussion around greenhouse gas 

emissions. She said, and I quote, “I would say that that is a red 

herring, an economic discussion. I would say that‟s also 

irresponsible.” And Mr. Speaker, I think that‟s a very 

irresponsible position . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Are the members interested in 

actually getting a response? Or are they not interested? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Yes. 

 

The Speaker: — Well then allow the minister to respond. The 

minister may complete her answer. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, we do have to have a 

discussion about the economy when it comes to greenhouse gas 

emission reductions in this province. That is a position that our 

government has taken, and we believe that we have found a 

balance between the two. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Management of Provincial Economy 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just a few 

months ago Crown Investments Corporation, CIC, had well 

over $1 billion cash on hand in its holding. This represented 

important equity for our Crown corporations to enable our 

Crowns to grow and to renew their provincial-wide networks 

while keeping rates low for Saskatchewan people and business. 

 

Straight question to the Minister of Finance. After stripping 

$480 million and any other commitments as well, prior to any 

measures that are going to be included in this year‟s budget 

update, simple question: what‟s the current balance of CIC 

dollars? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments Corp. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m very pleased that the 

members opposite are now realizing the importance of the 

Crown Investments Corporation to our province, and the fact 

that the opposition, when they were sitting over here, never 

understood the importance of actually spending money on 

infrastructure. 

 

The NDP annual capital spend on SaskPower was $280 million. 

Last year our government spent 420 million. This year we‟re 

going to spend $900 million. You know what we‟re doing right 

now, Mr. Speaker? We‟re spending money on infrastructure in 

our Crowns because the members opposite didn‟t spend 

enough. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member responsible for 

Regina Rosemont. 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the minister completely 

avoided the question. The question was how much money‟s on 

hand. We know that that government has a burn rate on capital, 

such as Crowns, like no tomorrow. And it‟s a major concern. 

Mr. Speaker, you can understand why people of Saskatchewan 

no longer accept this incompetent Finance minister at his word. 

His assurances don‟t cut it after presenting the most 

irresponsible budget in this province‟s history.  

 

Mr. Speaker, a straightforward question to the minister. 

Saskatchewan people expect a straightforward answer. How 

much money does he plan to strip from the Crown corporations 

in this budget year? And would he admit that this unjustified 

cash grab is really just a backdoor tax increase? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, there is no doubt that the 

province has a challenge in reconciling the revenue loss that has 

happened as a result of the potash industry‟s shortfall. There is 

no doubt that that is a challenge. And this government is going 

to meet that challenge within a balanced budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, but there‟s another story in Saskatchewan that also 

needs to be told, a much more positive story of economic 

development and growth and opportunity. Mr. Speaker, 

Sébastien Levoie, Laurentian Bank economist says, and I quote, 

“Saskatchewan and Manitoba are breezing through the 

economic and financial crisis with an ease that . . . [would] 

make other regions envious.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Dominion Bond Rating agency has said, when 

they gave Saskatchewan a credit upgrade, they cite debt 

reduction, fiscal prudence, and sound economic fundamentals. 

The Conference Board predicts strong economic growth going 

forward into the new year. And certainly the Crowns are very 

much a part of that fiscal stability in this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — It‟ll be interesting, Mr. Speaker, to hear 

about what some of the analysts are saying about this financial 

escapade here this year. When equity that could have been used 

as an injection into our Crown corporations to allow growth and 

renewal is diverted and is stripped to cover off the mistakes of 

this government, this certainly has an adverse effect on the 

utility rates Saskatchewan people and Saskatchewan businesses 

pay. Rates are forced to increase. 

 

The people and businesses of Saskatchewan will partially pay 

for the gross mismanagement of this government‟s budget 

through increases to utility bills for many years into the future. 

Mr. Speaker, how can the Finance minister in good faith 

characterize his equity stripping as anything other than what it 

is, a backdoor tax increase? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the money 

that is being used in the Crowns is cash that‟s available for the 

use of government for important government priorities. And 

important government priorities include the important things 



November 17, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3615 

that we‟ve been doing. 

 

The important government priorities include the things that 

we‟ve been doing for families and seniors and children and the 

most vulnerable in our economy. We had $58 million for early 

learning and child care spaces. We have a strategy to make . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, we‟ve provided for $18 

million for the active families benefit. We‟ve provided $16.5 

million for enhancements to the seniors‟ income plan and $12.5 

million to increase shelter rates for people. These are important 

initiatives of the government and the people of Saskatchewan. 

And CIC equity dollars are also dollars that can be used from 

the sales of the Saferco proceeds to help with those very 

important priorities. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we have important 

questions to the Finance minister. We haven‟t got a single 

answer — not how much money‟s on hand right now, not how 

much will be on later this week, and certainly not at the end of 

this budget year. But it‟s not just the Crown equity that this 

minister is draining. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 2008, the Throne Speech of this government 

committed to maintain a significant cash balance in its rainy 

day fund. In fact the Throne Speech said, and I quote: 

 

My government is currently forecasting this balance to be 

almost $2 billion at the end of the current fiscal year. 

 

This will be the rock on which we secure Saskatchewan‟s 

future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today the rainy day fund is not $2 billion, but 

$840 million. And it‟s just starting to rain. My question to the 

minister: after he raids the rainy day fund once again, this week 

after the mid-year budget update, what will be left in that fund 

at the end of this budget year? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, an 

important initiative of this government was to reduce the long 

outstanding General Revenue Fund debt of the province. And 

when the members opposite ask, well what we did with some of 

the money, we absolutely paid down 40 per cent of the General 

Revenue Fund debt. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that initiative was a very important initiative 

because it improves the fiscal capacity of the province. Mr. 

Speaker, it also results in lower interest payments for the people 

of Saskatchewan, so those dollars can be used for other 

important initiatives of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there‟s two stories in this province. There 

certainly is the story of the challenge as a result of the potash 

industry shortfall. But there‟s a story of growth and optimism, a 

story of ensuring that we‟re looking after the most vulnerable of 

our citizens. And this government will continue to be noted for 

those stories. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the minister speaks about 

debt reduction. Debt reduction. At the same time, it‟s cranking 

up debt in the Crown corporations like never before and 

draining resources in our Crowns and draining resources in our 

rainy day fund at a burn rate that‟s unsustainable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the 2008 Throne Speech had this to say about the 

global economic recession. And I quote: 

 

We expect our economy to flourish and prosperity to 

continue, even in these unstable times . . . 

 

But, Saskatchewan people should feel secure in the 

knowledge that they have a $2 billion fiscal insurance 

policy to ensure we are prepared to weather any possible 

impact on the provinces revenues. 

 

Can‟t you just see those pompoms waving, Mr. Speaker. To the 

minister: what‟s left of our $2 billion fiscal insurance policy, 

our rock? What‟s left in that fund today? And what will be left 

in that fund at the end of this budget year? 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 

noise and heckling in the House has obviously prevented the 

member from hearing my previous answer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have used the resources of the province to pay 

back $2.6 billion of the provincial debt — 40 per cent. Some of 

that money has come from the Growth and Financial Security 

Fund, and we feel that that was a very important decision to 

make a major initiative against the long-term debt of the 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Crowns need to borrow funds to build the 

infrastructure that this province has neglected for 16 years 

under that administration. We need to build transmission lines, 

transmission capacity, and wind generation power. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. There‟s a handful of 

members, and in this case some on the side of the opposition 

benches, who continually continue to holler from their seats and 

interfere with the opportunity for the minister to respond. I ask 

the members to allow the minister to complete his response. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I must advise members 

in the gallery that they‟re not to participate in debate on the 

floor. And so we ask you to respect the rules of the Chamber. 



3616 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2009 

Thank you. Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I would close by saying this. The Dominion Bond 

Rating agency has given this province a current and improved 

credit rating. 

 

The members opposite, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 

always took great pride and pleasure when there was an 

upgrading of the fiscal situation of the province in the past. It 

means that there‟s good fiscal management of the economy, in 

spite of the economic pressures there are. And it means a good 

thing for the province of Saskatchewan. And they cite debt 

reduction, fiscal prudence, and sound economic fundamentals 

as the reasons behind the upgrade, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The people of the province understand that. The 20 members 

opposite don‟t. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 

 

Plan for Climate Change 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Following my 

remarks, I‟ll be moving a motion asking that this Assembly 

support Saskatchewan‟s climate change position going into 

Copenhagen. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we are now only a few weeks away from the 

COP 15 [Conference of the Parties] meeting in Copenhagen, the 

United Nations meeting that will set the global path forward 

from the Kyoto agreement which was signed a decade ago. 

Kyoto expires in 2012, and the world is looking for a new 

agreement to address the issue of climate change and 

greenhouse gas emission reductions. 

 

There has been much talk over the course of the past year on 

which countries are doing what. Are we doing enough globally? 

What happens if countries such as India, China, and the United 

States do not do their fair share? And these are all very 

important questions. Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to be able to 

represent Saskatchewan in our unique position at the meetings 

in Copenhagen and to tell our story to a global audience. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the course of this debate in the House today, 

I‟m sure that the opposition will simply point out what they see 

as deficiencies in our plan and decry the fact that we didn‟t do 

exactly what they would have done. And, Mr. Speaker, while 

we do not agree on everything, and I will point out some of 

those differences, I will also be taking this opportunity to point 

out the similarities of our positions. And as we head into the 

talks in Copenhagen, I believe our province is better served by 

having a unified voice and a plan that will actually make a 

difference. 

 

Our government has been consistent in our position that we 

need to find a balance between economic growth and 

environmental protection. And we believe that we have done 

that. One of the things that we did on this file was to have an 

analysis of targets and their impact on our province and our 

people. We saw that the NDP targets would cost our economy 

and our families. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP stand in this House and say they want the 

lowest possible SaskPower rates, but at the same time call for 

higher targets. They cannot have it both ways. Higher targets 

mean higher SaskPower rates. 

 

It is a well-known fact that reducing our greenhouse gas 

emissions will cost money. It is not free. It will cost our 

province money. It will cost SaskPower ratepayers money. That 

is a simple fact. What we are doing as a government is 

attempting to make this cost as reasonable as possible. 

 

I would point out that on this point the NDP once agreed with 

us. In 2002 they released a discussion paper on climate change. 

The premise of it was to address the ratification of the Kyoto 

agreement, but I believe that the NDP‟s basic concerns are still 

applicable today. 

 

There are many interesting things in the report, Mr. Speaker, 

comments that they contradict every day. And I quote from 

page 6 of that report: “Unacceptable costs will erode public 

support . . . and will force governments to reverse their 

commitment to reduce emissions.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, we agree. What good is a plan that is not 

economically viable? I suppose the easiest way to reduce our 

emissions is to drive out or shut down industry in 

Saskatchewan, but I hardly see how our province will benefit 

from that approach. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have said all along that Saskatchewan is not 

immune to the current economic difficulties facing our nation. 

The issues that we have seen with potash sales this year have 

also caused concern, yet we are doing relatively well. And in 

the face of uncertain economic times, it remains important to 

find a balance on this issue that will not further exacerbate our 

economic position. 

 

We will not adopt a position that will put our industries and 

exporters at risk. Adopting targets that are substantially higher 

than what our trading partners are willing to do will hurt our 

industry and it will hurt our province. 

 

The NDP once agreed with this position. And I quote from their 

own climate change paper: 

 

. . . Saskatchewan companies may be placed at a 

competitive disadvantage compared to U.S. companies 

that may not have to reduce their emissions. 

Saskatchewan companies can easily . . . [shift] to the U.S. 

or manufacturing activity can easily shift from 

Saskatchewan to U.S. plants as relative costs change. As 

well, many other countries . . . may enjoy a competitive 

advantage in serving the U.S. or Canadian markets. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will soon be receiving the mid-term financial 

update of our province. Our Finance minister has already 

indicated that, due to the lowest potash sales in almost 40 years, 

we will have to be making wise economic decisions. 

 



November 17, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3617 

The NDP were also once concerned about the impact of their 

own provincial targets if we adopted too harsh a target. Mr. 

Speaker, from page 10 of their own paper, I quote: 

 

. . . Saskatchewan currently has a small budget surplus . . . 

It is difficult for budget-constrained provinces to provide 

the large amounts of funding required to undertake 

climate change initiatives. Any increased provincial 

expenditures on climate change will need to be funded by 

diverting expenditures away from priority areas such as 

health, agriculture, highways or education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they go on to quote — this is the NDP — 

“Alternatively, taxes would need to increase, or funds would 

have to be borrowed and provincial debt would increase.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are not interested, and I would say that the 

people of this province are not interested, in either increasing 

our debt or increasing taxes to pay for climate change 

initiatives. I would hope that the NDP are not interested in that 

approach either. 

 

And as I‟ve stated earlier, it is our position that we find a 

balance, and I believe that we have. We have done extensive 

consultations with industry and environmental NGOs 

[non-governmental organization] on this issue. We need to 

ensure that our province remains competitive, not just with 

other jurisdictions within Canada, but with our export partners 

as well. 

 

The federal Environment minister, Jim Prentice, said recently, 

and I quote: 

 

If we do more than the U.S., we will suffer economic pain 

for no real environmental gain — economic pain that 

could impede our ability to invest in new clean 

technologies. But if we do less, we will risk facing border 

barriers into the American market. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have to find the balance between that and 

doing our fair share. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the US and China account for almost 50 per cent 

of global greenhouse gas emissions. Canada accounts for 2 per 

cent of global emissions, and Saskatchewan 10 per cent of that 

2 per cent. Mr. Speaker, we are a mere fraction of 1 per cent of 

global emissions. 

 

We have promoted the idea that jurisdictions within Canada 

face their own unique challenges and opportunities. The federal 

government has recognized this as well. Saskatchewan is home 

to amazing natural resources. They are the basis of our 

economy. To implement a plan that is detrimental to that 

resource base hurts us all. Whether it‟s reserves in the Bakken 

play, uranium mining in our North, or potash mining, our 

resources offer jobs and security for the people of our province. 

 

We also face challenges due to our weather. We live in a cold 

climate and face a greater need for energy and electricity than 

many jurisdictions. And again, Mr. Speaker, the NDP were 

once aware of this situation. 

 

In 2002, the NDP understood the need to protect these 

industries and to face the realities of the challenges that we face. 

On page 2 of their position paper, it says, and I quote: 

 

Saskatchewan is a high per capita emitter of greenhouse 

gases because we have a relatively small population 

spread over a large geographical area. Saskatchewan has a 

large rural population. We also have an extreme climate 

that requires energy for heating in winter and cooling in 

summer. 

 

It goes on to say, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Saskatchewan has an energy-intensive, resource-based 

economy, and many of our products are exported to other 

countries instead of being consumed within the province. 

Much of Saskatchewan‟s economic growth is linked to 

the development of our oil, natural gas and coal resources. 

Curtailing the growth of these industries would have 

significant economic implications for Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, so there is a balance that we must achieve to 

do our fair share in reducing emissions while keeping our 

industries on a level playing field and our economy strong. And 

these are not easy decisions to make. Our government did not 

take the situation lightly. And while the NDP would like to 

engage in yelling and rhetoric in this House, we have made 

decisions that we believe will be in the best interests of our 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that the NDP will take this opportunity to 

rail against our plan. But I have one thing to say about that — at 

least we have a plan. The NDP Environment critic has said that 

a glossy brochure does not constitute a plan. I couldn‟t agree 

more. The difference is, Mr. Speaker, a glossy brochure is all 

the NDP ever had. 

 

In 2002, a paper that they wrote, they said that an advisory 

committee was set up in 1998. Well that‟s great. But it took 

almost a decade before the NDP released their next glossy 

brochure. In that time, they could‟ve introduced legislation and 

regulations to do something but they failed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I would note, Mr. Speaker, that we have not issued glossy 

brochures on climate change, or our plans, and you won‟t find 

one. I had told the Ministry of Environment that we are not 

interested in simply undertaking PR [public relations] 

initiatives, Mr. Speaker. I asked for legislation and that‟s 

exactly what we have delivered. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, while the NDP dragged their feet for a 

decade, our government in just 18 months tabled legislation. 

And if the NDP Environment critic is concerned about having 

legislation passed before I go to Copenhagen, I will reiterate my 

offer to them: that when I reintroduce that legislation to the 

House this fall, Mr. Speaker, that they pass it at all stages and I 

will have passed legislation going to Copenhagen. And that is a 

challenge that I give to the NDP. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have also signed an agreement in principle 

with the federal government to work towards an equivalency 

agreement. And again, after question period today, it‟s clear that 

the NDP don‟t understand what that constitutes. Mr. Speaker, 

an equivalency agreement is based on equivalent outcomes and 



3618 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2009 

we have to make sure that our regulations are in sync so that we 

can have the equivalency agreement, Mr. Speaker, and that will 

take some time. But it is the path that we are going down with 

the federal government. 

 

That agreement will allow Saskatchewan to be the regulator. It 

will also allow us to have our own Saskatchewan Technology 

Fund for investment in low carbon solutions for reducing 

emissions in our province. 

 

And as I stated at the beginning of my remarks, I am pleased to 

be part of the delegation representing Canada and Saskatchewan 

going into Copenhagen next month. I believe that Saskatchewan 

has an amazing story to tell and we should be promoting our 

position and the action that we are taking. We are currently 

working with the folks at the University of Regina to have an 

additional event while I am there. I have been asked to be one 

of the presenters so that I can tell Saskatchewan‟s story, Mr. 

Speaker, on what we are doing and the work that is being done 

right here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, in carbon capture and 

storage. 

 

I will also be pointing out the benefits of our Saskatchewan 

Technology Fund. It is my hope that other jurisdictions see our 

tech fund as an equivalent action to buying and trading credits. I 

believe it is a better answer than transferring wealth from one 

jurisdiction to another. Many would like to simply see the 

trading of credits — something that doesn‟t necessarily result in 

actual reduction of emissions. 

 

The NDP were once concerned about this as well. Mr. Speaker, 

on page 3 of their 2002 discussion paper they said, and I quote, 

“The federal . . . [government] should avoid undue reliance on 

the purchase of international emission credits that provide no 

net environmental benefits.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, in their 2007 brochure, the NDP promoted the 

idea of having money invested in technology. They were 

planning to, and I quote: 

 

Establish a Technology Fund to receive voluntary 

payments from Saskatchewan industry as a method of 

complying with industry‟s mandatory emissions reduction 

obligations under the federal climate change plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we agree — not with obligations that are the 

federal climate change plan because we‟d rather have a 

made-in-Saskatchewan plan, but on the tech fund, Mr. Speaker, 

we agree. We believe that Saskatchewan can offer real answers 

and real solutions. We are already leaders in CCS [carbon 

capture and storage] technology. 

 

To give credit where credit is due, and I know that the 

Opposition Leader says that we don‟t do that at all, and, Mr. 

Speaker, I would say that that‟s an erroneous assumption 

because the Premier gives credit to the previous NDP 

government in every speech that I‟ve heard on their advances 

on CCS technology. It was a good thing that they did, and for 

some reason the NDP Environment critic now no longer thinks 

it‟s a good thing. But, Mr. Speaker, to give credit where credit 

is due, the NDP were initial partners with PTRC [Petroleum 

Technology Research Centre], the University of Regina, and 

helped fund research into CCS. 

And as I said, Mr. Speaker, for some reason — which is still 

unclear to me — in recent years the NDP seem to have turned 

their back on that amazing technology. The NDP Environment 

critic is on record as saying, and I quote, “They committed to 

the expensive and untried technology of carbon capture . . .” 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m not sure why that is, when any NDP brochure 

— glossy or otherwise — has clearly stated that this technology 

and clean coal is being supported by the NDP, but they have 

now turned their backs on that. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, again from their 2002 discussion paper on page 3, 

and I quote: 

 

Investment in . . . clean coal technology will reduce 

emissions, generate real environmental gains and provide 

Canada with significant economic development and 

employment benefits. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it goes on to say, and I quote: 

 

Enhanced investment in research related to clean coal 

technology, carbon dioxide separation techniques and 

geological sequestration of carbon dioxide would enable 

Saskatchewan to reduce the environmental impact of 

utilizing its coal and oil resources and would develop 

valuable technologies for use throughout the world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that was from 2002, and apparently they held that 

position until 2007 when in their glossy brochure it says, and I 

quote: 

 

Saskatchewan‟s opportunity to advance technologies for 

using coal in an environmentally advanced way can make 

a difference on a global scale. This world-leading 

technology could provide clean energy for future 

generations in Saskatchewan and has the potential to be 

applied throughout the world. 

 

2007 they were praising CCS technology, and I quote: 

 

Saskatchewan Industry and Resources, in co-operation 

with the federal government, is investing in world-leading 

research through Saskatchewan‟s Petroleum Technology 

Research Centre to examine ways to store carbon dioxide 

deep underground in order to reduce the atmospheric 

impacts of CO2 releases. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again we agree. Although the NDP are apparently 

no longer in favour of either clean coal or CCS technology or 

I‟m not even sure, Mr. Speaker, if they‟re supportive of 

Saskatchewan‟s leading role in this work, we believe that the 

world and the environment can benefit from the work that is 

being done right here in our province and from new advances 

that are sure to come through continued investment in research 

and development. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are committed to advancing these 

technologies. We are working on a Saskatchewan-Montana 

carbon capture and storage reference plant — a large-scale test 

facility that will capture 1000 tonnes per day of CO2 from 

coal-fired power plants in southern Saskatchewan. Some of the 



November 17, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3619 

CO2 would be stored in Montana and the remainder will be used 

for enhanced oil recovery. So there‟s an environmental and an 

economic benefit, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also support the Consumers‟ Co-operative 

Refinery aquastore project which will store 500 tonnes per day 

of CO2 in a deep saline aquifer beginning in 2011, and this is in 

partnership with the PTRC at the University of Regina. The 

project will be the first in Canada to demonstrate the feasibility 

and best practices for storing CO2 in deep saline aquifers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan is proud to be 

able to help fund this project through our Go Green Fund. And, 

Mr. Speaker, we have SaskPower‟s Boundary dam clean coal 

project, something that the NDP are not in favour of, which will 

use technology at a coal-fired power plant in southeastern 

Saskatchewan to capture 1 million tonnes of CO2 per year, 

starting in 2015. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are making strides to reduce our emissions 

while supporting technology that can be used around the world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have attempted to point out that our two parties 

have more in common on this issue than we have differences. 

Our government and the NDP appear to agree on the following 

principles. 

 

First, a climate change plan for Saskatchewan should be 

economically acceptable to our residents and economically 

sustainable for Saskatchewan industries and businesses. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, the NDP and us agree that 

Saskatchewan industries and exporters should not be forced to 

be at a disadvantage with other jurisdictions. 

 

Thirdly, Mr. Speaker, the NDP and the Saskatchewan Party 

agree that Saskatchewan should do its fair share, based on our 

population, our resource base, and our unique weather. 

 

Fourth, Mr. Speaker, the NDP and the Saskatchewan Party 

agree that levies and offset payments should stay in 

Saskatchewan to be invested in low carbon solutions right here 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

And fifthly, Mr. Speaker, the NDP and the Saskatchewan Party 

agree that Saskatchewan already has exceptional technology, 

research, and development that will not only help us reach our 

targets, but it can help the global community reach their 

objectives as well. 

 

It would seem to me, Mr. Speaker, that the main point of 

contention for the NDP is a difference in targets. I have already 

stated quite clearly why we felt the need to adopt the federal 

targets, and if the NDP want, I can once again read into the 

record the NDP Environment critic‟s quote demanding that we 

adopt the federal targets. But, Mr. Speaker, I think we‟ve done 

that a couple of times today already. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the basic premise of our positions is actually very 

similar and, as I‟ve said, I think it‟s important that we present a 

united front to the world. We do have an amazing story to tell. 

We need to promote the work that has already been done in 

Saskatchewan and the work that can be done, Mr. Speaker, if 

we work together. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask that the opposition support this 

motion as we head towards talks in Copenhagen. I am not 

asking them to support the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker. I 

am asking them to support Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I move the following motion: 

 

That this Assembly support the government‟s plan 

addressing climate change, a plan balancing 

environmental protection with economic growth, thereby 

ensuring the well-being and future prosperity of 

Saskatchewan families; and 

 

That this Assembly support the Saskatchewan plan to 

direct offset payments into the Saskatchewan Technology 

Fund to fund research into the development of technology 

needed to help the world reduce and control carbon 

emissions; and 

 

That this Assembly encourage the government to actively 

promote the Saskatchewan plan at the United Nations 

COP 15 Conference in Copenhagen in December of 2009. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly is the 

motion by the Minister of the Environment: 

 

That this Assembly support the government‟s plan 

addressing climate change, a plan balancing 

environmental protection with economic growth, thereby 

ensuring the well-being and future prosperity of 

Saskatchewan families; and 

 

That this Assembly support the Saskatchewan plan to 

direct offset payments into the Saskatchewan Technology 

Fund to fund research into the development of technology 

needed to help the world reduce and control carbon 

emissions; and 

 

That this honourable Assembly encourage the 

government to actively promote the Saskatchewan plan at 

the United Nations COP 15 Conference in Copenhagen in 

December of 2009. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

from Regina Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 

pleasure to stand and speak to the Sask Party motion and 

certainly make some observations on the misconceptions that 

the minister has made in her speech. 

 

The Sask Party motion is flawed from the start, Mr. Speaker. 

They talk about the Sask Party plan like they have one, when in 

fact nothing could be further from the truth. The closest they 

came to a plan was in the dying days of the spring session — 

literally in the eleventh hour of the spring session — within the 

last few days of the spring session when they were guilted into 

bringing something forward because they had promised to bring 

something forward. 



3620 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2009 

So finally in the dying days of the spring session, they brought 

forward their climate change Bill. And then what did they do 

with that, Mr. Speaker? They let it die on the order paper and 

haven‟t brought it forward so far, not even a second reading of 

that Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The government hasn‟t taken a single legislative step to reduce 

greenhouse gas emissions in Saskatchewan, and the only thing 

that they prefer to do is mock the NDP plan and the $320 

million that we had put in place to deal with the plan that we 

had set out. 

 

And you know, what‟s even more interesting about that is, is 

that the minister claims that the money wasn‟t real, that it was 

only in the General Revenue Fund. Well then clearly what 

we‟ve seen from how they handle the finances of this province, 

we see what happens to money that‟s in the General Revenue 

Fund or in the rainy day fund or elsewhere because it just seems 

to be all part of their let-it-burn policy in terms of making the 

money burn as quickly as they can. 

 

The plan they brought forward was flawed. It didn‟t have 

benchmarks. It had no target year for stabilization and let 

emitters completely off the hook. And they have the nerve to 

ask this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, to support this so-called plan. 

 

They‟re opposed to targets. They‟re opposed to cap and trade, 

and they‟re opposed to making polluters pay. So how can you 

have a plan, Mr. Speaker, when you don‟t believe in anything? 

It‟s quite remarkable. 

 

The Sask Party broke their campaign promise and reduced the 

targets from 32 per cent to 20 per cent and, Mr. Speaker, so far 

it appears they can‟t even live up to that. 

 

Now the minister likes to refer to the fact that the opposition 

critic asked for the federal target. Well in absence of this Sask 

Party government having any plan whatsoever to meet any of 

its commitments that it made in their election platform, they are 

correct that this opposition critic was looking for them to bring 

forward any target for them to reach — and at the very, very 

least, at the very least — something that the minister has been 

referring to often and enjoys mocking the Environment critic 

about. 

 

So the plan that this government brought forward won‟t even be 

passed until the spring of 2010. And, quite frankly, at that point 

we‟re not sure how long it‟s going to take to bring into effect at 

that point, if they even want to. And as we‟ve heard the 

Environment minister say today, she‟s not even sure whether 

they‟re going to meet targets, what they‟re going to do, what 

those targets will be. It‟s all when and if and maybe, and 

clearly, Mr. Speaker, no plan whatsoever. 

 

Meanwhile SaskPower keeps building coal and gas plants, and 

this government has yet not, since it was elected in November 

of 2007, erected a single windmill in this province despite the 

fact that when they were elected in November of 2007, this 

province had a reputation for being a leading per capita 

producer of wind power in the country. It‟s shameful that they 

did not continue on with that legacy that the NDP government, 

former NDP government, left them in terms of something that 

we were doing in this country that was admired, was tangible, 

was leading the nation on. And yet not one single windmill had 

been erected in the last two years since they‟ve been elected. 

 

Now granted they‟ve announced that they have intentions of 

doing so, but as I said, they had a windfall of money to be 

dealing with when they were first elected. They certainly saw 

some increase of resource revenues when they were first 

elected, and chose to do nothing on the green economy in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now this party, this is a party that has a history of climate 

change issues in terms of it has a caucus that‟s full of climate 

change deniers and skeptics. There are many, many quotes that 

one could offer up, which have been offered up many other 

occasions in the Assembly, as to the various members in the 

Sask Party government who believe that climate change is a 

hoax, that climate change doesn‟t exist, that climate change is 

some odd ploy of some, of many individuals, I guess, who 

believe in the fact that climate change is a reality for the world 

to be dealing with. So is it any wonder, Mr. Speaker, that they 

can‟t bring forward a plan? 

 

Now the minister likes to purport the fact that the NDP had a 

glossy brochure, which absolutely it did. It had a wonderful 

brochure called the Energy and Climate Change Plan, which 

clearly laid out a plan. Not just some, you know, brochure with 

fancy pictures, but actually laid out a plan. 

 

And unfortunately the minister mustn‟t have read the plan or 

can‟t remember what the plan said, so perhaps I‟ll just read into 

the record some of the things that the NDP established while it 

was in government and was going to be setting out to continue 

on and further with respect to the green economy in this 

province and sustainable energy in this province. 

 

So, for instance, the NDP record is that the NDP built enough 

wind power capacity to provide electricity for 73,000 homes in 

the province of Saskatchewan. And as I said before, became the 

leading per capita province with respect to producing wind 

energy. 

 

The NDP pioneered — yes, pioneered — carbon capture and 

storage technology. Now as the minister likes to rant on in her 

rhetoric in terms of her responses — and I won‟t call them 

answers — to questions in question period . . . They are merely 

responses that the minister provides. But she likes to rant on 

that we‟ve flip-flopped on the issue of carbon capture 

technology. 

 

Now the reality is, is that we have great hope, great hope, Mr. 

Speaker for carbon capture technology to be successful. There‟s 

no question about it. But we also know and so does everyone in 

the industry that it‟s not the silver bullet. And so therefore we 

also have to be careful about throwing all our eggs in one 

basket. And in this particular case, Mr. Speaker, it would be all 

our financial eggs, all our financial resources into one basket. 

 

We have to be sure that what we‟re doing in terms of a 

sustainable economy and a green economy encompasses all of 

the technologies that are going to be needed, at the various costs 

that they are going to incur to be a fruitful economic plan and a 

fruitful, sustainable energy plan for the province of 

Saskatchewan. So we have to be careful that there‟s a balanced 



November 17, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3621 

approach for meaningful carbon emission reductions in this 

province. So as I said, those are a couple of the points so far. 

 

The NDP promoted energy conservation through programs like 

EnerGuide, which provides assistance for Saskatchewan 

families to retrofit their homes to be more energy efficient. 

 

Now what‟s interesting about the minister‟s comments and the 

minister‟s responses is that one never hears anything about 

conservation or demand-side management. It is as if those two 

terms don‟t even exist in the Sask Party language. It is 

something that is the cheapest form of energy in terms of 

conservation because obviously the energy saved is the 

cheapest form of energy. And yet this government, the Sask 

Party government, has no plan for the conservation or 

demand-side management and clearly doesn‟t even understand 

the notion of it because they can‟t seem to even bring it up in 

their vocabulary, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:45] 

 

And we‟re certainly seeing that in the hearings that are 

happening through Crown and Central Agencies Committee as 

well. The fact that conservation and demand-side management 

is something of a concept that they do not have grasp of or do 

not want to embrace is evident. 

 

So the NDP also made it more affordable for lower income 

families to afford energy retrofits and reduce their carbon 

footprint by establishing the Saskatchewan home energy 

improvement plan to provide a top-up grant to the EnerGuide 

for Houses program. Again, we‟re talking about conservation 

again. And, Mr. Speaker, this is something that the NDP felt 

very strongly about. It‟s something that the experts in the 

industry feel very strongly about, knowing full well that this is 

the cheapest form of energy is the energy that is conserved, is 

the most cost-effective form of energy. 

 

Now the NDP also reduced the PST, provincial sales tax on 

energy-efficient appliances to encourage more Saskatchewan 

families to buy them. The NDP also provided more than 16,000 

homeowners with rebates and grants for programmable 

thermostats, Energy Star appliances, and home upgrading 

programs. And, Mr. Speaker, these programs were extremely 

successful. We saw a great uptake in these programs, and 

clearly it was something that was embraced by the homeowners 

of Saskatchewan and is something that has worked very 

effectively for the homeowners of Saskatchewan as well. 

 

The NDP government, former NDP government, also set targets 

that would have achieved the highest per capita reduction in 

greenhouse gases of any province. So we see, Mr. Speaker, 

under the previous NDP administration, once again we would 

have led the nation, would have led the nation on the reduction 

of greenhouse gas emissions in the country. 

 

But yet again, what does the Sask Party government do? They 

make the phony promise by putting it in their election platform 

and then once they‟re elected they completely break that 

promise. It‟s completely eradicated. They make a promise to 

meet the federal target of 20 per cent instead. And as we‟ve 

already said, they still don‟t even have a plan laid out as to how 

they‟re even going to reach that target. So at this point again it‟s 

completely unclear as to whether they‟ll even reach the greatly 

reduced target instead of leading the nation again in greenhouse 

gas reductions. 

 

The energy and climate plan under the NDP committed to 

stabilizing greenhouse gas emissions by 2010 and reducing 

emissions by 32 per cent of 2004 levels by 2020 and 80 per cent 

by 2050. These were absolute lofty goals, but goals that the 

NDP administration had every, every intent of meeting, 

absolutely every intent of meeting. As I said, Mr. Speaker, 

that‟s why there was a fund set up of $320 million. There was 

also an aggressive move to expand the Office of Energy 

Conservation versus what the Sask Party government did, 

which was basically eliminate the Office of Energy 

Conservation. 

 

And the previous NDP administration also had plans and was in 

the process of setting up the climate change secretariat. That‟s 

right, a climate change secretariat with its own deputy minister 

so that it would have the clout that it would need to deal with 

the various ministries to ensure that a viable climate change 

plan would be put into place and would be followed, Mr. 

Speaker. Not some empty, hollow, shallow promise which is all 

we‟ve seen out of Sask Party government so far, but something 

that would be set in place which would actually have some teeth 

to be met and would actually have the clout it would need to 

make sure, to ensure that all the ministries were on board, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And what did the Sask Party government do with the plan for a 

climate change secretariat in this province, Mr. Speaker? They 

completely annihilated it. It was completely bombed. They 

decided that they weren‟t going to go ahead with that plan. That 

plan lays fizzling on the floor somewhere as well as, Mr. 

Speaker, the $320 million that the NDP government, that the 

previous NDP government had committed to a climate change 

plan — $320 million. What did the Sask Party do with that 

$320 million? They gutted it down to $40 million. And what 

did they do with the rest of that money? Well it got burned up 

by whatever mismanagement, financial mismanagement the 

Sask Party was incurring in the day. 

 

So the rest of that money is gone. It‟s absolutely nowhere to be 

found with respect to addressing climate change issues. It‟s 

become part of the Sask Party fund for expenditures which have 

increased, by the way, dramatically since the last NDP 

administration. Dramatically. 

 

And you know, the Finance minister likes to refer to the fact 

that, well we misjudged potash. Unfortunately, you know, the 

potash revenues didn‟t come in the way we had hoped, contrary 

to the fact that there were many experts that were saying that 

this isn‟t something that they foresaw. Contrary to the fact that 

the NDP opposition, the NDP Finance critic at the time, said 

that it was clearly, clearly miscalculating their revenues on 

potash at the time that the budget was released in the spring of 

2009. But the Finance minister likes to say, well you know, 

they just didn‟t come in the way we had hoped. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, part of what‟s going to be a deficit that this 

government is going to be showing is obviously the potash 

revenues. 

 

But the greater part of the deficit that I have concern about, Mr. 



3622 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2009 

Speaker, is their increase in expenditure. The increase in 

expenditure for this government has risen so dramatically over a 

short two-year period that it seems to be, Mr. Speaker, what my 

colleague from Regina Northeast referred to before, a movie 

that we‟ve seen before, Mr. Speaker. This is, in my opinion, 

Devine Tory accounting all over again. We are seeing similar 

expenditures, similar promises. They want to be everything to 

everyone. 

 

And where does that ultimately leave the Saskatchewan 

taxpayers and the people of this province? It leaves us in debt. 

And it leaves us crawling our way out of that debt yet again and 

having to pay the interest on that debt yet again. Mr. Speaker, 

which is exactly what the NDP administration had to do. From 

1991 until 2007, the NDP administration was saddled with 

paying horrible interest payments on the debt that they left this 

province in. That debt, Mr. Speaker, was $15 billion in 1991 — 

$15 billion. 

 

And when one looks at the population of this province being 

slightly over 1 million people, Mr. Speaker, on a per capita 

basis, that is absolutely deplorable. And they should be 

ashamed of themselves. So when they brag about the fact that 

they paid down some money on the debt, you know what, they 

should be bragging about the fact that Saskatchewan taxpayers 

have been able to pay down the money on that debt. 

 

The debt that they incurred, Mr. Speaker, was something that 

the Saskatchewan taxpayers have had to pay since 1991. And 

when they brag about the fact that they paid a significant 

portion of that debt, that was done on the backs of the 

Saskatchewan taxpayers, the backs of the Saskatchewan 

industries. And was done again, like I said, not because of their 

largesse, but because of the fact that when they came into 

government in November of 2007, they were left with $2.3 

billion in the bank. Mr. Speaker, $2.3 billion in the bank, on top 

of the increased resource revenues that they were able to work 

with. So let‟s make sure that their memories are refreshed on 

that particular topic. 

 

The previous NDP administration also established the Green 

Initiatives Fund with $4.9 million for programs like support for 

sustainable communities, green technology commercialization, 

and green energy conservation. Once again, Mr. Speaker, one 

can see the commitment by the previous NDP administration to 

the issue of conservation, knowing full well that that is the 

cheapest form of energy to be able to produce. 

 

The previous NDP administration, as I‟ve already said, 

established the $320 million Green Future Fund with the 

proceeds from the sale of the government share of the 

NewGrade upgrader. And in other words, Mr. Speaker, the plan 

was to take the profits that Saskatchewan taxpayers made from 

something that produced greenhouse gas emissions and invest 

those profits in technologies that would reduce them. 

 

Now, you know, Mr. Speaker, that sounds like an amazing form 

of similarity between what the Sask Party is now purporting to 

be their innovative and creative plan. But we had already talked 

about the fact that the proceeds from the NewGrade upgrader 

would go into a fund that would develop technologies that 

would be available to reduce the greenhouse gas emissions that 

are being emitted in this province. And, Mr. Speaker, when one 

goes to what the minister likes to refer to as the glossy 

brochure, the Energy and Climate Change Plan for 2007, one 

can also say that something else is coming true. Which is that 

imitation is the finest form of flattery, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the reason I say that, Mr. Speaker, is because under the . . . 

I‟ll actually list it for the minister. It‟s on page 4 under “Expand 

Research and Innovation”. One of the bullets reads this, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

Establish a Technology Fund to receive voluntary 

payments from Saskatchewan industry as a method of 

complying with industry‟s mandatory emissions 

reductions obligations under the federal climate change 

plan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, they‟re taking one of our great ideas, and 

they‟re of course calling it one of their own which they tend to 

do, Mr. Speaker. I‟m not going to take offence to the fact that 

they like the idea of setting up a technology fund for developing 

technologies to reduce greenhouse gas emissions because, as I 

said, that was something that we had already established in our 

plan. And so again, as I said, imitation is the finest form of 

flattery. 

 

The NDP administration also proposed a $40 million energy 

conservation loan program during the 2007 election to pay for 

energy conservation and efficiency upgrades, such as retrofits 

of wind and solar installations, heating installations, and 

energy-efficient irrigation systems. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, one can see that that‟s the NDP record. And 

there‟s many more that I can read into the record, but those are 

some of the highlights that I wanted to point out. 

 

Now what‟s interesting about the minister‟s rhetoric that she 

likes to purport is the fact that they forget about what they have 

done and what they haven‟t done. And I use that have done with 

a little bit of tongue-in-cheek of course, Mr. Speaker, because 

it‟s not having done anything substantial in terms of reducing 

greenhouse gas emissions, but rather what they haven‟t done in 

terms of addressing it. 

 

So for instance the Sask Party climate change plan is quite 

frankly a broken promise. They promised a 32 per cent 

reduction in greenhouse gas emissions by 2020 during the 

election. But now, Mr. Speaker, what are they saying? They‟re 

saying that that will only be 20 per cent. They‟ve broken a 

major campaign election promise. 

 

They clearly put this . . . They adopted these targets from the 

NDP because these were obviously part of our plan, those 

targets. They adopted these targets from the NDP, stuck them in 

their election brochure, but had absolutely no idea, no plan, no 

concept whatsoever as to how they were going to achieve those 

greenhouse gas reduction targets. 

 

Now what‟s interesting about that is — given that imitation is 

the finest form of flattery, and since they did adopt the NDP 

greenhouse gas reduction targets — what‟s interesting about 

that is that they gutted everything that the NDP had put into 

place to achieve those reduction targets and had yet no plan of 

their own.  



November 17, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3623 

So you would think if imitation was the finest form of flattery, 

that they would‟ve imitated — or kept in place, I should say — 

the plan that the NDP set out, given that they had no plan, and 

in absence of any plan with respect to the Sask Party 

government. So, Mr. Speaker, this 20 per cent target that 

they‟ve now put in place is nearly not good enough. The NDP 

had much more aggressive targets, with money and a plan in 

place to meet them. And the Sask Party clearly had none. 

 

Now the reasons they gave for breaking the promise, Mr. 

Speaker, quite frankly are laughable. And the impact on, for 

instance when we‟re talking about the economy, Mr. Speaker, 

the economy definitely comes into play. There‟s no question 

about it. And the minister likes to have a . . . use word play with 

respect to how we‟ve portrayed that. But the fact of the matter 

is, the economy is important in this. 

 

As I‟ve said before, had the greenhouse gas emission reduction 

target stayed in place, the Pembina Institute is saying that we 

would‟ve achieved probably about 50,000 new jobs in this 

green economy, Mr. Speaker. So the economy is most definitely 

a major component in an environmental plan, in a green plan, 

and for a sustainable economy. 

 

[15:00] 

 

Now with respect to SaskPower rates, the government, the Sask 

Party government likes to say, well you know they couldn‟t 

have done this because it would have been too much of a 

burden with respect to SaskPower rates. But we know, Mr. 

Speaker, from the research that was done that the impact on 

ratepayers for Saskatchewan on the difference is quite 

negligible. The greenhouse gas reduction target that was in 

place of 32 per cent would have amounted to about a 20 to 22 

per cent increase for SaskPower ratepayers over 10 years, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So it was not something that was onerous. It certainly wasn‟t a 

legitimate reason for the Sask Party government to renege on its 

promise, to break its promise, its election promise, on meeting 

the greenhouse gas reduction targets that they had adopted from 

the NDP. 

 

Now the same Sask Party government has unfortunately jacked 

up SaskPower rates by 8.5 per cent as of June 1st and has 

promised annual rate increases for the foreseeable future. So, 

Mr. Speaker, one has to wonder when one sees that there‟s 

going to be serious financial implications for the spending that 

this government has been doing, and obviously the deficit that 

this province is going to accrue again under this government. 

 

And they talk about, oh well we‟re not going to, you know, 

we‟re not going to increase taxes. And depending on what day 

you‟re going to ask the Sask Party government about this 

question, I‟m sure we‟re going to get different answers on that. 

Just like the Environment minister said today, may or may not 

on reduction targets. It‟s always a moving target, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But one has to wonder if they aren‟t using the Crown 

corporations to backfill the financial losses that they are 

currently incurring because of their financial mismanagement 

and clearly . . .  

 

An Hon. Member: — Exuberant spending. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Exuberant spending. Exactly. 

 

Now the Sask Party government says that the NDP has chosen 

between affordable utility rates and reduced greenhouse gas 

emissions, but the fact of the matter, Mr. Speaker, is this. The 

Sask Party is providing neither. In fact the report from the rate 

review panel made it clear that the real problem is the Sask 

Party‟s inability to manage costs at SaskPower. So, Mr. 

Speaker, it‟s quite interesting that the Sask Party has engaged in 

the spin that they‟re in, given that the facts state something 

quite different. 

 

Now the Sask Party government could have used the $320 

million set aside by the NDP to subsidize ratepayers or industry 

for their rising costs for the out years, Mr. Speaker, but that‟s 

not what they chose to do. They chose to simply siphon that 

money off of the General Revenue Fund for their exuberant 

spending and without any thought whatsoever to a green 

economy. 

 

Now when they talk about this legislation that they had 

introduced in the eleventh hour, Mr. Speaker, the legislation 

contained no year when greenhouse gases would stabilize. 

There was no baseline year against which reductions in 

greenhouse gases could be measured. And their plan let 

industrial emitters off the hook for violations of federal 

environmental law. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that doesn‟t speak to credibility for a Sask 

Party government which now, as of today, is touting the fact 

that they are very impassioned about the topic of climate 

change. And, Mr. Speaker, I welcome the notion of the Sask 

Party government being impassioned about climate change. We 

would just hope that it would actually come with something 

credible in terms of meeting that passion. 

 

Now the minister also likes to talk about an equivalency 

agreement that was part of the discussions with the federal 

government, and again was talked about in the eleventh hour 

before the spring session ended in 2009. Now the cornerstone of 

the climate change plan that they put forward was this 

equivalency agreement with the federal government. That, quite 

frankly, Mr. Speaker, doesn‟t even exist. It doesn‟t even exist, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

In place right now is an agreement with the federal government 

to talk about — that‟s right, to talk about — having agreement. 

And that the fact that these discussions won‟t take place until 

the fall of 2009 at the earliest. So again we‟ve not heard 

anything about the fact that there may have been discussions 

that have taken or not taken place. We‟re not sure where the 

minister is on that one — may or may not have taken place. 

 

But we certainly know that all it is, is basically what was 

announced in the spring was an agreement to talk about an 

agreement. So that was an interesting announcement that the 

government engaged in. Quite frankly if we would have as an 

NDP government announced every agreement to talk about an 

agreement, it would have been frequent, Mr. Speaker. So it‟s 

interesting that they have to cheerlead the fact that they are even 

able to have a discussion with their federal counterparts to talk 



3624 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2009 

about an equivalency agreement. 

 

Now this agreement to talk about an agreement was signed the 

same day the plan was announced which again, as I said, was in 

the eleventh hour of the spring session. So one has to wonder 

about the fact that this wasn‟t something that they simply 

slapped together to provide their promise that they were going 

to have something come forward by the end of spring session. 

This was their way of slapping something together to make sure 

something could be laid on the table, just so that they could say 

that they did something. But quite frankly, there was nothing 

there, Mr. Speaker. It was as good as the paper it was written on 

and, quite frankly, the paper it was written on is worth more. In 

this reality, the standard that . . . Quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, 

this isn‟t what the people of Saskatchewan are looking for. 

 

The federal government has announced that action on climate 

change will be delayed until 2012 at the earliest, Mr. Speaker 

— 2012. So the reality is that any action taken by Stephen 

Harper will be influenced by what the US does, and the US is 

moving to a cap-and-trade system. The US Environmental 

Protection Agency may regulate greenhouse gases as pollutants 

if Congress doesn‟t pass legislation. So what if there is a federal 

election in the fall before an equivalency agreement can be 

reached, Mr. Speaker? 

 

As I said, I mean the agreement in the spring was as good as the 

paper it was written on. If there is another election — I mean, 

sorry, in the spring, not the fall — then it goes nowhere again. 

But you know, even if there is something that‟s signed, the plan 

won‟t take effect until the spring of 2010 anyways. And at that 

point, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party government will be 

three-quarters of the way through their term before their plan 

will even be enacted. And let‟s face it, Mr. Speaker, it‟s a 

flawed plan at that. 

 

So if a good economy is a bad time to introduce climate change 

targets, when is a good time, Mr. Speaker? If the Sask Party 

government can‟t introduce a climate change plan, a viable, 

comprehensive climate change plan with real targets and real 

baseline targets to measure against, when is a good time? 

 

I mean, clearly they had a wonderful window of opportunity. 

They inherited, like I said, when they took over government 

from the previous NDP administration, $2.3 billion. They also 

inherited a booming economy at the time, Mr. Speaker, a 

wonderful booming economy in Saskatchewan that would have 

been willing to — because we all know that we have 

obligations with respect to greenhouse gas emission reductions 

as good citizens of the province, as good citizens of the country, 

and quite frankly as good citizens of the world — industry 

would have been willing to embrace those at the time. 

 

But now when you go to do anything meaningful on climate 

change when times are tough, obviously things are going to be 

more difficult. So if they wouldn‟t do it, if they wouldn‟t 

introduce climate change targets, significant climate change 

targets and a plan when the economy was good and when the 

province was sitting pretty, so to speak, when would be a good 

time, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Now the inaction of the Sask Party government, Mr. Speaker, 

quite frankly is potentially risking our economic future. Media 

reports from the United States make it increasingly clear that a 

cap-and-trade system is coming to North America, Mr. Speaker. 

And the US Environmental Protection Agency has announced 

that it will regulate carbon dioxide and five other greenhouse 

gases as pollutants even if Congress fails to act. 

 

The National Round Table on the Economy and the 

Environment recommends that Canada adopt hard targets for 

greenhouse gas emissions and participate in the North 

American cap-and-trade system, and warns that Canada‟s 

economy will suffer if it doesn‟t adopt the US approach. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the Premier has been very clear about how he 

feels about the cap-and-trade system, and further to that has not 

put anything concrete in the plan, has not laid out anything that 

would be salient for people to be able to say that, you know, 

Saskatchewan is really doing its part in terms of meeting its 

greenhouse gas emission reduction targets, be as pathetic as 

they are in terms of what they originally promised during the 

election campaign. But we‟re in some serious, we could 

potentially be in serious trouble with our economic trading 

partners if we‟re not going to do something viable on that front. 

 

Saskatchewan deserves the opportunity to participate in the 

green economy of the future. Instead, the Sask Party may be 

cutting us off from those opportunities by insisting on policies 

our biggest trading partner may never accept. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that causes great concern for all of us in terms of what 

will happen to the Saskatchewan economy going forward if we 

want to present ourselves as an island with respect to the policy 

beliefs that this government is putting forward. 

 

So, you know, Mr. Speaker, there have been some third party 

reviews of the eleventh hour climate change plan the Sask Party 

brought forward. And Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to just read a few of 

those into the record. For instance, Ann Coxworth with the 

Saskatchewan Environmental Society, quoted in the 

Leader-Post on May 13, 2009: 

 

“It‟s going to be really hard to measure how effective this 

program is . . . people will pay money into a fund rather 

than make emission reductions” . . . 

 

So obviously, like I said, Mr. Speaker, it‟s not just the NDP 

opposition that has concerns about what the Sask Party 

government is doing or not doing. There are some other third 

party organizations that feel the same way. 

 

Now also from another quote is, in total, 66 individuals 

participated in the consultation process for industry and 

association; 28 NGO and environmental group representatives 

participated in the April 27 sessions in Saskatoon. The 

post-session questionnaire asked participants to provide their 

overall assessment of the proposed climate change policy and 

legislation and the results were based on a five-point scale. 

Saskatoon environmental NGOs gave it a 2, Mr. Speaker. Now 

this is from a summary of stakeholder consultations on climate 

change legislation by Howard Crofts and Craig Gates at 

Meyers Norris Penny on May 5, 2009. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there is also some quotes by some of the 

Sask Party members, as I‟ve said, from the past who have a 

serious disbelief in the fact that climate change even exists. And 



November 17, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3625 

this quote, Mr. Speaker, was much more recent than some of 

those quotes, and I‟d just like to read that into the record as 

well. And that is from Fred Bradshaw who is currently . . . 

sorry, the MLA for Carrot River. My apologies, my apologies, 

Mr. Speaker, the MLA for Carrot River Valley. And the quote 

is: 

 

Mr. Speaker, higher targets come with a cost. Higher 

targets [make] higher SaskPower rates — this at a time 

when the NDP are demanding holding the line on rate 

increases . . . the NDP cannot have it both ways. They 

cannot demand status quo on electrical rates while 

demanding harsher climate change targets. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we‟ve already established the fact through 

the research that had taken place that it wouldn‟t have been an 

onerous situation for SaskPower ratepayers. It would have 

meant a 20 to 22 per cent increase over the next 10 years. And 

that‟s what the experts are saying, Mr. Speaker. So it‟s 

interesting that, despite the fact that the experts are giving us 

this information, that one of the Sask Party MLAs would claim 

something quite different. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, the Minister for Environment states 

that she‟s proud to go to Copenhagen and represent 

Saskatchewan. Well you know, Mr. Speaker, there‟s no 

question that we‟re all very proud of our province and would 

be, you know, very proud to represent Saskatchewan in any 

forum that we would be representing the province. But, Mr. 

Speaker, I wonder if people understand that this is coming at a 

fairly hefty cost to the taxpayers of the province yet again. This 

is coming at a cost of $24,000. And, Mr. Speaker, for $24,000, 

the ratepayers, the taxpayers, and citizens of this province 

would expect some return on that investment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:15] 

 

And clearly, since the Sask Party government has no plan in 

terms of how they‟re going to meet their reduced greenhouse 

gas emission reduction targets, and given that their climate 

change plan is just a hollow shell that wasn‟t re-introduced in 

the fall and was only introduced in the eleventh hour of the 

session in the spring just to make themselves look somewhat 

legitimate in terms of what the minister was saying that she was 

going to achieve by the end of the spring session, $24,000 to 

sell no plan, and $24,000 to go to Copenhagen and say, you 

know what, we‟ve reduced our reduction targets from 32 per 

cent to 20 per cent — which will not be something that would 

be impressive to the other participants in Copenhagen — is not 

what I would call good value for our money, Mr. Speaker. 

Twenty-four thousand dollars just to be a cheerleader for the 

province and shake the pompoms in Copenhagen is quite a 

hefty price tag to pay, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we talk about their election campaign 

promise with respect to reducing the greenhouse gas reduction 

targets, the Shellbrook Chronicle editorial on May 22nd of 2009 

had this to say: 

 

This entire scenario has two large holes in it. First the 

Sask Party promised this as a part of their election 

platform. At the time they had to have done some math to 

have arrived at the number they came up with, 32 per 

cent. Perhaps what is worse is that the newly reduced 

targets might not press companies and utilities to make 

meaningful changes in the way that they go about their 

business. 

 

So we even see from the editorial in the Shellbrook Chronicle 

that there are serious concerns about how the province would 

move forward with respect to being good environmental 

stewards and good citizens of the country with respect to some 

serious commitment to reducing greenhouse gas emissions. 

 

There was an analysis of greenhouse gas abatement 

opportunities for Saskatchewan which was prepared by M K 

Jaccard and Associates for the Ministry of Environment on 

January 13th, 2009. And, Mr. Speaker, what did they have to 

say? Well, they said this: 

 

With a policy package that attains federal targets, 

residential electricity rates are estimated to increase by 20 

per cent. With a policy package that attains provincial 

targets, the original targets promised by the NDP and 

adopted by the Sask Party, residential electricity rates are 

estimated by 20 to 22 per cent depending on the extent of 

revenue transfers. Other factors may have a larger impact 

on future electricity rates, including capital construction 

costs, deferred capital replacement, and the long-term 

effects of inflation on future investment. 

 

So we see again from an independent that actually prepared this 

report for the Ministry of Environment, that with the reduced 

greenhouse gas reduction target of 20 per cent, the electricity 

rates are estimated to increase by 20 per cent. Had they stuck to 

the original 32 per cent reduction target, which they adopted 

from the NDP, they were only looking at an increase in 

electricity rates of 20 to 22 per cent. 

 

So we can see, even from the expert advice that was given to 

the Ministry of Environment itself, that this wouldn‟t have been 

something that was onerous on the Saskatchewan ratepayers 

and the Sask Party ratepayer . . . SaskPower ratepayers, I should 

say. And so again we look at, what was the real reason that the 

Sask Party decided to reduce their greenhouse gas emission 

reduction targets, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the original plan that the 

NDP had put into place — as I said, this was the wonderful plan 

that was researched and had some wonderful advice given to us 

by the former legislative secretary, Peter Prebble — there are a 

number of different initiatives that were either under way or 

were going to be adopted. 

 

And the fact that the Sask Party is yet again putting forward 

another proposal . . . And I‟m going to call it their proposal, 

because there is no plan. And in terms of anything tangible that 

anybody can actually take hold of, one has to wonder how 

many more of these announcements, proposals, cheerleading 

attempts are we going to see by the Sask Party before we see 

something actually happen in this province, to see the reduction 

in greenhouse gas emissions that need to take place and, quite 

frankly, we have a responsibility to see happen? 

 

Now when we talk about Copenhagen, Mr. Speaker, the 

COP 15  Conference, which takes place in Copenhagen, is the 



3626 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2009 

United Nations Climate Change Conference, and it runs from 

December 7th to the 18th. And it‟s the highest body of the 

United Nations framework on climate change, Mr. Speaker. The 

goal of the conference is to create a global agreement to address 

climate change that will include all countries of the world. Now 

the Copenhagen conference will fall short of a comprehensive 

international treaty, but it will determine if a framework can at 

least be agreed upon. 

 

Now the hope is that the Copenhagen conference will hammer 

out an agreement to replace the Kyoto Protocol treaty before it 

expires in 2012, Mr. Speaker. And interestingly enough, Mr. 

Speaker, we see that the federal government is not going to 

have anything in place until 2012 — that is if they are still the 

government at that time. And because the Sask Party 

government is hitching its wagon firmly to the Harper 

Conservative plan, we obviously don‟t have much hope to see 

anything concrete happen in this province either. 

 

Canada hopes to re-establish itself as an environmental 

defender at Copenhagen despite the fact that Canada has failed 

to meet the obligations of the Kyoto Protocol which, Mr. 

Speaker, Canada in fact signed. So you know, we see a bit of a 

pattern between the Sask Party government and its federal 

cousins, the Harper Conservatives we‟ll sign on to the Kyoto 

Protocol and yet we won‟t be able to meet the targets. 

 

And the Sask Party government is, you know, put into their 

election campaign platform that they will meet certain 

greenhouse gas reduction targets, and yet breaks that promise as 

well and has no plan in place yet to reach the reduced reduction 

target that they had announced in the spring. 

 

Now internationally, Canada‟s record on reducing emissions is 

recognized as “. . . [having] disgraced the country‟s good 

name.” And this is from Jeffrey Simpson from October 27th of 

2009. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in the meantime, Canada‟s domestic 

emissions continue to rise. Mr. Harper says that the Kyoto 

targets were unattainable and trying to achieve them would lead 

to economic ruin. Now this sounds very similar to what the 

Sask Party government said about reaching the greenhouse gas 

emission reduction targets that it put in its election campaign 

platform — which were adopted from the NDP from the spring 

of 2007 — that it would lead to economic ruin. But in fact, Mr. 

Speaker, we see that that wouldn‟t have been the case, 

especially when I spoke of SaskPower rates. We see that it 

would have only increased perhaps two percentage points 

compared to the increase that we already know of that would be 

approximately 20 per cent. 

 

The recently released Suzuki Pembina report says Canada and 

Saskatchewan can achieve the government target of 20 per cent 

below 2006 levels by 2020, or a more ambitious target of 25 per 

cent below 1990 levels, and still prosper economically. 

 

Now the Pembina Institute is an institution, Mr. Speaker, that I 

have a great deal of respect for, that many, many individuals in 

the country have a great deal of respect for. And they are 

experts that we should be listening to and listening to very 

closely. 

 

The Premier himself even quoted the Pembina Institute recently 

in terms of talking about the legitimacy of a proposal that was 

made by the Pembina Institute, and so clearly this is something 

that we should be giving some credence to. 

 

Now Canada has a 20 per cent reduction in emissions by 2020 

from a starting point from 2006, Mr. Speaker. That‟s what 

Canada has on the table right now. But, Mr. Speaker, in terms 

of being good world stewards, this clearly won‟t cut it in terms 

of impressing anybody when we go to Copenhagen, that‟s for 

sure . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . No, just the Environment 

minister‟s going to Copenhagen, Mr. Speaker, and the 

Environment minister and some staff I‟m sure, at a cost of 

$24,000 to the Saskatchewan taxpayers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And as I‟ve said before, the fact that the minister is going to 

Copenhagen and will have nothing to report in terms of a plan, 

or the fact that she is only going to be able to report that they‟ve 

broken their election promise and will not even have a plan in 

place with respect to how they‟re going to even meet that 

reduced target, is something that I don‟t know if anybody in this 

province should be cheerleading or would want to cheerlead. 

And especially at a cost of $24,000 to the Saskatchewan 

taxpayers. 

 

Now you know, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan it begs the 

question, why? If a government is truly concerned about 

climate change, would you abandon the election promise to 

keep Saskatchewan‟s aggressive targets which would‟ve made 

us a leader in the nation with respect to the targets that were 

being put forward by the previous NDP administration along 

with the plan that was put forward to reach those targets, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

So I guess in the Sask Party government‟s case, when you don‟t 

really believe in climate change or doing anything about it, Mr. 

Speaker, breaking a promise of that sort really isn‟t all that 

important anyways. Because, Mr. Speaker, it seems as though 

the goal of the Sask Party government is simply to cheerlead 

without achieving much at all. And we‟re seeing that on many 

fronts, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But there are many of my colleagues that would like to speak to 

this topic as well, Mr. Speaker. So I‟m going to take my place 

despite the fact that clearly I have many, many more things I‟d 

like to say on the issue. But I‟m going to allow my colleagues 

to get into the debate as well, so I‟m going to take my seat at 

this time. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

I wanted very much to participate in this debate. It‟s an 

important debate. And the views of members opposite, the 

views of members of this side of the House, I think should be 

on the record with respect to the issue of the energy and the 

environment and the confluence of those two issues and how 

they will impact life in the province of Saskatchewan, how they 

impact the environment of this province, how they will impact 

people‟s electrical bills in this province, and how they will 

impact the economy of Saskatchewan going forward for a very, 

very long time to come. 

 



November 17, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3627 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate the member for 

Martensville, the Minister of the Environment, and I also want 

to congratulate the member for Last Mountain-Touchwood who 

felt it important that this Assembly consider a motion and then 

come to a decision on the motion. 

 

Soon and very soon, the Minister of the Environment will 

attend the conference in Copenhagen that the hon. member who 

has just spoken has referenced, where the world is going to 

gather and possibly make some important decisions on the issue 

of CO2. The attendees to the meeting in Copenhagen will 

include those in the emerging economies, countries like China. 

They‟ll include the United States. And so I think what happens 

in December will have the attention of the world because any 

climate change initiative — any CO2 initiative — that doesn‟t 

include the position of the United States and the position of 

China, and I would argue India as well, is going to be very, very 

difficult to actually come to fruition in terms of the benefits that 

might flow either for economies or for the issue of the 

environment. 

 

What‟s at stake for our province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is this. 

We rely 50 per cent on coal to generate our electricity. It has 

been like that for a very long time. We‟re making 

improvements on that. We‟re striving to do more in terms of 

renewables. And the Minister for SaskPower announced very 

recently that we would double our wind generation in the 

province of Saskatchewan from 200 megawatts currently, 

thereabouts, to 200 megawatts in the future. 

 

Interesting to note that members on the opposite side of the 

House opposed this measure. The NDP said, no, it‟s not 

enough, that we should actually be doing what they campaigned 

on. Well we looked at their platform, and what they 

campaigned on was not 200 more megawatts of wind but 100 

more megawatts of wind. So we hope that they would support 

the Minister of SaskPower in this initiative because it actually 

doubles the commitment they made in their own platform with 

respect to wind. 

 

[15:30] 

 

And the members opposite are saying, well you didn‟t do it 

soon enough. Well two years into the mandate, Mr. Speaker, 

and 112 promises kept and 40 per cent less debt in 

Saskatchewan and lower income taxes and lower taxes on 

education, Mr. Speaker, and key investments in 

community-based organizations like we hosted here today in 

the legislature, and doubling the NDP‟s own plan for renewable 

wind power in two years with two years left to go is a pretty 

good start, Mr. Speaker. And we‟re going to make some 

progress further. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I think it‟s very important that this Assembly, 

that members of this House have two opportunities on this 

particular motion. The first opportunity is to speak, to debate, to 

represent their constituents, maybe to represent their party 

position or to balance that in some way. But I think it‟s very 

important that each member that wants to speak has the chance 

to speak to this particular motion because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

of its importance. 

 

I don‟t think there is a single more important issue in terms of 

the economy of this province in 20 years or 30 years or 40 

years, or even 10 years, than the issue of energy and the 

environment. What are we going to do with respect to our 

dependence on coal? What are the interim measures? Is it 

natural gas in combination with renewables? Is the long-term 

solution CO2-free nuclear power? Does that make sense 

economically for the province or ought we to be investing in 

our already strong position with respect to clean coal 

technology? 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, these are absolutely fundamentally 

important questions. And the motion that‟s before this 

Assembly today is really the bulwark that goes underneath all 

of that discussion and debate. The motion before the Assembly 

today is whether or not this Assembly will support the 

government‟s plan, climate change plan as outlined by the 

minister in the legislation she introduced last spring. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the previous debater, the member for 

Regina Walsh Acres, Mr. Deputy Speaker, said, well we need 

to have a plan if we‟re going to Copenhagen. The minister has 

been crystal clear about that plan for the province: that we 

would have targets of 20 per cent reduction using the baseline 

of 2006; that we would harmonize those target reductions with 

the federal government proposal that‟s made; that we would 

seek an equivalency agreement, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 

accomplish a couple of things that I‟ll get to in a moment; and, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the 20 per cent reduction would guide 

the government‟s action plan very significantly as part of the 

legislation that was introduced. 

 

And the regulations that will back up that legislation is this 

premise: that whatever is levied in terms of fines or costs to 

those emitters after that legislation becomes the reality — 

whatever is levied, whatever is collected — stays in the 

province of Saskatchewan for reinvestment in the technological 

solutions to deal with this. That‟s the plan of the Government of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The hon. member also has the Bill that was already introduced 

and will return and be passed, I believe, this spring, after more 

deliberation, but it will be passed this spring. That‟s the plan we 

want to take to Copenhagen. 

 

Now the hon. member may not agree with the plan. More on 

that in a moment as well. She may disagree with it. That party 

over there may disagree with the plan that‟s been highlighted 

and that‟s what this place is all about. Then they are free to 

stand in their place and speak to it first if they choose or, if they 

don‟t choose, simply to stand up and vote against it. Mr. 

Speaker, we on this side of the House can also speak to this 

Bill. And I think members on this side of the House are going to 

speak in favour of the motion. 

 

Then what we have is something from this Legislative 

Assembly, from the representatives of the people we work for, 

of the people of this province, who have come together to 

debate a very, very important issue, arguably the most 

important economic issue facing the province in a generation. 

We can debate it. We can decide it by vote. And then that 

minister will take the position to Copenhagen. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that‟s democracy at work. The people have 



3628 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2009 

chosen their MLAs. Their MLAs debate a very important issue 

and then they vote on it. And that position becomes the position 

of the province of Saskatchewan, and the minister then takes 

that very clear and strong message to the federal delegation, to 

the Canadian delegation that will meet in Copenhagen in early 

December. That‟s what we‟re asking members opposite to do. 

 

Now I‟ve heard from my House Leader, from our House 

Leader, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that it‟s already the intent of the 

NDP not to let a vote on this come forward; that they‟re going 

to just speak out the clock today and maybe interminably. Why? 

— I ask. I ask this Assembly, why would they be doing that? 

This is a fundamentally important . . . They don‟t have to agree 

with the government‟s position obviously . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Well the hon. member says they want an 

opportunity to speak. We will give them that opportunity. 

 

We‟ll bring it back again tomorrow. I‟ll keep my remarks brief 

so each member could have a chance to speak on the issue. But 

at the end of the day, there needs to be a vote on this. They need 

to stand up and either say yea or nay to the resolution. That‟s 

part of their job, I would argue, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on this 

fundamentally important issue. 

 

Now they‟re heckling and yelling from their seats as they‟ve 

been doing for the last week, Mr. Deputy Speaker, partly 

because they do not have a consistent position on this issue. 

 

We witnessed it earlier today when the Leader of the 

Opposition was up asking questions, speaking very favourably 

about carbon capture sequestration and technology. And that 

member was part of a government that initiated what is now the 

largest such project on the planet, which is a positive thing. 

Something that I‟ve put on the record, we‟ve put on the record 

significantly, and something that we wish to build on now in the 

province, even though, Mr. Deputy Speaker, even though — 

and the member that I‟m going to refer to stood up and 

moments later asked questions of the Environment minister — 

even though that‟s not the position of the NDP. 

 

They don‟t support carbon capture and sequestration. They 

don‟t provide that support to . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Well I hear the member from Nutana groaning. Let me 

highlight why I would say that. 

 

The member for Regina Walsh Acres in a media scrum, April 

22, 2008 said, “They committed to the expensive and untried 

technology of carbon capture.” It‟s been untried for eight years 

in Weyburn, Saskatchewan as a product of her party‟s project 

put in place there with EnCana and Apache oil. 

 

She went on to say this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in a scrum. She 

said this — now this is the NDP Environment critic — she said, 

“Carbon capture and storage, a technology the Saskatchewan 

Party claims to be cost effective, which is a claim that is simply 

dubious.” Those don‟t sound like the words of unqualified 

support and maybe invention that we heard from the Leader of 

the Opposition. 

 

I remember a presidential debate not long ago in the United 

States where one presidential candidate, or maybe he was the 

vice-president at the time, claimed to have invented the Internet. 

 

Well here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, we have a Leader of 

the Opposition that has claimed to have invented carbon capture 

and sequestration. Whoever invented it, whatever happened, it 

was a good project for the members opposite to pursue. And 

they need to have a consistent position because our province 

has a chance to lead, as we are leading now, on the issue of 

carbon, on the issue of carbon capture, and then successful 

storage as is already happening in the Weyburn area. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we‟ve heard the opposition have different 

positions on the role of the economy in this debate. They can‟t 

decide whether the economy should play a part in this debate or 

not. And the reason why we would be concerned about that, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, is this: depending on a cap-and-trade system 

that might come to Canada or North America, depending on 

what that system looks like, this could be very harmful to 

Saskatchewan‟s economy. 

 

If a cap-and-trade system is about a tax for heavy emitters, the 

proceeds of which flow outside of Saskatchewan to other 

jurisdictions to fund other activities of government — highways 

or health care or some other infrastructure initiative, if the 

proceeds of that money go outside this province, and they fund 

anything but the technological solutions we seek to try to clean 

up coal or find some other application of fossil fuel or some 

other renewable energy, if they go to anything but that, then it‟s 

not environmental policy, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Then it‟s a tax. 

Then it‟s wealth transfer from this province, maybe to Ontario 

or Quebec or some other region in North America. 

 

And that‟s why I say that members opposite who say the 

economy shouldn‟t be brought to bear in this debate, why I tell 

them that they are wrong. I respect the fact that they have the 

right to that position. They should maybe want to vote that. 

They should maybe want to stand up and take their place in the 

House and vote on this particular issue, but they can‟t have it 

both ways. 

 

They can‟t say, as the hon. member, again the Environment 

critic for the NDP, the member for Walsh Acres in another 

media scrum on April 20th, 2009, not very long ago, said this. 

When asked about if it would tough on the economy to reduce 

GHG [greenhouse gas] emissions, the member for Walsh Acres, 

the Environment critic, in a spectacular show of misjudgment 

and miscalculation said, I would say that that is a red herring. I 

would say that that‟s also irresponsible. 

 

The same member, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in question period and 

now in her remarks, the Environment critic for the NDP, the 

hand-picked spokesman by the Leader of the Opposition was 

quoting — spokesperson for the opposition, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker — was quoting studies that were looking at the 

economic impact of policies. She specifically was pointing out, 

I think, the TD Bank-sponsored report done by Pembina 

Institute and the David Suzuki Foundation — a very, very 

neutral force in this debate, I would say. Now, now . . . 

[inaudible interjections] . . . Well, now members want to enter 

the debate and I encourage them to do so. 

 

That report says this, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That report weighs 

the impact on the gross domestic product of various places in 

Canada if the federal government climate change plan happens. 

That particular report, I would say to the member for 



November 17, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3629 

Elphinstone, if he wants to read it, says this, the province that 

he represents, the province that he serves as an MLA, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, is at great risk if that plan is implemented and 

we don‟t get an equivalency agreement where funds stay in the 

province. Our GDP [gross domestic product], that‟s the 

measure of our economy, will pay in much greater ways than 

the GDP of every other province in the Dominion of Canada, 

according to that study. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that means money and jobs. That‟s what it 

means. And it‟s the Pembina Institute she quoted and the 

Suzuki Foundation study she quoted. That means money and 

jobs from our province to some other part of the country in the 

name of the environment when actually it‟s in the name of a tax 

and a wealth transfer, not unlike the National Energy Program, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So they don‟t have a position. One of the solutions that have 

been touted for cleaner sources of energy for the province of 

Saskatchewan has been nuclear power. And there‟s a lot of 

disagreement and debate and discussion about nuclear power. 

Though I note in a recent poll, in some recent polls in the 

province, that the support for nuclear power is about five times 

greater than the support for the NDP actually, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, some debate should happen 

about whether that‟s the right approach. Even though it‟s a 

CO2-free source of power, there are other environmental issues. 

And so we‟re having a debate about whether that‟s good or bad. 

 

Now what is the position of the opposition on nuclear power? 

Well take your pick. What day of the week is it? What day of 

the week is it for the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, who came back to the province on an itinerant basis 

every chance he could to speak to groups like the North 

Saskatoon Business Association, I think once a month, to 

lecture and hector the people of the province of Saskatchewan 

as to why they had not immediately put up nuclear power plants 

when he left for Alberta, however long ago that was. 

 

He said, and I don‟t have the quotes with me, but the member 

for Thunder Creek went at him, listed them fairly significantly 

in the last session. I think the Hon. Leader of the Opposition, on 

nuclear power, said the time for debate is over. And I‟m 

paraphrasing, but not by much because I‟m not using the word, 

Mr. Speaker, disingenuous or ingenuous. It‟s just a paraphrase, 

though one of those isn‟t actually a word. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, he came and lectured the people of this 

province, anyone that would listen. Lectured Shirley Ryan, the 

North Saskatoon Business Association, the media in this 

province, and said the time for debate about nuclear power is 

over. He was talking about powering the oil sands maybe with 

Saskatchewan uranium. He talked specifically about nuclear 

power‟s application in the post . . . [inaudible] . . . carbon 

economy. He talked about all of those things, and the quotes are 

there for the world to see. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, now they‟ve run away from that 

position as well. That‟s not their position today on nuclear 

power. It‟s not his position any more. He says well he doesn‟t 

. . . He likes nuclear power still, but not this proponent. I have a 

feeling, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that regardless of the proponent 

that came forward or the size of the plant, 1000 megs or 200 

megs or 300 megs, he would find a way, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

to be against it. Because he had to in order to win the leadership 

over there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And right now I think it bothers him that he‟s changed his 

position. I do. Because I believe he strongly believes in the first 

things, the things he used to say about nuclear power. So he 

may have a little buyer‟s remorse about the new job he has, but 

I‟m not sure who has more buyer‟s remorse — himself or the 

party that he now leads — based on the polling numbers that 

we‟ve seen, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Now, now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are going to have a chance 

in this Legislative Assembly on this issue, on the motion before 

the House, for all members to stand up. And in the case of the 

members opposite, they may want to be critical of the 

government‟s plan. That‟s fair enough. That‟s part of the 

debate. We heard the member for Walsh Acres be very critical 

for . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well the member for 

Lakeview says, what‟s the plan? 

 

The plan is 20 per cent reduction with a base year of 2006. The 

plan, Mr. Speaker, are regulations to ensure that levies 

collected, and through an equivalency agreement levies 

collected from those who emit beyond that 20 per cent level and 

beyond targets that are set, stay in the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The plan is in a Bill that 

was tabled in this House — secretly tabled in this House and 

available on the Internet — from members opposite. That‟s the 

plan. That plan seeks to balance the economy and the 

environment. That plan is about the very future of this province 

of Saskatchewan. That plan is about Saskatchewan leading in 

the technologies that we know will actually do something about 

the issue. 

 

[15:45] 

 

That plan needs to go to Copenhagen, with or without the votes 

of the members opposite. But they should vote on it. They 

should vote on it on behalf of their party so that this Assembly 

sends a clear message that Saskatchewan‟s going to continue to 

lead in this issue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what is at stake is great. What is at stake is great. 

With reference to cap and trade, with reference to cap and trade, 

TD‟s [Toronto Dominion] chief economist Don Drummond on 

the GHG reduction report that his bank financed, this report was 

quoted by the member for Walsh Acres. The report that the 

independent Pembina Institute and the independent Suzuki 

Foundation funded. The report that said Saskatchewan‟s going 

to pay, that Alberta and Saskatchewan are going to pay to the 

benefit of somebody else. 

 

Well I can see the member, the Leader of the Opposition, 

shaking his head. That is exactly what the report says. And if he 

aspires to any other office or desk in this Assembly, he ought to 

familiarize himself with that report because it represents a 

potential threat to the economy of the province of Saskatchewan 

and won‟t achieve anything environmentally. Here is what Don 

Drummond, who is an economist with that very bank that 

authored the report, said: “It will be the biggest fiscal shock in 

Canadian history, but the study shows it can be done.” 

 



3630 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2009 

And then the study goes on to show, again as I‟ve said earlier in 

this debate, what will happen to the GDP of Saskatchewan and 

Alberta — but we should be focused on Saskatchewan — to the 

great benefit of other jurisdictions in the Dominion of Canada, 

Mr. Speaker. And it will be about a levy that goes to other 

things that government wants to spend it on, not about the 

environment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the plan we‟re proposing and offering today, and 

the resolution that forms the foundation for that plan, says 

simply this: we are serious about this issue. We know that 9 per 

cent of the emissions of CO2 come from our province, and we 

only have 3 per cent of the economy and 3 per cent of the 

population. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we know we have to do more 

in this province. And here‟s the good news — this government 

and the people of Saskatchewan are prepared to do more. Mr. 

Speaker . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, on this particular issue, on this 

particular issue we recognize that our government, that our 

province, has to do more. That on a per capita basis, Mr. 

Speaker, based on what we‟ve indicated, we‟re prepared to do 

at Boundary and at Shand — with a reference project, a joint 

project with the state of Montana on a per capita basis — there 

is not a jurisdiction in the country, not a jurisdiction in the 

country on a per capita basis that‟s prepared to do more. 

 

But what we‟re not in favour of, as members opposite seem to 

be in favour of, we‟re not in favour of targets that will pipe 

wrench the very economy that‟s going to pay for the 

technological solution as members advocate. And I think come 

the next election there‟s going to be people doing math on their 

plan and how it‟ll impact people‟s power bills in this province 

and how it‟ll impact the economy. We‟re not in favour of that. 

And we‟re not in favour of New Democratic Party cap and 

trade, as we‟ve heard from their federal party and members 

opposite, that would see taxes levied in this province and taken 

out and given to other jurisdictions to fund projects other than 

environmental issues and technologies in Canada. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members opposite have a lot to say 

from their seats. I hope they have something to say on their feet, 

on their feet. Because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I think the people of the province will want to 

know how they‟ll vote on this issue. And they can vote against 

it or they can vote in favour of it, but they should absolutely 

have the courage to stand and take their place and vote on this 

so that the Assembly can send a message as to the plan and the 

position of the Government of Saskatchewan and the 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Voting on a motion. No legislation . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — The member for Moose Jaw Wakamow 

keeps talking about no legislation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when it 

was tabled in the spring. If she looked deep in her desk she‟d be 

able to find a great preponderance of the legislation, to quote 

the hon. member from earlier this week. Preponderance, by the 

way, is on the same list as “ingenuine,” Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

It‟s a growing list that we have for members opposite. 

 

Still, still notwithstanding that, well notwithstanding what the 

interventions are for members opposite, they should stand up 

and take a position on this particular issue on the principles that 

have been laid out by the minister and on the very important 

principle that says, let‟s make sure that the environmental plan 

adopted by the country, supported by the provinces, is actually 

about the environment. Let‟s make sure it‟s not about wealth 

transfer. Let‟s make sure it‟s not the next generation national 

energy program. Let‟s stand up for Saskatchewan, for the 

environment, but also for the economy, and also for the 

customers of SaskPower, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to be clear about 

what we‟re really talking about here today in this debate, this 

debate around the environment. And it‟s not a debate that 

necessarily is one that we‟re eminently qualified to enter into. 

We tend to be, if not seen by ourselves, seen by the general 

public as a collective group of grumpy old men and grumpy old 

women. 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, the future, we have a piece of the 

future that‟s ours collectively. We have a piece of the future 

that‟s ours. But you know, the future is in our children and in 

our grandchildren. And it‟s those very grandchildren and their 

kids that we have to talk about in terms of the environment. 

 

We have a situation today where the north polar ice cap is the 

thinnest it has been in many, many eons. It‟s not a four-syllable 

word, eon, not like the Premier used a four-cylinder word: 

preponderance. Eon is just a one-syllable word. I thought I‟d 

speak in simple terms so that everybody in the Chamber could 

understand what it was we were saying. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the North Pole is at the thinnest level it has ever 

been. When I was in grade school, they taught us that the world 

was getting colder, and indeed we might risk freezing to death. 

It was sort of the impression that we got. How things have 

changed quickly. We‟ve got the North Pole, the solar . . . or 

pardon me, the polar cap melting. We‟ve got oceans rising 

worldwide at a much faster rate than was predicted as little as 

three years ago. The ocean levels are rising much faster. It‟s 

going to mean the virtual disappearance of some 50 of the 

smallest island nations in the world. Now this should cause us 

some pause for concern. 

 

There‟s all kinds of evidence that says what we‟re doing is 

wrong. One of the things that‟s happened, Mr. Speaker, is the 

carbon dioxide levels around the world are nearing 500 parts 

per million — 500 parts. And historically, it‟s more like 300 to 

330 parts per million. It‟s now beyond 500 parts per million and 

growing at a horrendously fast rate. This is the highest level of 

CO2 in millions of years, Mr. Speaker, millions of years. 

 

And what‟s happened that‟s caused this? Well we could say 

there‟s some volcanoes, you know. But there‟s been volcanoes 

forever — forever. The world does what it will do. There‟s 

things that happen around the world that aren‟t brand new. 

 



November 17, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3631 

What is new is 6 billion or more people on earth consuming 

fossil fuels, consuming coal for electrical generation, 

consuming gas and oil for our transportation and to keep our 

homes warm. And it‟s many times more . . . Well I remember 

when the population of the world in my lifetime, in our lifetime, 

was something like 2 billion and now it‟s well beyond 6 There 

are problems in the world. But what we‟re trying to establish is 

a future for our grandchildren and our great-grandchildren and 

generations beyond. That‟s what we‟re really all about. 

 

Now I want to, before I get into the major part of my speech, 

Mr. Speaker, I want to just suggest that the Premier may have it 

right when he says that what the democratic process is is that 

the government will put forward a plan and we don‟t have to 

agree but we have to discuss it. The government proposes a 

plan and we should discuss it and then we should vote on it. 

Well you know, there‟s nothing wrong with what he says, but 

talk is cheap. 

 

Here‟s where it goes off the rails, Mr. Speaker. Here we are 

now nearing the mid-term of the Sask Party government, of that 

administration, nearing the mid-term and they still haven‟t got 

this blueprint, this environmental plan, tabled in the legislature 

and voted on. 

 

Sure they tabled the Bill — I think it was Bill 95 — last spring, 

in the dying days of the spring where we have a fixed calendar. 

They knew there wasn‟t time to pass the Bill. Here we are, day 

15 of the fall session, day 15 of the fall session. They haven‟t 

had the courage to bring that Bill back for our consideration. 

The Bill isn‟t even before the Legislative Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker. No Bill. So we‟d love to debate. We‟d love to say yes 

we agree, no we don‟t agree. Here‟s what‟s good, here‟s what‟s 

bad. But we don‟t have that Bill to debate, Mr. Speaker, and 

what a shame. 

 

So here we have the Premier saying, oh well here, you know, 

we should debate and then vote, but there‟s no Bill to vote on. 

Instead what we have is a motion, a motion that calls for . . . 

Essentially what it is, is the new version of National Lampoon‟s 

Copenhagen vacation for the Minister of Environment. That‟s 

what we‟re voting on, that we can send the Minister of 

Environment to Copenhagen, Mr. Speaker, at a cost of what? — 

24,000 I think I‟ve heard; $24,000. 

 

Well, you know, Mr. Speaker, this on the heels of . . . Find out 

earlier today the Premier‟s going to be going to Washington for 

his little vacation. He‟ll be gone on Thursday, leaving the 

Minister of Finance high and dry, answering the questions 

about the fiscal situation of Saskatchewan, about the financial 

situation. This on the heels of the Minister of Enterprise 

Saskatchewan coming back from Kazakhstan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the irony of all this world travel, this global 

travel, is that we have a government that admitted they had a 

financial problem, a fiscal problem and said publicly, we‟re 

going to cut out-of-province travel. We‟re going to really reel in 

out-of-province and out-of-country travel. I see or . . . No I 

don‟t see. I hear. I hear one thing, Mr. Speaker; I see something 

completely different. There‟s one set of rules for Saskatchewan 

people. There‟s one set of rules for the civil service and there‟s 

another set of rules for those Sask Party cabinet ministers in 

power. Travel for them is good. Not . . . [inaudible interjection] 

. . . Yes. Travel first, ask questions later. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a situation, we have a situation that was 

outlined very eloquently by my colleague, the member for 

Regina Walsh Acres, who is the critic for the Environment of 

the New Democratic Party, and we‟re very proud of the job that 

that critic does for us day in and day out. That critic who says 

things like, you know, we should be doing much more. The 

province could be doing much more on environmental, on 

energy conservation, Mr. Speaker. Yes, they‟ve done some 

things. Your government has done some things. They‟ve 

introduced a rebate for low-flush, low-flow toilets, and this is a 

good thing. This is a good thing. But it‟s a tiny step in getting 

us where we need to go. It‟s a tiny step, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And what the people of Saskatchewan, what all of our — I 

don‟t want to personalize it and say my grandchildren — all of 

our grandchildren, all of the future generations, what they really 

are asking for is more walk to go with the talk. There‟s lots of 

talk but not much walk. And what they‟re really demanding is 

more action, more on-the-ground things that can help us. 

 

And to which, Mr. Speaker, I‟m reluctant to say this, but I 

suspect that I‟ve read more books on global warming in the past 

18 months than any other single member in the legislature. It‟s 

a concern and it scares. It scares. I don‟t mean that others don‟t 

read, and many of you have done much research. I know 

colleagues on this side have, and I‟m confident that some 

members on the government side also have read on this 

important issue. 

 

[16:00] 

 

But really what we‟re talking about, Mr. Speaker, is more than 

just, will our economy thrive, will our economy survive? What 

we‟re really talking about is, will our future generations exist? 

Will they exist? Will they thrive? What kind of a world, what 

kind of a legacy are we leaving behind for them? 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, when the time comes that I have 

to meet my Maker . . . I hope it‟s many years in the future but 

we never know. We never know. When that time comes, I don‟t 

want to have to answer a question that I could have done more 

to protect the future. I could have done more to alleviate the 

suffering. I could have done more to guarantee that our 

Saskatchewan continued to be the greatest place in the greatest 

country in the world to live. 

 

We need to have that commitment, Mr. Speaker. We need it. 

What we see is just about the opposite of that. We see, with 

respect, we see a Premier gets up and waves his pompoms and 

says, well we‟ve done more on wind power than the NDP 

opposition has in the last two years. 

 

Well you know, Mr. Speaker, they‟re the government. We don‟t 

control that any more. We built the wind power to the point that 

Saskatchewan had the most wind per capita, wind power per 

capita of any province in Canada. We were proud of that. It was 

just a starting point, just a starting point. We campaigned, as the 

Premier pointed out, we campaigned — a little over two years 

ago — we campaigned that we were going to add 100 

megawatts of wind. And now he‟s saying, well but they‟re 

going to go with something more than double that. 



3632 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2009 

But let me point out this is now two and a half years later since 

we were campaigning on that. They‟ve been the government for 

two full years. So far what we‟ve got is an announcement that 

we‟re going to maybe see some wind power at some point in 

the future, but not a single wind power has been built. Not a 

single additional megawatt of electricity is online as a result of 

the talk. 

 

So what people want is more walk to go with the talk. They 

want to see the windmills. They want to see them hooked up. 

They want to see them producing electricity. Clearly we‟ve got 

a windy province. Clearly there is lots of potential for that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I‟ve done some reading on energy 

conservation. I‟ve talked to some experts in the field, and I can 

tell you this. Let me start by where we were half a dozen years 

ago roughly. I was minister responsible for Saskatchewan 

Property Management for a while. We had five major building 

programs going on across the province where we were 

renovating the envelope and making these buildings much more 

energy efficient than what they had been when they were built 

some years earlier. 

 

We were doing that for a couple of reasons. One, the buildings 

belonged to all of the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, the people of 

Saskatchewan, and they were basically very good buildings that 

needed to be upgraded. But more importantly or as importantly, 

when we were doing the modernization and the upgrading, we 

also paid very close attention to the environmental impact and 

to the ongoing requirements for electricity and for heating and 

for water consumption in all of those buildings. And we paid 

very close attention to all three of those areas. So that‟s, you 

know, just a little snapshot of where we were half a dozen years 

ago when we were in government. 

 

But my reading tells me that there‟s a tremendous opportunity 

in housing stock, whether it‟s individual units — you know, the 

traditional two- or three-bedroom, single, detached building — 

or whether it‟s duplex or condo units or apartments. There is the 

opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to more than double our energy 

efficiency. Put another way, we could cut in by more than half 

the amount of fossil fuel that‟s required just in heating, just in 

keeping these buildings lit. 

 

And I‟m not — I want to be clear about this — I‟m not a 

proponent of, oh let us turn the thermostat from 22 degrees to 

12. That‟s not what I‟m talking about. I don‟t want to 

discourage anyone from turning the thermostat down and 

putting on a sweater. But what I am talking about is making 

sure that you‟ve got very adequate insulation because your next, 

your cheapest source of energy is the source that you save, the 

energy that you save. That‟s always your cheapest source. 

 

While I‟m on that, it reminds me there‟s two major theories on 

where oil and gas come from. One is that it‟s plants and 

dinosaurs, you know, rotted millions of years ago and produce 

oil that we now pump out of the ground. And we use it to heat 

our buildings — buildings like this one, buildings like our 

homes. We drive here in our vehicles from either the plant and 

dinosaur leftovers, remains, that‟s cooked for millennia. Or the 

other theory is, that it‟s like iron, it‟s a part of the planet. Oil is 

just a part of the planet. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, either way, either way I don‟t care. Either 

way, they‟re not making any more oil. There‟s no more 

dinosaurs helping make oil. And the earth isn‟t changing 

significantly enough that it‟s making more oil, if that‟s the 

theory that you might want to accept. So we have a resource 

that‟s depleting at a rate that‟s about 100 per cent. Every litre of 

oil or gas that we use is one litre less that remains for the future. 

 

And while we‟re depleting that fossil fuel resource — I could 

add coal to it or any other fossil fuel — while we‟re depleting 

that fossil fuel, Mr. Speaker, that‟s one litre of, using my gas or 

oil example, that‟s one litre less for future generations. And we 

are pumping additional carbon dioxide into the air, a major 

greenhouse gas that has been acknowledged by everyone except 

some of the members opposite, has been acknowledged as a 

major problem, as a major contributor to global storming and 

global warming. A major contributor to the rising of sea levels. 

I might add, a major contributor to the salination of the seas. 

 

And I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that as a scuba diver that 

wishes he could do an awful lot more scuba diving, it‟s just an 

amazing world. But I can tell you that the coral reefs certainly 

in the Caribbean are in distress. And what they‟re in distress 

from is oceans warming and the acidification — now that‟s a 

tough word for me this moment — but the acidification of the 

oceans. And this is causing grief to the coral reefs. And I‟ve 

seen it. I‟ve experienced it, and I‟m distressed by it. So, Mr. 

Speaker, we have a situation just crying out for help. 

 

I‟ve already talked a little bit about energy conservation with 

respect to housing and buildings. And that could be government 

buildings. It could be government-owned housing stocks. It 

could be just the homes that we all own. We need to find 

programs to help create more action on energy conservation, on 

insulation, and on reducing the need for fossil fuels in our 

ongoing operations of buildings. 

 

Transportation is a second area, Mr. Speaker. It distresses me to 

see SUVs [sport-utility vehicle] driving along the highways, at 

whatever speed they happen to be going, with one passenger. 

And I don‟t want to claim to be any purer than anyone who 

drives an SUV. On that I can do better. I can do better on my 

own front. I don‟t drive an SUV, but I can do better on that 

front. The government fleet can do better than it is doing. 

 

And we need to do things to help organize so that we can 

reduce that footprint, that greenhouse gas footprint. Things like 

we tried in the early ‟90s, we had a park-and-ride program. And 

we encouraged civil servants to, and ourselves, to take the bus 

when we were going to Saskatoon, that being a major area. Or it 

could be any of the other cities too, but Regina to Saskatoon 

was the heaviest corridor. And we encouraged that we use 

public transportation, as opposed to just getting into our own 

little vehicle and roaring down the highway at whatever speed 

we felt comfortable driving. 

 

So transportation is an area that, as we modernize our vehicles, 

we should also look to what is the most fuel-efficient, what‟s 

the most energy-efficient type of vehicle that we can reasonably 

buy that will serve the purpose. And I want to just highlight — 

that will serve the purpose. Because again, I‟m not advocating 

that we provide somebody with a bicycle if part of their job is to 

go from here to Weyburn and back twice a week. Clearly a 



November 17, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3633 

bicycle is not the appropriate form of transportation. But we 

should figure out what it is that will serve them the best. And 

then that‟s what we should get. 

 

Industry is the third area where we can clearly get into energy 

conservation, get into demand-side energy conservation, Mr. 

Speaker. We can get into electric motors that start up, requiring 

a lot less electricity in the start-up, and that they can operate 

ever more efficiently. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‟ve got all of these areas of potential that I 

don‟t want to pretend to be the expert, the leading expert in the 

world on, because I‟m not. Clearly not. But we‟ve got all of 

these areas that the government could have moved on, every 

single one of them. 

 

And how, you might ask? It‟s quite simple. We left $320 

million in the Green Future Fund, $320 million that we got 

from the sale of a Crown asset. And we dedicated that to being 

spent on green initiatives — $320 million that this government, 

now government, took into the General Revenue Fund and 

spent it. And on Thursday, we‟ll find out just how badly they‟ve 

spent that amount of money. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan can be a utopia, but it requires us to 

move, to act. It requires us to do some things. It requires us to 

have the courage to introduce our environmental Bill. Now I 

understand why the government might be a little reticent, a little 

reluctant to reintroduce the Bill, because it again highlights that 

one of the things we did is we had campaigned on a 32 per cent 

reduction in greenhouse gas emissions. And our 32 per cent 

reduction was from the current day, which at the latest 

information when we were putting this together was for the year 

2004. A 32 per cent reduction in greenhouse gas emissions we 

committed to with the base year being 2004. 

 

The Sask Party said, well that sounds pretty good, we‟ll do that 

initially. But where are they at today? If you believe and take at 

face value where the Sask Party government is at today, Mr. 

Speaker, is they‟ve slid from a 32 per cent reduction in CO2 

with the base year being 2004 to a 20 per cent reduction with 

the base year being 2006. That‟s pretty darn significant. And 

yet the government would have you believe — you know, wave 

the pompoms — would have us believe that somehow they‟re 

doing something good for the economy. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, they inherited a red hot economy, as my 

colleague the member for Regina Walsh Acres, the 

Environment critic said. The Sask Party came into office with 

$2.3 billion in the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. An economy that 

was just the hottest in all of Canada. We had record job growth. 

We had record economic growth. And they did nothing, other 

than said, well initially the 32 per cent target that the New 

Democrats have set was acceptable for a reduction in 

greenhouse gas emissions. 

 

[16:15] 

 

Now they‟ve slid where 20 per cent, a 20 per cent reduction in 

greenhouse gas emissions is now the acceptable target. Well 

how does that work? How can you claim to be a government 

that is governing, not only for today but for the future, when 

there‟s so little action with respect to the environment? There‟s 

so little action in a province that is blessed with people that are 

more than willing to pick up the challenge, to work diligently 

for it. They‟re just looking for a little bit more leadership. 

They‟re looking for some opportunities. 

 

And there are opportunities galore in Saskatchewan. We just 

need to put our mind to how can we create jobs by working in 

energy conservation. How can we put people to work, for 

instance, moving into insulation, more adequately insulating 

homes? How could we upgrade windows and doors? How could 

we move so that we need to use less fossil fuel and employ 

people? 

 

How could we move from incandescent lights to fluorescent 

lights or compact fluorescent lights? And many, many people 

have done so, but again there is more that needs to be done on 

that front. And more importantly, why don‟t we make the leap 

to LED [light-emitting diode] which is hugely, hugely more 

efficient than compact fluorescent? More expensive right now, 

but we need to put a little bit of the $320 million that was set 

aside by the previous government, we could put some of that 

money into some lighting projects. We could actually have it 

where people could see how well LEDs work and then we 

might just, on our own initiative. might just move more that 

way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‟ve got a situation. We‟re asked to send the 

Minister of Environment to Copenhagen to support a plan that 

this legislature hasn‟t had a formal opportunity to discuss and 

vote on. That‟s what we‟re being asked to do. The government 

is asking us in essence to sign a blank cheque and to just trust 

them. After all they‟re good people. And you know what? 

Might be good people. Might be good people, but that‟s not the 

democratic process. 

 

The democratic process is the government will propose. The 

opposition will consider and will ask its questions and make 

sure that the due diligence happens, make sure that the hard 

questions are asked, make sure that, when the Minister of 

Environment in this instance goes to Copenhagen, that that 

minister has a clear understanding of where we‟re at. 

 

I want to be as clear as I can, Mr. Speaker. I clearly think that 

the minister could save $24,000 of taxpayers‟ money, could 

save lots of tonnes of CO2 from the eliminated airplane flights 

from here to Copenhagen and could spend that $24,000 in 

energy conservation almost anywhere and get a multiplied 

return off of that. The minister could do that. 

 

The Premier could . . . I shouldn‟t go into that. Mr. Speaker, it 

is necessary for cabinet ministers to do some travel, and it‟s 

certainly necessary for our Premier to do some travel. I don‟t 

want to pretend that I‟m in favour of all of the travel they do, 

and clearly I‟m not in this instance. This trip to Copenhagen 

I‟m not in favour of. This trip to Copenhagen, I don‟t see that 

Saskatchewan is going to get any pay value at all for it. I think 

instead what we do is we potentially send off a relatively small 

delegation for the — how did I describe it? — the National 

Lampoon‟s Copenhagen vacation, Mr. Speaker. And that‟s 

essentially what it is. The payback for Saskatchewan — zero. 

The cost — $24,000 up front. And at a time when we don‟t 

have a long credibility of having dealt with environmental 

concerns. 



3634 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2009 

The government has proposed some major, what they‟ll call, 

energy or environmental programs. They‟ve proposed for 

example that we should have a Bruce Power nuclear power 

plant, and then silent about it, except trotting it out every once 

in a while just almost as a veiled threat. Well it‟s interesting, 

Mr. Speaker, because when you read, you pick up today‟s 

Leader-Post and you read about nuclear power. And you have 

the government spokesperson saying, well if Bruce Power is 

looking for a government guarantee, a taxpayer guarantee, 

we‟re not interested. If they‟re looking for some guarantee on a 

special price that we‟ll buy the electricity, we‟re not interested. 

And if they‟re looking for some special environmental 

acceptances, we‟re not interested in that either. Well I don‟t 

know why the government wouldn‟t just say to Bruce Power, 

you can‟t build. Because in essence, that‟s where it‟s at. 

 

There‟s no, no nuclear power plant built now that can produce 

electricity for less than what Saskatchewan people are paying 

for our electricity. The cost is going to only go up. They‟ve 

admitted it earlier, when the nuclear power plant was still very 

much at the forefront, when they said what‟s going to have to 

happen is SaskPower rates are going to go up 8 per cent this 

year — they‟ve already done that — and then they‟re going to 

go up about 10 per cent each year over the next decade, they 

said. Astounding. And wonder why the support for a nuclear 

power plant or anything that the Sask Party government wants 

to do disappears. It dissipates. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it‟s really quite elementary. Saskatchewan 

people used to enjoy the lowest cost utility bundle in all of 

Canada. They came to expect it. They came to believe that that 

was doable. We certainly know it‟s doable. We delivered it for 

16 years . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And already I hear an 

oh. And I know I‟ve overspoke myself, Mr. Speaker, because 

the promise wasn‟t there for 16 years. We had amongst the 

lowest, and then once we made the promise, we delivered it for 

four years. But before that, overall we had for example, always 

historically had, the lowest SGI [Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance] auto insurance rates in Canada. We had SaskTel 

rates that were either lowest or second lowest in North America 

for most of that time. 

 

The simple fact of the matter is New Democrats deliver 

low-cost utilities through our Crown corporations because we 

understand the Crowns. We created many of them, and we 

understand them to be a great way to organize our business 

affairs and to deliver the services that homeowners and 

businesses require to live in this relatively cold climate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government has been long on talk and very, 

very short on walk. At best I could describe what they do on the 

environment as the environmental shuffle. And I‟ve already 

talked about them having started with a 32 per cent reduction 

promise, of CO2 reduction, and then that slid to 20 per cent, and 

it just gets worse. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that I will have other colleagues that are 

interested in speaking to this matter, and I‟m most interested in 

hearing from some of these colleagues. I know it‟ll be very 

interesting to hear how this debate unfolds. 

 

But I want to close where I began and that‟s with this plea — 

that us grumpy, old men and women, us grumpy, old men and 

women gathered here in the legislature to do good work. My 

plea is that we put future generations ahead of ourselves, that 

what we do is motivated for the long term as opposed to for the 

immediacy of today‟s debate. 

 

What we need to do is pay attention to the environment. 

Without an environment that we can live in, Mr. Speaker, there 

can be no future. There can be no economic growth. There can 

be no utopian Saskatchewan or Canada — or world for that 

matter. The signs of crisis are everywhere throughout the world. 

There is no single issue that cries out and demands our attention 

more than the issue of global warming, of carbon dioxide 

growth, of the greenhouse gas growth. There‟s no issue larger. 

And I‟m aware of this fact that I have not trotted in, but just 

when I want to put it into perspective so people understand 

when I say there‟s no issue larger. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think I‟ve been speaking for about 20 minutes 

now, and for each of those 20 minutes, in each one of those 

minutes, 10 children in Africa have died of starvation. That‟s 

200 children have died of starvation in Africa while I‟ve been 

speaking about the environment. 

 

There are clearly problems in our world that are almost 

impossible to tackle. That doesn‟t mean we shouldn‟t tackle 

them. It doesn‟t mean we shouldn‟t try. On the contrary, it tells 

me that as a rich province, relatively rich province in a very rich 

nation, we have an obligation to do, each of us, what we can to 

shoulder the burden. Each of us has an obligation to do what we 

can to make this world a better place. But without a liveable 

environment, there is no better place. There is no ongoing world 

for future generations. 

 

The world won‟t end tonight. The world won‟t end, not likely, a 

decade from now. But the signs are there. We‟re stressing the 

earth to and, in many ways, beyond its limits, its caring limits, 

its limits of capacity to cope. The snow on Mount Kilimanjaro 

will be gone within the decade. There are problems throughout, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I‟m urging that the government withdraw this vacation trip to 

Copenhagen and instead spend $24,000 on energy conservation. 

Spend $24,000 putting together some programs that will make a 

difference to real people, putting together some programs that 

will help make facilities throughout Saskatchewan more energy 

efficient because every dollar that they spend that saves, results 

in us using less fossil fuel is just incredibly well spent, and it 

helps us in the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I regret that this motion came before us. I think 

I‟ve made it pretty clear where I stand on it, and I‟m looking 

forward to colleagues on both sides of the legislature speaking 

out and representing their constituents as well. I thank you for 

your attention and your time. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 

proud to stand and address our government motion. The motion 

reads: 

 

That this Assembly support the government‟s plan 

addressing climate change; a plan balancing 



November 17, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3635 

environmental protection with economic growth thereby 

ensuring the well-being and future prosperity of 

Saskatchewan families; and 

 

That this Assembly supports the Saskatchewan plan to 

direct offset payments into the Saskatchewan Technology 

Fund to fund research into the development of technology 

needed to help the world reduce and control carbon 

emissions; and 

 

That this honourable Assembly encourage the 

government to actively promote the Saskatchewan plan at 

the United Nations COP 15 Conference in Copenhagen in 

December of 2009. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to address this motion piece by piece. 

 

The first part of this motion is suggesting that we continue to 

look for innovative environmental initiatives that will not be 

damaging to our local economy. Well I am proud to say that 

some of these world-leading environmental initiatives are 

happening right in my constituency of Estevan. 

 

[16:30] 

 

Saskatchewan is home to the world‟s largest carbon dioxide 

storage project which consists of two commercial carbon 

dioxide enhanced oil recovery projects operated by EnCana 

Corporation at Weyburn and by Apache Canada at Midale. 

Both of these projects obtain their carbon dioxide from a 

gasification facility in North Dakota. The carbon dioxide is 

shipped through a 325-kilometre pipeline that crosses the 

international border, and it is regulated by the National Energy 

Board. 

 

Mr. Speaker, each day EnCana‟s Weyburn oilfield is injecting 

an amount of CO2, which is equivalent to 30 per cent of the 

greenhouse gas emissions from all the vehicles in 

Saskatchewan. The neighbouring Apache Canada Midale 

project, Saskatchewan‟s second commercial scale CO2 flood 

project, is injecting an amount of CO2 equivalent to the 

emissions from all the homes in Saskatoon — the largest city in 

our province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Both projects obtain large climate change benefits with 

commercial gain. While it is important to reduce greenhouse 

gas emissions from small emitters such as vehicles or homes, 

governments should encourage the petroleum industry to store 

large volumes of CO2 in oil reservoirs. 

 

Carbon dioxide capture and storage, CCS, is considered a 

critical technology to reduce world greenhouse gas emissions. 

Mr. Speaker, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 

of the United Nations is estimated that carbon dioxide capture 

and storage might provide up to half of all emission reductions 

necessary to stabilize greenhouse gas levels in the atmosphere. 

CCS plays a major role in the plans to reduce greenhouse gas 

emissions from industry at relatively low costs that have been 

developed by the Government of Saskatchewan, the 

Government of Alberta, and the Government of Canada. 

 

The opposition members sit in their chair day after day and 

insist that the energy rates in the province are too high. Then 

their next complaint is that our government is not doing enough 

for our environment in terms of green energy. Well 

unfortunately for the members opposite, they can‟t speak out of 

both sides of their mouths. If there is a desire to move forward 

with cleaner energy — and I think there is, Mr. Speaker — our 

government is going to have to continue to invest funding into 

new and innovative technology that will help reduce CO2 

emissions. 

 

It is quite simple. To have greener energy is going to cost 

money, and even members opposite have made this 

observation. That is why our government believes that offset 

payments collected in Saskatchewan should stay in 

Saskatchewan. We are in the enviable position of leading the 

world in carbon capture and sequestration technology. And if 

there is going to be carbon offset payments collected in 

Saskatchewan, these funds should stay in Saskatchewan to 

allow for continued research and development of technologies 

right here in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the second part of our government‟s motion is 

really just common sense. I would be surprised if any member 

of this Assembly would vote against a motion that states if the 

money collected in Saskatchewan should stay in Saskatchewan 

and go towards the funding of more innovative, clean energy 

technologies. 

 

The third part of our government‟s motion speaks for itself. I 

believe that wherever we send a representative, they should be 

promoting Saskatchewan‟s plans. Our government was invited 

to the Copenhagen climate change conference because we were 

considered leaders in carbon emission reductions. I am proud of 

the fact, and I know that our hon. Environment minister will do 

an excellent job of promoting our government‟s plans. 

 

It is a plan that has stringent reduction goals as anyone in the 

country. Our reduction goals are now in line with the federal 

government — something that the Environment critic has asked 

for, yet she is grumpy about the plan. And yes, we will be 

promoting the idea that offset payments collected in 

Saskatchewan should stay in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is taking the environmental 

concerns of the people in our province seriously. We are 

moving forward on reduction targets and are leading the world 

in carbon capture and sequestration technologies. 

 

Our government has signed an MOU [memorandum of 

understanding] with Montana, agreeing to work together on the 

development of one of the largest international carbon capture 

and storage demonstration projects in the world, which would 

see carbon dioxide produced at the coal-fired plant in 

Saskatchewan, transmitted, and stored in Montana. 

 

Our Saskatchewan Party government is moving to meet 

reduction targets while ensuring continued economic growth, 

which is so important. This motion is of particular importance 

to me, Mr. Speaker, and to my constituents as the Bakken oil 

field is an integral part of our economy. My constituents have 

been blessed with a valuable resource in the area. They feel that 

for too long government has stood in the way and not allowed 

them to reap the rewards of this good fortune. Now that 

Saskatchewan has become known as a place that businesses 



3636 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2009 

want to invest in, there are fears that there will be too many 

restrictions put on resource development, and businesses will be 

scared off. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I know my comments are brief. I know 

there‟s others that want to get in on this debate. So I will just 

close by saying, I am proud, on behalf of my constituents, I am 

proud to give my support to this motion that will see our 

government continue to move forward on balancing 

environmental issues with economic growth. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m happy 

to rise and join the debate on the government motion here 

before us. I have some real issues about the actual wording in 

the motion and I‟ll get into that. And of course, this is a real 

opportunity for us to have a good discussion, a good debate 

about climate change and what this government is putting 

forward. And I see a lot of weaknesses in it. 

 

And I know that my colleagues, first the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres had exhaustive discussion about some of the 

problems that she sees with the proposal; I‟m not sure if I 

would put it a plan. But clearly we have some questions about 

that. And I also want to acknowledge my colleague, the 

member from Regina Coronation Park, who feels very strongly 

about this issue and framed it in a way, I think, that many of us 

should talk about this. 

 

We are at a real crossroads, Mr. Speaker, where we can make a 

difference. And when we have people at international 

gatherings like this, it‟s so important for us to really do the right 

thing, do the right thing. And I worry about this motion because 

in many ways, I feel when I read the first two paragraphs, she 

talks about the government plan and she outlines the plan and I 

wonder, so where is the plan? Where is the plan? 

 

We saw this, a Bill presented in the House, I believe it was on 

May 11th, just before we ended. It was the day of or the day 

before the session ended, at the eleventh hour, we saw the first 

reading. But we didn‟t even get a chance to get into second 

reading or into committee. All of the time was lost over the 

summer for the committee to talk about what are the pros and 

cons of the plan. It just disappeared. 

 

And we hear today that it‟s going to come back, but it‟s going 

to come back maybe in the spring. Why isn‟t it here right now? 

It should be here right now. We‟ve been in the House for 

several days, for several weeks. Why isn‟t it back right away as 

a priority piece if this is so important to this government? And 

so, clearly, I‟m not sure if this is yet another example of a 

last-minute item that this government wanted to make sure they 

had something to show for themselves. This is pretty poor 

actually, that we don‟t have the Bill before us, that we could be 

voting on the Bill. 

 

That would be the first two paragraphs and there would be a 

Saskatchewan plan, and that‟s the process. We know what the 

process is in the House. It‟s for the government to put forward 

Bills and the Bills get voted on. They go to committee. They get 

public consultation. We don‟t do motions like this. 

 

The third paragraph though is one that I find very interesting 

because you know, Mr. Speaker, I‟ve actually been to a 

conference — the UNFCCC [United Nations Framework 

Convention on Climate Change], United Nations framework on 

the climate change commission — in Montreal in 2005 in 

December. And it was quite an event. And so I do support 

government members and opposition members going to these 

kind of things. It‟s very important. 

 

But I do worry. The wording here implies it‟s almost like a 

trade show. She‟s going to a trade show. She‟s going to 

promote the Saskatchewan plan at the United Nations COP 15 

conference in Copenhagen in December of 2009. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the stakes are much higher than this. This is an 

international agreement on climate change we‟re talking about. 

We‟re talking about Canada‟s role in Copenhagen. We‟re not 

talking about Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan has a role for sure, 

to support our national goals at the United Nations. 

 

We often hear how this government will talk about supporting 

Canada in its national responsibilities, its federal 

responsibilities. So I‟m not sure if this government understands 

what will be happening at Copenhagen when they get together 

and talk about potentially a new treaty, some new agreements. 

The work is being done right now and they need to get behind 

Canada and say, Canada, make sure this happens — this 

happens. 

 

This is my experience in Montreal actually, Mr. Speaker, where 

we were able to achieve an awful lot. And I will get into that in 

a minute. But it‟s very important that we see some real results. 

 

Now my colleague from Regina Coronation Park talked about 

Africa, and there‟s some real impacts and we see that in 

droughts. But also, Mr. Speaker, if you were listening to CBC 

[Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] and members were 

listening to CBC this morning, the impacts on the Arctic are 

huge. The impact on the Arctic is huge. The temperature in the 

Arctic is very key for the success of what happens in the Arctic, 

the economy of the Arctic, the transportation within the Arctic. 

 

And here we have a circumstance where we can be real global 

leaders, and I‟m afraid that we‟re going there a little 

short-sighted here. If there had been a plan in place and that 

plan was something we could be proud of, we could understand 

what it is, then maybe we‟d be having a different debate today. 

But we‟re not. 

 

So I really urge . . . And you know I was just thinking though, 

that I do hope that when the minister does go — and she‟s 

taking two officials with her, her deputy minister and the person 

from corporate planning and policy — that maybe they‟ll come 

back thinking of themselves more of global citizens, thinking 

about global responsibility and how we really have to work 

hard to take this issue more seriously in terms of global issues. 

 

Now I believe an awful lot in the saying, think globally, act 

locally. And I think there‟s a lot of merit in that saying, 

particularly when we‟re thinking of climate change. If you see 

the implications of what happens in Saskatchewan, in Canada, 



November 17, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3637 

and the role we can play as role models, moral leaders in the 

globe, in the global initiatives such as climate change, this 

could be a real opportunity. 

 

So I‟m hoping that, Mr. Speaker, that when the minister is in 

Copenhagen she takes an opportunity to really look at these 

issues through the perspective of others in the world and also 

others in Canada, keeping in mind the Saskatchewan 

circumstance, keeping in mind the Saskatchewan challenges. 

And things that we can do, I think, are huge. 

 

But we know we cannot let this go. We cannot let this 

opportunity in Copenhagen go. We saw in Montreal in 2005 

that there was a different American government, one that was 

being led by a government that really did want to see the end of 

Kyoto, that was bent on killing any agreements that came out of 

Montreal. And in fact that did not happen. In fact Montreal was 

fairly successful. And that‟s very, very important — that the 

Copenhagen conference be successful. 

 

Now I want to review some of the notes here because I think 

this is important. We know the goal of the conference is to 

create a global agreement that addresses climate change that 

will include all countries in the world. And Saskatchewan can 

play a leadership role in making sure that Canada stands up and 

gets that job done. We know that there will be a problem if 

there‟s no international treaty signed, no comprehensive 

international treaty, but at the very least what can happen is a 

framework so further discussions can carry on. 

 

Now what happened in Montreal was that they had agreed on a 

five-year plan of how we get the emissions and the regulations 

to continue on for five years past 2005. We‟re at that timeline, 

Mr. Speaker, where Copenhagen is huge, where we think of 

beyond the Kyoto Protocol when it expires in 2012. 

 

Now unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, we recognize that Canada 

does not have a good reputation throughout the world of 

actually putting its words into action. And that is unfortunate 

because Canada is not alone and has provinces behind it, 

particularly I think of the Western provinces — Alberta and 

Saskatchewan — that could be doing more. But if Canada were 

to become an environmental defender, as it should be, then it 

should be doing more. And Saskatchewan could be helping it 

do more to make sure it lives up to the obligations that it had 

signed through the Kyoto Protocol. 

 

[16:45] 

 

And in fact we know that there‟s been much written about this. 

I think of Jeffrey Simpson in his article, “Copenhagen 

climate-change talks will produce only disappointment” in his 

column of October 27th, and I quote, “. . . [having] disgraced 

the country‟s good name.” And clearly we can be doing much 

more. And so we look at this plan and we think that we should 

be doing a lot more. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, in fact we have a moral responsibility doing 

much more. And we think of future generations and their 

expectation, that when they look back and think about what we 

could have done at this time period in 2009 and in 2010 and 

what could have been in Copenhagen. 

 

And in fact, Mr. Speaker, some people are calling it the hope in 

‟hagen conference because there‟s so much hope placed on this 

conference. But we‟re just not there. And in fact a writer, Bruce 

Anderson, said in . . . “Copenhagen already a success.” And I 

quote: 

 

. . . public consensus is that we should reduce extravagant 

or unsustainable consumption of resources and do a lot 

more to avoid pollution, because we have a moral 

responsibility to do better by future generations. 

 

And that is so, so important. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we think this is a real problem. We don‟t 

know what this plan is. There‟s been some real questions about 

this unique and practical plan, but yet we don‟t know the details 

of it. We‟ve heard about the carbon capture aspect of it, but is 

that the only part of it? 

 

We heard, we had questions in question period today about the 

20 per cent decrease through conservation that the Premier had 

signed on through with the premiers in Quebec City. But we did 

not receive an answer in terms of, so what‟s happening with the 

20 per cent work around conservation? Is that actually 

happening? SaskPower doesn‟t seem to be knowing too much 

about it. They said the best they could do is 9 per cent, not 20 

per cent. Nobody‟s saying, do better. They‟re being a little bit 

left off the hook by saying, you know what? Nine per cent is 

good enough. Well it‟s not quite good enough. The Premier did 

make a commitment of 20 per cent increase in conservation 

activity and yet we‟re not seeing anything there. 

 

So we have some real questions about that. We think this plan is 

flawed right from the very beginning and we see the missteps 

have happened already, the missteps that when it was 

introduced late last year — even though they have been talking 

about it for many months and then they introduced it late in 

May just before the House rose for the summer and then it died 

on the order paper — it didn‟t even get to second reading. And 

we think there‟s some real problems with that. We don‟t see the 

benchmarks. We don‟t have target years for stabilization. And 

they really let industry off the hook. What is the role for 

industry? 

 

And when they had their consultations — and I want to talk a 

little bit about the consultations because we think it‟s really 

important — they talked to some business people, I understand, 

and there‟s some question about whether they talked to the 

environmental groups, the NGOs, but clearly there‟s some 

questions. 

 

But did they talk to the public? Are the public engaged in this 

process? And I actually don‟t think they are. I don‟t think they 

are, and I think the government kind of likes it that way because 

there‟ll be some real questions about this. We saw what 

happened around the UDP [Uranium Development Partnership]. 

When the public did get engaged, it clearly sent a message. 

They needed more information. The economics of nuclear 

initiatives that this government‟s talking about were not making 

sense, just clearly not making sense. And so there were some 

real problems and so I think that it will be difficult to support 

this motion. 

 



3638 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2009 

And I don‟t know why this motion is before us today. Clearly 

this is part of the government business. I think that it‟s 

reasonable to go and be part of the Canadian delegation if that‟s 

what the minister . . . And she‟s not talked about being part of 

the Canadian delegation and holding the Minister of 

Environment‟s, the federal Minister of Environment‟s feet to 

the fire to make sure that action does happen in Copenhagen, 

that we do have a moral responsibility. 

 

But clearly, there‟s been very little discussion about that. And I 

hope that some of the members will correct me if they stand up 

and talk about the role of the federal government, and how the 

Minister of Environment, our provincial Minister of 

Environment will ensure that the federal Minister of 

Environment will do all he can to make sure the treaties or the 

framework . . . At the very least, they come out of Copenhagen 

with a framework agreement of how they‟re going to move this 

forward. Because I know that when you have a short time 

period, now you look and you say, well they‟re almost there for 

10 days — I believe it is from the 8th to the 17th in December 

— that you can get an awful lot done. Work should have been 

done already to this point, but it‟s not being done. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about this so-called 

plan or proposal or what‟s happening. And I was struck by the 

Premier‟s comments that he had made. And he was sort of . . . I 

don‟t know how to read his comments around the TD report and 

Pembina and the Suzuki report. 

 

And I remember, as a former minister of Environment, in fact 

the Environment critic — not the one from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood, but the one before from Wood River — 

he actually had an affection. I think he actually liked that David 

Suzuki. I remember him getting up in the House, and I think we 

had a question period over David Suzuki. And the Sask Party 

was using David Suzuki as their source. I remember this day in 

the House. And I think it was the member from Wood River 

who raised this question, and he was saying he really felt David 

Suzuki had a lot of credibility on that day. So I find it really 

passing strange that today David Suzuki doesn‟t have as much 

credibility. 

 

But many people in Canada actually like to hear what David 

Suzuki has to say. They may not agree with him, and that‟s fair 

enough, but they do like to hear what a scientist has to say 

about climate change. And I think it‟s very important that 

sometimes we take a look and see what are scientists like David 

Suzuki and his foundation talking about this. Well first of all, 

I‟d just like to say here is a quote from the foundation, David 

Suzuki Foundation, and I quote: “Instead of strengthening 

existing climate change plan, Saskatchewan‟s new government 

gutted it, including many good renewable-energy and energy 

efficiency programs.” 

 

Now that quote is from July 16, 2008. And this was a report that 

was released by the David Suzuki Foundation that showed “. . . 

while most provinces are ramping up activity to fight climate 

change, Saskatchewan under the Sask Party is moving in the 

wrong direction.” And it reports that “. . . while the Sask Party‟s 

adopted the NDP‟s emission reduction targets, it has „no plan or 

strategy to get there.‟” And really, clearly they don‟t have a 

plan. They don‟t have a plan at all. 

 

And in fact if they are not liking Dr. Suzuki‟s perspective on 

what‟s happening, then what are some of the columnists saying 

about the Saskatchewan plan? Here‟s a column from May 12, 

2009, from the Leader-Post. And this is from a columnist, 

Murray Mandryk. The title is “Saskatchewan adopts Harper‟s 

hot-air plan” [too]. And this is from May 12th, and I‟ll just read 

the first part. I‟ll quote: 

 

Even if one accepts the Sask. Party‟s premise that its own 

2007 campaign promise of a 32-per-cent reduction in 

greenhouse gases was just too costly to the provincial 

economy [and then he goes] (and more in a moment on 

how the Environment Ministry sounds far too much like 

an economic development ministry), why did it have to be 

20 per cent . . . [or] a 25-per-cent reduction? 

 

Well, the only magical thing about a 20-per-cent emission 

reduction is that it happens to be the same as the federal 

Conservative government‟s, which takes us to the biggest 

problem with this supposed [and he puts quotes] 

“made-in-Saskatchewan” strategy: It‟s really a 

“made-in-Ottawa” strategy. 

 

Now he goes on to say that, and I‟ll read this. And the quote 

starts here: 

 

The problem, however, is that she didn‟t make [referring 

to the Minister of Environment, she didn‟t make] a great 

case that the province would be all that hard hit if it 

instead adopted the 32-per-cent emission target. Her own 

ministry‟s charts showed the difference between the 

20-per-cent and 32-per-cent targets amount to about $600 

million more over 10 years. (And with the tax incentives 

and environmental credits for things like zero-till 

available, the wallop on business would be substantially 

cushioned.) 

 

Moreover, most of the $60 million a year would be borne 

by SaskPower, which categorized the difference between 

the 20- and 32-per-cent goal as the 

something-less-than-onerous difference between a 

20-per-cent and a 22-per-cent electrical bill hike in the 

next decade. (Gee, wasn‟t it going to hike our rates by 13 

per cent anyway, until the rate . . . panel said: “Not so 

fast”?) 

 

So what it boils down to is this: we are accepting the fed‟s 

20-per-cent emission reductions largely because the Sask. 

Party government wants to avoid showing up Harper and 

company. 

 

So some questions about the plan. Some questions about the 

plan. So if you don‟t like Suzuki, what about Mandryk? Well 

here, how about these folks? Here‟s another review. This is the 

next day, May 13th, 2009. And this is Mr. Woods, James 

Wood, in a climate plan titled “Climate plan meets with 

scepticism.”  

 

Now it talks about “But at issue . . . “And the quote goes here: 

 

But at issue particularly is the centrepiece proposal of an 

“equivalency agreement” with the federal Conservative 

government that would allow the provincial plan to be 



November 17, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3639 

[more] compatible national or international cap-and-trade 

system for greenhouse gas emissions that appears likely 

to be enacted. 

 

And this is a quote from Aaron Freeman, policy director of the 

group Environmental Defence. He says: 

 

[The difference] . . . here is that the whole state of play is 

in flux. They don‟t know what the federal program is 

going to look like because it‟s currently being written in 

Washington. 

 

So it‟s a little premature to be talking about this particularly 

because we just don‟t know. And yet we‟re being asked to 

support this. 

 

And I wonder . . . Again, this is a real opportunity for the 

Minister of Environment, when she‟s in Copenhagen, to really 

take this opportunity to learn what‟s going on around the world. 

The opportunity‟s going to be great. I can tell you that from 

first-hand experience when I was in Montreal. This is an 

opportunity in a lifetime. And I hope she comes back, and her 

deputy minister comes back, changed people with a real global 

perspective. 

 

But I want to continue with this, I know my time‟s running out, 

before we hit the supper hour. But I want to talk about Ann 

Coxworth. Many of us know Ann Coxworth. She‟s from the 

Saskatchewan Environmental Society. This story talks about: 

 

The potential effectiveness of the Saskatchewan program 

is also a concern of Ann Coxworth of the . . . 

Environmental Society. 

 

And this is the quote: 

 

“It‟s going to be really hard to measure how effective this 

program is . . . people will pay money into a fund rather 

than make emission reductions,” she said in an interview 

. . . 

 

So really clearly at the end of the day, we want to get to a point 

where we see real reductions. Now we know that there is going 

to be hard work to get to that point, but we do want to see 

reductions. We don‟t want to see this shell game thing 

happening here. And it‟s complicated enough when you‟re 

signing up with the Harper government federally. And this is a 

real problem. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I know that the Premier did talk at length 

about the Pembina, the TD report. And I want to talk a bit about 

that because it is very important that we get all this information. 

And clearly Saskatchewan is a player, a significant player on 

the national scene. So it‟s important to hear what those kind of 

reports are saying. 

 

But we know . . . And the Premier talked about and I think he 

used the quote, and I have the quote in front of me, talking 

about how it will be a shock. But clearly this whole thing 

around climate change is asking all of us to change the way we 

do things, change the way we do things. 

 

Do you not think right now in the Arctic it‟s a bit of a shock, 

what‟s happening in the Arctic in terms of climate change? Is it 

not a bit of a shock? And we can see that around the world in 

different circumstances. You know, we saw in past years the 

number of hurricanes going up. Now this year it‟s been a better 

season for that. It‟s a shock right around. When you have 

circumstances like New Orleans — New Orleans, a city wiped 

out like that. I think that‟s a bit of a shock. 

 

But clearly we don‟t want to have a big shock in Saskatchewan. 

We want to go into this with a plan. That‟s why we‟re saying, 

where is the plan? Where is the plan? We can‟t be avoiding this 

because of fearmongering. We have to have a significant plan. 

 

The Speaker: — Being 5 p.m., the Assembly will recess until 

later this evening at 7 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly recessed until 19:00.] 

 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3607 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3607 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3607 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3607 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3608 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3608 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3608 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3608 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3608 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3608 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Induction of Prince Albert Mayor and Council 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3609 

 Government Funds New Group Homes 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3609 

 Lest We Forget 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3609 

 Torch of Life Raises Awareness of Organ and Tissue Donation 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3610 

 Cheshire Homes Addition in Saskatoon 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3610 

 Honouring Saskatchewan’s First Nations Veterans 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3610 

 Leaving Town 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3610 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Energy Alternatives and the Environment 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3611 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3611 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3611 

 Greenhouse Gas Emissions 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3612 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3612 

 Management of Provincial Economy 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3614 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3614 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3614 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 Plan for Climate Change 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3616 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3619 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3626 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3630 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3634 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3636 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium Development 

Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

 Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

Government House Leader 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. James Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Capital Commission 


