




















































Hansard: November 25, 2009


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 20A  WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 25, 2009, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3787 

 November 25, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I would seek leave of the 

Assembly to give two introductions that will wind up being an 

extended introduction for one of them. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has asked for leave for an 

extended introduction and the opportunity to give two. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — I thank members of the Assembly for 

permission to make a bit of an extended introduction, Mr. 

Speaker. My first introduction is a family that have joined us on 

the floor of the Assembly, a special family that also joined us 

earlier today for an important announcement here at the 

Legislative Assembly. Joining us is a Paralympian medallist 

from Saskatoon, currently employed with the Abilities Council, 

is Heather Kuttai has joined us here on the floor of the 

Assembly. She’s joined by her husband, Darrell Seib. And their 

kids, Patrick and Chelsea are also here today. 

 

Heather joined us earlier for an announcement, the unveiling of 

a new podium that the Government of Saskatchewan’s able to 

make available to hotels and other groups that may host 

speakers who are in wheelchairs. Mr. Speaker, we know that 

sometimes as much as we think we have made, and I think we 

have made a lot of progress in terms of accessibility for those 

who have disabilities, for those who are in wheelchairs, there is 

always something else that has been missed, something else to 

be done. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, Heather was here earlier today to help the 

government unveil a podium that through hydraulics moves up 

and down and accommodates those with wheelchairs and those 

who are not in wheelchairs to be able to use them. And we’re 

going to make those available right across the province to hotels 

and other groups and other halls that may host those kinds of 

events. We’ll also have one available in Saskatoon. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join with me in 

welcoming Heather, a Saskatchewan hero, and her family, her 

husband Darrell, and Patrick and Chelsea to their Legislative 

Assembly today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while I’m on feet, I have a second introduction if I 

may. In your gallery are also two special individuals I’d like to 

introduce to the Assembly. Many people in this Assembly know 

them well. Many of the people in the province of Saskatchewan 

know them well. 

 

One of the best parts of my job, and I think the jobs that we 

have as elected representatives, is the amazing Saskatchewan 

people that we get to meet almost every day. One of those 

people I met on a trip out to the Grey Cup in 2007. I had heard 

about her, but I hadn’t met her until that day. And I want to 

welcome her and her husband to the Assembly today and say 

just a few brief things, if I can, about them just before I 

formally introduce them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think everybody knows the story of Chris Knox 

and the foundation that has come from that very, very 

compelling story. There is now a Chris Knox Foundation that is 

operating in the province of Saskatchewan with the leadership 

of Sharla and others, the help of others as well. It raises money 

and donations so that kids who are battling cancer and their 

families can go to concerts and special events — events like 

Grey Cups for example when they happen to come along. 

 

This weekend, Mr. Speaker, you will know that 10 children 

who are battling cancer are going to be able to attend the Grey 

Cup, thanks to the Chris Knox Foundation. And their family 

members and chaperones will be able to attend too. We thank 

Cameco, certainly, for their participation in making that happen. 

 

And just before I introduce them formally, I also want to 

acknowledge a couple of people who really got the ball rolling 

with the Chris Knox Foundation as well: Kelly Schermann and 

Trevor Lowey who are not here with us today. I remember back 

in 2007 when we were trying to make arrangements for Chris to 

come to Grey Cup, our office was talking to Kelly. And we 

asked him, how long have you known Chris? And he said this 

— we’ve saved this quote — he said, “I don’t know him. I’ve 

never met him. I just heard his story in the news and thought I 

wanted to help him get to the Grey Cup.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, in typical Saskatchewan fashion, the whole 

province rallied. And it didn’t stop there. Witness the Chris 

Knox Foundation that is in place today and I think the heroic 

leadership of Chris’s mom, who is Sharla Folk. And she is with 

us today in the Legislative Assembly. She’s joined by Kim. 

 

And I just want to, on behalf of the Assembly, welcome them to 

their Legislative Assembly and thank them for their great 

example and their great courage, and to make sure that Chris’s 

legacy lives on in really amazing ways, benefiting kids and their 

families here in our province still today. Welcome to the 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

welcome a group of guests we have in your gallery today. We 

have with us numerous members from the Saskatchewan 

Professional Fire Fighters Association that have been here 

today talking to all members of the Assembly about concerns 

they have in doing their jobs each day on behalf of the people of 

the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, they come from 

communities across the province here to speak to each of us 

today about their jobs and what they do on behalf of all of us. 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to welcome them all to their Assembly 

today. Thank you. 



3788 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2009 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood River, the 

Minister Responsible for Corrections, Public Safety and 

Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you 

and through you to the Assembly, I’d like to introduce some 

special guests here today, and I would ask if they would rise 

and be recognized. Mr. David Marit. Dave is the president of 

the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities. He is 

currently a councillor for division 3 in the RM [rural 

municipality] of Willow Bunch, and in my constituency, I 

might add. And Renaud Bissonnette is SUMA’s [Saskatchewan 

Urban Municipalities Association] vice-president for towns. 

And Renaud is currently the mayor of Willow Bunch and was 

mayor of Assiniboia previously. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these gentlemen were part of a very important 

event earlier today in the Saskatchewan gallery, announcing 

new funding to make the new provincial public safety 

telecommunications system more affordable for all users. 

 

I would also like to welcome a number of other stakeholders 

who attended the ceremony this morning for our announcement. 

And they’re seated in your galley also, including Dale McFee, 

who is the chief of police for Prince Albert. And Dale is also 

the head of the Saskatchewan Association of Chiefs of Police. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to acknowledge the many firefighters 

in attendance today on behalf of the government. I welcome 

them to their legislature. Several of our MLAs [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly] met with these folks this morning to hear 

their concerns, and I also had the chance to meet with 

Saskatchewan Professional Fire Fighters Association 

Vice-president Kirby Benning last Thursday. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of all members and the people of our 

province, I’d like to express our appreciation for the 

contributions made by these people to our many municipalities, 

both urban and rural. And I would invite all members to join me 

in welcoming all of them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It gives 

me great pride to introduce 21 students from Pinehouse Lake, 

Saskatchewan who are in the east gallery. And Pinehouse Lake 

is one of the greatest communities of our province, and they 

come from a school, Minahik Waskahigan School, which is the 

translation in Cree for pine house. 

 

And of course with the students is Jacqué Skage — and I think 

her husband Ron’s there as well — Rose Natomagan, Jerry 

McCallum, and Donald Misponas. 

 

And if I can say in my language of Cree: 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 

 

So I just basically told them that I’m very glad they’re here and 

that they have nothing to fear here. This is their Legislative 

Building. And it gives me great pride to welcome the fine 

people from Pinehouse and especially the students. Great job of 

bringing them down here. And I wish all the members of the 

Assembly to join me in welcoming these fine students from 

Pinehouse Lake, Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all members of the Legislative Assembly, I 

would like to introduce one of my constituents. Her name is 

Senait Gebrekidan, in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. If you want to 

give us a wave, Senait. Senait came here to Saskatchewan from 

Ethiopia through the Saskatchewan immigrant nominee 

program and she joined her cousin, Tadesse, in Saskatoon. She 

is finding the weather a little cold, but she’s getting used to it. 

She’s speaking English very, very well. And most importantly, 

Mr. Speaker, she feels safe here. Welcome to your legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 

to introduce to you and through to all the members of the 

legislature, sitting up in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, is Mr. Lorne 

Nystrom, former member of Parliament for Yorkton-Melville 

and Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. And Mr. Nystrom has served as 

a member of Parliament for a goodly number of years in this 

great country and province of ours. And during his entire 

career, he did enjoy three years that I think was probably the 

most outstanding years in his career and that was during the 

period of time that I was part of his staff. So with that, Mr. 

Speaker, I’d ask all the members to welcome Mr. Nystrom to 

his Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 

want to welcome two groups this morning. Our committee met 

with these two groups. The Saskatchewan Professional Fire 

Fighters Association, there’s a number of them up there and 

maybe they could just stand for a second and be acknowledged. 

They do a commendable job of fire protection, both for 

full-time and volunteer capacities throughout the province. And 

there’s too many to introduce individually, but I want to 

acknowledge them and thank them for the job they do. So thank 

you, gentlemen. 

 

We also met with the Saskatchewan Association of Fire Chiefs. 

Two of them are in your gallery. Fire chief of Kindersley Fire 

and Rescue, Ron Hope, and deputy chief of the Prince Albert 

Fire and Emergency Service, Dan Heney. 

 

These two associations do a commendable job of protecting, 

assisting in EMS [emergency medical services], and promoting 

fire safety. And I’ll ask all members to make them welcome in 

their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to 

join with the Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and 

Policing in welcoming our guests that are here for his special 



November 25, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3789 

announcement earlier today about the enhancement of our 

emergency radio systems. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if they stick around a little later this afternoon, 

they’ll have the opportunity I believe to see the Bill actually be 

passed third reading and finalized in the House. So thank you 

very much, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official opposition. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In your gallery, to 

you and through you I’d like to introduce to all members of the 

Assembly, Ms. Melony Materi and Dianne Pahl. They represent 

a very unique organization, the Options Pregnancy Center from 

Regina. They offer counselling as an option to women and men 

in unplanned pregnancies, options which include adoption. 

 

Our committee met with them this morning, and we found it 

very informative. Some of the numbers they shared with us 

quite astounding, alarming statistics including a high rate of 

abortions as opposed to the low rate of adoptions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Interestingly they are the only group that I’m aware of that offer 

options and supports to the men and women who struggle with 

emotional issues after such an event. And I’d ask all members 

to welcome them to their Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all members of the Assembly, seated in your 

gallery, Mr. Speaker, is a lady that came all the way down from 

Shellbrook today to take part in the Saskatchewan House of 

Prayer. Her name is Tracy Azevedo. If you would just give a 

little wave, Tracy. Thank you for coming. 

 

Her and her husband moved to Shellbrook some six years ago. 

And she is involved in the Saskatchewan House of Prayer, she 

came down to partake in that and also to take part in the sitting 

today. And I welcome her here and I ask all members to help 

me. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress Hills. 

 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Soon we will have 

the whole gallery covered, but I noticed there was one 

individual who was not introduced. Cypress Hills constituents 

don’t make it to the legislature very often, so I don’t want to 

miss this opportunity. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to all members, I’d 

like to introduce Fire Chief Dean McNabb from the community 

of Shaunavon. I’m very pleased to see him here today as part of 

the chiefs delegation. He does great work on behalf of 

Shaunavon and some of the surrounding communities. And I 

would like all members to welcome Dean to his Assembly. 

 

[13:45] 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan that 

speaks to the difficulty that families are having accessing 

quality and affordable child care and that this truly is a major 

roadblock for parents, whether moving on to higher education, 

accessing training, or returning to the workforce. And, Mr. 

Speaker, the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government through consultation with the child care 

community to immediately invest in growing the capacity 

of the early child care community to enable new child 

care spaces. And this investment must include 

infrastructure funding for new facilities and expansion, 

funding to significantly increase the number of early 

childhood diploma and certificate training seats, and 

funding to ensure that the sector is able to increase its 

wages and benefits to attract and retain the needed 

personnel. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of wage equity for CBO 

[community-based organization] workers. And we know that 

workers in community-based organizations in Saskatchewan 

have traditionally been underpaid and many continue to earn 

poverty-level wages, that low wages paid to CBO workers 

results in a high staff turnover. The subsequent lack of caregiver 

continuity has negative impacts on the quality of care clients 

receive. And we know also that research demonstrates that 

CBO workers are paid on average 8 to $10 per hour less than 

employees doing work of equal value in government 

departments. So I’d like to read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

development and implementation of a multi-year funding 

plan to ensure that CBO workers achieve wage equity 

with employees who perform work of equal value in 

government departments. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these folks come from Regina. Thank you 

very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

in support of a new long-term care facility in La Ronge. And 

the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 



3790 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2009 

the government to immediately invest in planning and 

construction of new long-term care beds in La Ronge. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by the good people of La Ronge and area. I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition in support of fairness for Saskatchewan 

students through the necessary expansion of the graduate 

retention program. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately expand the graduate 

retention program to include master’s and Ph.D. 

graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are from 

the city of Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present yet another petition on behalf of rural residents 

of Saskatchewan who question why the Sask Party government 

is leaving them behind with respect to providing safe and 

affordable water, and who have yet not had any commitment of 

assistance. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to financially assist the town of Duck 

Lake residents for the good of their health and safety due 

to the exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency, and that this government fulfills its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good residents of 

Duck Lake. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I stand today to present a 

petition on supporting the maintaining of quality health care 

services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all hope that the Government of Saskatchewan 

recognizes the essential role of all health care providers as 

valued members of the health care team. And one of the ways 

they can show the commitment is to provide adequate funding 

and the installation of good faith in the collective bargaining 

process. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to commit to maintaining quality health 

care services and job security for all public health care 

providers. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the petitions are signed by residents of Swift Current. I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased today to 

rise and present a petition in support of affordable rents and 

housing for The Battlefords. 

 

The residents note that some apartments have been given notice 

of rent increases of 40 per cent, and they note that vacancy rate 

for rental accommodation is very low. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to call 

upon the Government of Saskatchewan to develop an 

affordable housing program that will result in a greater 

number of quality and affordable rental units to be made 

available to a greater number of people throughout The 

Battlefords, and that will implement a process of rent 

review or rent control to better protect tenants in a 

non-competitive housing environment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by residents of the city of 

North Battleford. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from across 

Saskatchewan as it relates to the unprecedented 

mismanagement of their finances by the Sask Party. The billion 

dollar deficit created by the Sask Party does not sit well with 

people in communities across this province, Mr. Speaker. The 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to start managing our 

provincial finances responsibly and prudently to ensure 

that it does not continue its trend of massive budgetary 

shortfalls, runaway and unsustainable spending, equity 

stripping from our Crowns, and irresponsible revenue 

setting. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions of the many I’ve presented this session, Mr. 

Speaker, are signed by good folks and concerned citizens of 

Regina. I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 

 



November 25, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3791 

International Day for the Elimination of Violence Against 

Women 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, many of 

us will leave work this evening and anxiously rush home to the 

open arms of a loving family. For far too many women, this is 

only a dream. For them, walking into their home can feel more 

like a nightmare they cannot wake up from. Today is the 

International Day for the Elimination of Violence Against 

Women. Together we say no to violence and collectively 

empower women with the strength and courage to change their 

lives. 

 

Between July 2007 and July 2008, over 900 women and 

children were admitted to Saskatchewan shelters, and many of 

those children had witnessed the violence against their mothers. 

We recognize their struggles two ways. Through the YWCA 

[Young Women’s Christian Association] of Canada’s Rose 

Button campaign, we recognize that violence against women 

affects us all. Men who wear a white ribbon make a personal 

pledge to never commit, condone, or remain silent about 

violence against women. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, we stand united — our arms reaching out, 

our voices speaking out, our hands ready to help, and our hearts 

full of love. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is International 

Day for the Elimination of Violence Against Women, 

designated by the United Nations. This date marks the brutal 

assassination of the Mirabal sisters, political activists in the 

Dominican Republic. Strong, independent women, all three 

were firmly dedicated to ending the brutal dictatorship of Rafael 

Trujillo. On November 25, 1960, Trujillo sent men to intercept 

the women after they had visited their husbands in prison. The 

unarmed sisters were led into a sugar cane field and executed. 

 

In Canada we continue to remember violence against women on 

December 6, which marks the 20th anniversary of the massacre 

at École Polytechnique. On December 6, 1989, Marc Lepine 

singled out 14 women at the technical school in Quebec and 

brutally killed them with a semi-automatic rifle before killing 

himself, claiming that he was fighting feminism. 

 

Mr. Speaker, women around the world are subject to rape, 

domestic violence, physical and emotional abuse every day. 

Often this violence goes un-noted, unquestioned, and 

unchallenged. But there is hope. 

 

After the assassination of the Mirabal sisters, 49 years ago 

today, a revolution started from their village. Because of their 

efforts, Rafael Trujillo was eventually forced to turn over his 

power and resign. The eldest daughter of one of the Mirabal 

sisters went on to serve as a congresswoman in her country, a 

symbol of the change that only one generation can bring. 

 

In the wake of the Montreal massacre, improvements were 

made to gun control laws and tactical police response to 

shootings. 

 

I ask all members to join with me in taking the opportunity 

today to learn from our past and to take action to prevent 

violence against women today and every day. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Podium Affords Access for Wheelchair Occupants 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

rise in the House and announce that our government is making 

great strides in achieving increased accessibility for those in 

need. 

 

Last spring our Premier was attending a prayer breakfast with 

Paralympian Heather Kuttai. This exceptional woman was 

involved in a terrible vehicle collision at the age of six which 

left her in a wheelchair. Heather was a guest speaker at this 

prayer breakfast. When it came time for Heather to speak, of 

course the microphone had to be moved to her table since 

podiums are made for people standing. She jokingly said, 

wouldn’t it be nice if someone built a podium that would fit 

people in wheelchairs. 

 

The Premier approached her after the event and asked if she 

would help design such a podium. He then asked Saskatchewan 

Property Management to work with Heather to develop a 

podium that would work for people in wheelchairs. Together 

they designed a device with a hydraulic system that allows the 

podium to be adjusted to whatever height is necessary to 

accommodate the needs of the speaker. 

 

This is the first of its kind in Saskatchewan, and we’re going to 

have a couple more built to be loaned out to hotels and other 

venues across the province when a person in a wheelchair needs 

a podium. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government is committed to accessibility for 

all of the people of Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Young Man Receives Youth Award for Philanthropy 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I want to take a moment to 

honour a 10-year-old constituent of mine, Ronnie Thiessen. In 

mid-September, Ronnie and his mother Shelley encountered a 

man getting ready for bed in the space between the West Side 

Community Clinic and the Friendship Inn on 20th Street in 

Saskatoon. 

 

Ron started asking his mother questions about shelters and why 

that man just couldn’t go to the Salvation Army because Ronnie 

had given them money last year. His mother explained about 

the lack of room. And Ronnie’s response was, I am going to 

build a building that everyone can live in. I’ll pay the bills. 

They’ll be warm and safe and everyone will have their own 

space. They won’t have to share, and they won’t have to pay a 

penny to live there. 

 

His mother reminded him that he didn’t have a job and that he 



3792 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2009 

was 10. Well Ronnie got a job delivering newspapers. He gets 

up at 5:30 every morning for six days a week, Mr. Speaker and 

gets out 40 StarPhoenix newspapers and puts aside the money. 

 

He has raised $5,000 in pledge donations through matching 

donors, small fundraisers by university students and his local 

church and local artists. Ronnie has joined with Saskatoon 

Overnight Shelter, who was also working on the very same idea 

that year. And Ronnie was nominated by SOS [Saskatoon 

Overnight Shelter] to receive the youth award for philanthropy 

by the Association of Fundraising Professionals and received 

that honour on November 13th. 

 

I ask the Assembly to join with me and join with the 

Association of Fundraising Professionals in honouring Ronnie 

Thiessen. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Innovation Place Receives Award of Excellence 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 

proud to rise in the House today to speak about exciting news 

from Innovation Place in Saskatoon. Innovation Place has 

recently received a prestigious international award of 

excellence. 

 

On October 23rd, 2009, the Association of University Research 

Parks named Innovation Place the 2009 outstanding research 

science park, in recognition of their role in supporting the 

growth of science and technology-related economic 

development in Saskatchewan. 

 

In 2008, clients of Innovation Place contributed $647 million to 

the provincial economy. I would like to recognize Doug Tastad, 

the president and CEO [chief executive officer] who celebrated 

his 30th year anniversary with the organization on October 

15th. Doug has been the key management person in Saskatoon 

since 1979 and is instrumental in making them a 

world-renowned research development park. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 

Doug and Innovation Place for the contribution to this great 

province through science, technology, research, and of course, 

innovation. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

A Cautionary Tale 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I want to share with my colleagues 

in the Assembly a story. It’s a cautionary tale of a true leader 

who thought he could sell anything. Some people may know it 

as a story of a man who couldn’t sell country music to 

Saskatchewan. 

 

In 1991, former Premier Grant Devine spent $150,000 in 

taxpayers’ money to lure the Canadian Country Music Hall of 

Fame to Swift Current. Then the museum hired a former 

ministerial assistant in the Devine government to manage it. 

Guess who that was? The current Premier of Saskatchewan. 

The manager told the media at the time that the museum needed 

at least 28,000 visitors annually to break even. He also 

predicted the museum would attract at least 34,000 visitors in 

the first year. But the museum attracted an average of just 2,500 

people a year over the next three years — 2,500. Not 

surprisingly, the museum went bankrupt in less than five years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can’t help but think that this sounds like a 

familiar story. Someone takes over an operation that should be a 

surefire money-maker. They set a budget based on numbers that 

turned out to be wildly overinflated. The revenues come in way 

under budget. The result is a disaster for everyone involved. 

Does this sound familiar to anyone? 

 

All cautionary tales have a moral, Mr. Speaker, and I think the 

moral of this story is clear: you can’t build a budget with a 

pocketful of optimism any more than you can build it with a 

pocketful of magic beans or a pocketful of imaginary potash 

sales. And you can’t lead a province just by thinking positively; 

you have to take positive action. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Thunder Creek. 

 

Twenty-Sixth Canadian Western Agribition 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Each November for 

the past 26 years, Canadian Western Agribition has opened its 

doors to the world. From November 23rd to 30th, Regina will 

be hosting the largest agricultural show and marketplace in 

Canada. Approximately 150,000 people from nine Canadian 

provinces, at least 28 American states, and more than 23 

countries worldwide will come to Regina this year. There are 

over 500 exhibits displaying the newest developments in 

agricultural technology and services. 

 

Agribition has become known as one of the pre-eminent 

livestock shows in the world, Mr. Speaker. There are around 

2,000 exhibitors that will come out and display the best of the 

best in the livestock industry. Agribition’s pro rodeo attracts the 

top professional cowboys from across North America. The 

national non-pro cutting horse finals, the heavy horse pulls and 

hitches, and the stock dogs are more examples of family 

entertainment. The Agri-Ed Showcase educates thousands of 

children from across the province in the business of agriculture. 

 

Mr. Speaker, putting on a world-class event such as Agribition 

would not be possible without the support and commitment of 

thousands of volunteers. It’s people like them that allow for the 

world to see that Saskatchewan is moving forward in all aspects 

of the agricultural industry and I extend a sincere thank you to 

all of them. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Municipal Financing Corporation Budget 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, last night in committee we 

were given shocking evidence of just how incompetent this 



November 25, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3793 

government is with respect to budgeting. And we found 31 

million new reasons why this legislative session needs to be 

extended to allow the official opposition and the people of 

Saskatchewan to question this government’s financial 

mismanagement. 

 

Last evening the Finance minister admitted that the budget for 

the Municipal Financing Corporation has gone $31 million over 

budget in the first six months of this year — a 100 per cent 

overrun. Worse, the minister admitted that he knew nothing 

about this until the mid-year report. Mr. Speaker, to the 

minister: how does this happen? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night 

we spent three and a half hours discussing this topic and so I’m 

glad to have a little opportunity to do it today, although I must 

admit I think everyone’s a little weary. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the budget we had to make an estimate of how 

much uptake there’s going to be from municipal entities in 

terms of the municipal infrastructure funding program. We had 

in the previous year budgeted $37 million, which was half of 

the $75 million that was authorized under the SIGI 

[Saskatchewan infrastructure growth initiative] program, and 

that much money was not up taken in the first year. So the 

second year we budgeted $30 million of the $75 million SIGI 

program, and we were on track to do that until particularly the 

city of Regina’s program for the global transportation hub came 

in at some $43 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is important initiatives that build this 

province, and the people of Saskatchewan and their 

municipalities very much appreciate it. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it has nothing to do with 

the projects that were funded. It has to do with the huge accrual 

and racking up of government debt, of people’s debt, under this 

minister. And he had no knowledge of that, Mr. Speaker. We’re 

not opposed to municipalities being able to borrow funds for 

important projects. We’re opposed to this government’s 

financial incompetence. 

 

Let’s put this in context. Who is the Minister Responsible for 

the Municipal Financing Corporation? Well that’s the Minister 

of Finance. Who is the staff of the Municipal Financing 

Corporation? Well that’s the Finance department officials. Who 

is the Chair of the board of the Municipal Financing 

Corporation? Well that’s also the Minister of Finance. 

 

A simple question: how can he ask the taxpayers of this 

province to believe that he knew nothing of this budgetary 

mistake of 100 per cent? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the 

members opposite don’t quite understand the important role for 

the Municipal Financing Corporation in the province of 

Saskatchewan. This was an entity that was created in 1969 and 

has been functioning in the province for 40 years under 

basically the same guidelines as what we have now. 

 

What’s different, Mr. Speaker, is this administration recognized 

that there was a badly needed infrastructure investment in the 

province by municipalities. Right across this province, large 

municipalities and small came to this government and said, we 

need to get caught up on some of the infrastructure that has 

crumbled under the previous administration. And so we put in 

the SIGI program that allows municipalities to potentially 

access this money, who potentially will be able to have 

subsidies of their interest rate. This is an important initiative for 

the people of Saskatchewan, and municipalities very much 

appreciate this initiative. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we’re talking about proper 

oversight that does not occur in the Finance ministry or does not 

occur by this Minister of Finance, and it’s important. No 

constraint, no control. Mr. Speaker, I thought the minister 

getting the potash revenue forecast off by 95 per cent was the 

topper, but here’s a 100 per cent budgetary mistake right in his 

own department. 

 

Can the minister confirm that more than $17 million of this 

overrun was approved by Finance officials on June 5th, within 

days of the spring budget having been passed by this 

legislature? And does the minister not agree his budget controls 

and oversight were so poor that he presented a budget to this 

legislature which even his own officials knew was bogus even 

before it was passed? Why should anyone trust a single thing 

that he has to say about the budget or our finances as we move 

forward? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, as I 

explained at length last night in the three and a half hours of 

time that we had together, Mr. Speaker, there’s a $75 million 

authorization limit on the SIGI program. Certainly that that 

authorization was not nearly been committed to. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as a brand new program I explained to the 

Assembly . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Minister of 

Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I explained to the 

committee last night and to the members of the committee that 

this was well within the authorized limits of the program. And 

there was no way of knowing traditionally if a city like Regina, 

with the major $43 million infrastructure program for the global 

transportation hub, was going to use the Municipal Financing 

Corporation or was going to establish the practice that they had 

long held of using the independent banking and lending 

institutions for this money. 

 



3794 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2009 

Mr. Speaker, this is an important initiative to build the 

infrastructure of this province that has been allowed to crumble 

in the province under that previous administration. And right 

across this province, people are creating these jobs. They’re 

creating this infrastructure and allowing this province to grow. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Financial Management of Crown Corporations 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people will also be 

paying more for their utilities as a result of this government’s 

mismanagement. The government originally planned to take 

$185 million from the Crown corporations as a dividend. Then 

they kept 110 million originally designated for the children’s 

hospital. In the mid-year financial report, they announced they 

were taking another $460 million out of the Crowns. 

 

And thanks to their fiscal incompetence, the entire $195 million 

required for the children’s hospital will have to come out of the 

Crowns. That’s a total of $950 million stripped from the 

Crowns. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of CIC [Crown Investments 

Corporation of Saskatchewan]: how much will utility rates have 

to go up in this province in the coming years to pay for this 

government’s fiscal mismanagement? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments Corp. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I really think it’s important 

that the members opposite understand that everybody in this 

province knows the importance of the Crowns to the people of 

our province. They know that the Crowns are an integral part of 

Saskatchewan’s economy. And we know that investing 

Saskatchewan taxpayers’ money in Saskatchewan is the very 

best place in the world to invest. And I’d like to remind the 

members opposite that they wasted $300 million of taxpayers’ 

money in out-of-province investments in the last number of 

years. 

 

As for the dividend that came from the Saskferco this year, we 

have $560 million that came from the Saskferco fund. What 

we’re doing here right now is, through the sale of Saskferco, 

we’re going to get through a tough period. Our situation’s really 

no different than a family might face if they have a sudden cash 

flow problem. You dip into the money that’s set aside in order 

to get your family through to a better time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s still money in CIC for the children’s 

hospital. There’s still money for future projects. And we believe 

investing in Saskatchewan is . . . [inaudible] . . . the job for the 

people, the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, the money in the Crown 

corporations is not the government’s money. It’s the people’s 

money. Mr. Speaker, we can see how petty this government is 

when it comes to rate increases to taxpayers, Mr. Speaker. An 

example of this is the $8 a month minimum charge to SaskTel 

Mobility customers who purchase prepaid cellular phones and 

cards. Mr. Speaker, many of these customers for these prepaid 

cellular phones are people who primarily use cellphones for 

emergencies, including low-income people and seniors. 

 

To the Minister of CIC, Mr. Speaker: why are low-income 

people and seniors paying the price for this government’s 

mismanagement of our Crowns? And what other mean-spirited 

rate increases can we expect from this government as a result of 

their $1 billion deficit? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, a little over a year ago our 

government passed legislation prohibiting the expiry of gift 

cards. SaskTel complied with that legislation for the last year. 

None of the other companies chose to comply with that. 

SaskTel is legislated or governed by federal regulation. Mr. 

Speaker, there are ongoing costs to providing services through 

telephones, through cellular telephones and, Mr. Speaker, it is 

the goal of SaskTel to make money by providing services, not 

by forfeiting time on cards. 

 

Mr. Speaker, SaskTel is reviewing this policy. And within the 

next few days, we’ll be coming back to the House and we’ll be 

making an announcement with regard to a new . . . We’ll be 

coming back to the House, Mr. Speaker, with regard to a new 

pricing formula for prepaid cell cards, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Well, Mr. Speaker, isn’t that interesting. First the 

minister tells us he has to do it. Now he’s telling us he can 

review it and change the structure. I don’t know. That tells me 

maybe that he just wasn’t very thoughtful when he did it to start 

with. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government’s financial mismanagement of our 

Crown corporations by stripping $1 billion out of the equity has 

undermined the viability of the Crowns. And let’s not forget 

that equity stripping is not all they’ve done, Mr. Speaker. 

They’ve borrowed more than $800 million in new debt to add to 

the Crowns’ future misfortunes. 

 

This increased debt to equity ratio will put pressure on Crown 

utility rates moving forward, without doubt. It will weaken the 

Crowns’ ability to invest in improvements and infrastructure for 

better service for the citizens of our province, and it will prevent 

SaskPower from making needed improvements to our future 

energy sources to meet climate change commitments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why is the government 

undermining the ability of Saskatchewan Crown corporations to 

contribute to a better future for our province’s citizens? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And to the 

member opposite, I find this line of question very interesting. In 

the last 10 years, the NDP [New Democratic Party] took $2.2 



November 25, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3795 

billion from the Crowns. And in the past 10 years, the NDP 

sorely underspent on infrastructure. They spent an average of 

$500 million a year, on average, on SaskTel, SaskEnergy, and 

SaskPower. 

 

Last year the Sask Party spent $750 million on infrastructure. 

And this year, this year, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to spend 

$1.25 billion. 

 

The members opposite should just stand up and admit that 

they’ve left as big a deficit in the Crowns as they did in the 

highways and the schools and the hospitals in this province. 

 

It isn’t easy for the citizens of Saskatchewan to see if their 

lights are going to come on or if there’s going to be power and 

gas there. But we are going to make sure. That’s why, Mr. 

Speaker, we’ve allocated $90 million for high-speed Internet. 

That’s why SaskPower’s working on four projects to ensure the 

. . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. The minister may 

finalize her comments to the House. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. That’s why our 

government is planning for growth. We’re not planning for a 

decline, like the members opposite. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Financial Projections and Activities of Health Authorities 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 

Minister of Health. Can the minister confirm that 

Saskatchewan’s regional health authorities are now projected to 

be running deficits totalling more than $119 million this budget 

year? 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the Ministry of Health 

doesn’t deliver health care, of course, in the regions. The 

regional health authorities deliver health care. They’re 

responsible for providing a number of initiatives throughout the 

province, one of which is the H1N1 rollout, Mr. Speaker, that I 

would say has been very interesting. It’s been very absent from 

question period since the member opposite wanted us . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I would like . . . Order. I would 

ask the opposition, a handful of opposition members — most 

opposition members are allowing the minister to respond — 

allow the minister to finish his question. Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, as I said, the regional health authorities are responsible 

for delivering health care throughout their areas. And it’s been 

interesting because they’ve done such a great job on the H1N1 

rollout. 

 

The absence of questioning on that very subject has been very 

interesting, Mr. Speaker, because it was only a couple of weeks 

ago that the member opposite wanted us to run around with a 

little bag of vaccination to each university student that might be 

contracting H1N1 and vaccinate, Mr. Speaker. Thank God we 

didn’t take the advice from that opposition. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, the minister’s comments don’t 

even bear remarking on. They’re so far from anything 

connected to an answer. 

 

The mid-year financial report, tabled by the government this 

year, projected deficits of more than $119 million at the 

regional health authorities for this budget year. That represents 

a shortfall of more than $131 million from the March provincial 

budget, when the government forecast a surplus in the regional 

health authorities of nearly $12 million. 

 

To the minister, a simple question: how did he get this budget 

projected so very, very wrong? And how does he plan to pay for 

this $131 million deficit? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, the regional 

health authorities are responsible for delivering health care in 

their areas. Their board sits down with their CEOs and work out 

a budget for the year, Mr. Speaker. Then it’s their responsibility 

to operate and deliver the services within that budget, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And that’s what the regional health authorities have done. 

They’ve budgeted. Most are all running on a surplus budget or a 

balanced budget, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, as we go 

through and depending on the demands that each health region 

will see — it will fluctuate from health region to health region, 

Mr. Speaker — but the financial responsibility is within the 

health regions to deliver the services that their citizens need. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Harmonized Sales Tax 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, can the Minister of Finance please 

tell the Assembly when he or his officials last communicated 

with the federal government about adopting the harmonized 

sales tax? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, officials from my 

ministry communicate with the federal government on an 

ongoing basis, weekly or every two weeks or whatever. In 

terms of the issue of harmonized sales tax, this government has 

said we’re not interested in participating in that program. We 

looked at it when we were first elected government in response 

to Minister Flaherty’s request that we do look at it. We looked 



3796 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2009 

at it. We decided, in the interests of the province of 

Saskatchewan, we’re not interested. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, will the Minister of Finance 

commit to filing the documents that relate to this particular 

issue, the harmonized sales tax, with this House? And will he 

provide us with the information around this discussion? And, 

Mr. Speaker, will he do it today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, as I tried to 

explain to the member opposite, there’s an ongoing dialogue 

between ministry officials in Saskatchewan, ministerial officials 

in other provinces, and the federal government’s Finance 

department. Mr. Speaker, that’s an ongoing dialogue. That’s an 

ongoing communications over the telephone or in person. Those 

things are going on, Mr. Speaker, as they always did. There 

always has been this constant discussion between ministries in 

regard to these important topics. 

 

It’s important to note, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan looked 

at the issue at the request of the federal Finance minister. We 

studied it and see as best we could, what the impact might be on 

Saskatchewan people. And we decided it was not in the 

interests of Saskatchewan. And Saskatchewan said, we’re not 

interested; thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people have 

watched as the governments of Ontario and British Columbia 

have broken their campaign promises not to adopt the 

harmonized sales tax when they get into financial trouble. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we know that there are troubles in the 

finances in this province. We know that there’s a $1 billion 

deficit. Can the minister assure us that they are not now 

susceptible to the federal government’s legalized bribery and 

that they won’t adopt the harmonized sales tax? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I recognize 

that Ontario made the decision for the interests of their province 

that they were going to move forward with it. And after the last 

provincial election in British Columbia, British Columbia 

announced that they were going to be implementing it as well 

because of the pressure they felt that they were going to receive 

from Ontario. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan looked at it. Saskatchewan, 

Manitoba, and Prince Edward Island are the only provinces that 

are outside of this program right now. Saskatchewan looked at 

it and we said that we’re not interested and it’s not in the best 

interests of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I note with interest the neighbouring province of Manitoba 

just recently announced that they too have reviewed it and 

they’re not interested either, so the two provinces are going to 

stand together. And we’re not interested in harmonizing the 

sales tax. And, Mr. Speaker, that is the promises that we have 

made in this regard, and we keep our promises in this 

government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

School Construction 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. On February 9th of this year, the 

minister announced $142 million in new capital spending for 

102 Saskatchewan schools. How much of that $142 million, as 

part of the economic booster shot for shovel-ready projects, has 

actually been spent in 2009 — not committed to planning or 

being spent on design work, but actually spent on construction? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

as I indicated I think in an answer this week as well that was 

asked around capital expenditure by the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale, we’ve moved forward on a lot of 

projects. It’s not just the dollar figure that she refers to. We in 

fact put $13 million into the budget of ’07-08 by way of a 

supplementary expenditure when we were elected. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that was to take care of projects that that former 

government had initiated back in 2003, Mr. Speaker, 2003. So 

we’ve moved forward on nearly $303 million worth of projects, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have various stages at which they’re designed. I read into 

the record yesterday, Mr. Speaker, the major projects, the 22 

major projects that are under way. We can provide the list of 

hundreds of projects that boards of education are moving 

forward, Mr. Speaker, but I don’t track every one of those 

projects. That is the school divisions’ responsibility. And we’ll 

provide that list, Mr. Speaker, to the member opposite about 

every project, every roof, every window, every furnace, all of 

the projects that we have moved forward with, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, these school projects should 

have been more than shovel ready for 2009 because many of 

them were the very same education capital projects that were 

announced in the budget of March 2008: Balcarres, Humboldt, 

Scott Collegiate, E.D. Feehan, Nutana Collegiate, all of these 

were announced and paid for, apparently, in the March 2008 

budget and all re-announced in February of 2009. 

 

Again this is a member that likes to pay attention to figures. I’m 

sure he has them in his desk. How much money has actually 

been spent on construction in 2009? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite, 

having been a former minister of Education and also, Mr. 

Speaker, and also, Mr. Speaker, a former Finance minister — 

the only Finance minister who never did deliver a budget, I 



November 25, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3797 

might add — Mr. Speaker, that member knows full well that 

there are many stages in major capital investments. 

 

There’s approval in principle, which we announced this year 

two schools that are going forward with approval in principle. 

They’re Wascana-Herchmer and they’re the CEF [Conseil des 

écoles fransaskoises]. Now they’re going to move through 

various stages of detailed design. They’re not going to go to 

tender this year, Mr. Speaker. We know that. The member 

opposite knows that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member opposite knows that we’re working 

on a project in Nutana, right in her constituency, Mr. Speaker. 

And that’s going through detailed design. It is going into tender. 

Right now, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. The minister 

complete his comment, short comment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, it’s obvious 

that the members opposite don’t want to know the answers. But 

the answers are, at every school division, we’re moving forward 

with projects. We’ll supply the complete list of every school 

that was announced in the spring, as far as whether or not 

they’re . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The minister’s time has elapsed. I recognize 

the member from Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the 2008-09 budget 

announced $117 million for education capital. The February 

booster shot announced a further $142 million, and the March 

budget announced $61 million for more school capital projects. 

That’s $320 million set aside for school capital in two years. 

 

But how much construction has the government actually 

completed in those two years? Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s $20.5 

million. And that’s confirmed in the minister’s written answer. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, no wonder Saskatchewan’s in a recession. 

Why can’t this minister get his so-called shovel-ready projects 

with approved budgets off of his desk? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite has 

it wrong again. Mr. Speaker, as we announced before when we 

. . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I would ask opposition 

members to give the same latitude to the minister as they gave 

to the member placing the question, to answer the question 

without interference. Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

won’t turn the volume up. I’m going to tell the member 

opposite that she’s wrong when she says that we have allocated 

$61 million. She’s right in that it was announced in the budget, 

but we have made a decision that 30 million of those dollars 

were taken out of the budget. That’s a public statement. Mr. 

Speaker, it is a public statement, Mr. Speaker. And I find that 

the Leader of the Opposition finds that very strange, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there have been many projects here in Regina, in 

Saskatoon. We’re going to go over that list. We have St. Anne’s 

School in Prince Albert that’s under construction, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, I just was in Norquay not too long ago and we did 

the ribbon cutting, Mr. Speaker, of a renovation in Norquay that 

was in excess of $2 million, Mr. Speaker. We have tenders now 

that are going to end on December 3rd at Humboldt. And we’ve 

set aside those dollars to continue with those projects, Mr. 

Speaker. We’ll gladly supply for the member from Nutana the 

complete list of projects about all of the schools that have 

benefited from the $303 million. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Province-Wide Public Safety 

Radio Telecommunications Network 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’m pleased to rise today to update this House on an 

important initiative relating to community safety in 

Saskatchewan. Earlier this afternoon, I hosted officials from the 

RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police], SaskPower, and 

emergency response organizations across the province in a 

progress report on the construction of a province-wide public 

safety radio telecommunications network. This multi-year 

project, which started in 2002, is being led by Corrections, 

Public Safety and Policing. The network is currently being built 

onto the existing RCMP-SaskPower radio telecommunications 

system and when completed will serve public safety users 

across the province. 

 

[14:30] 

 

This system will serve such public safety users as fire services, 

emergency medical services, provincial government agencies 

like CPSP [Corrections, Public Safety and Policing], Highways, 

and Environment, and of course SaskPower and the RCMP, 

who are also our partners in building the system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this system needs to accomplish two very 

important objectives. First, it needs to ensure that public safety 

subscribers to FleetNet, which will be wound down at the end 

of 2010, have a continued means for radio communications. 

Second, inter-operability needs to be a vital feature of the new 

system, that is, all users need to have compatible equipment and 

equal access so they can talk to one another during an 

emergency response, particularly during those large 

emergencies that seem to have been besetting us more and more 

over the past few years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we heard concerns from small users, particularly 

in rural areas, that they might not be able to subscribe to the 

system because they couldn’t afford the monthly fee. We also 

heard that these same users might not have the financial 

wherewithal to purchase new radios that are compatible with 



3798 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2009 

the system. And so, Mr. Speaker, we have established a 

monthly user fee of $40 per radio so that all users will have a 

place on the system. The amount of this fee is slightly higher 

than current FleetNet fees, but considerably lower than the 

actual $90 a month per radio operating cost. 

 

Because we see this requirement for an affordable subscriber 

fee as absolutely vital to maintaining an effective level of 

emergency response in this province, we are asking consumers 

of telephone service to pay an additional 24 cents a month on 

their phone bills for 911 service. We believe that this is a small 

price for the peace of mind assurance of a service that could 

minimize damage to property or to save a life. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, we have created a radio purchase 

program that will help fund more than 1,600 radios for those 

non-government agencies who would be hard-pressed to bear 

the cost. To that end, government has provided 4.5 million for 

the radio purchase program during this fiscal year. Mr. Speaker, 

the new provincial public safety telecommunications system is 

critical to ensuring that public safety agencies can continue to 

seamlessly respond to emergencies. 

 

Our partners in safety in this province rely on a radio system 

that must be available 24-7, 365 days a year. As a government, 

we need to guarantee that this will be so for our public safety 

community and for every citizen of this province who looks to 

our emergency responders to be there when they need them. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased on behalf 

of the opposition to respond to the ministerial statement. I thank 

the minister for sharing a copy of his statement moments before 

the session started. But I sincerely thank the minister for that 

copy. 

 

This is an issue that of course has been years in the making, and 

I’m very pleased that we’ve gotten to the stage we are today 

where we could get some relatively concrete announcements 

made. We were in committee last night on this very Bill, and 

we were able to share some of our concerns with the minister 

and officials, the concerns being around coverage, but really 

concerned with the affordability issue for the potential users. 

 

And I’m quite pleased, Mr. Speaker, with the two-front attack 

on affordability. The radio purchase program, which I note was 

lacking detail in the ministerial statement, but nonetheless there 

is a radio purchase program that I hope in fact does make the 

radios affordable for, for instance, volunteer fire departments 

throughout the province, but for all users of the new system. 

 

I’m very pleased with the $40 cap for the user fee per radio, Mr. 

Speaker, and congratulate the officials and the minister for 

getting that cap. I am much less pleased with the quarter that is 

being added to our telephone bills every month. It used to be 

that the Sask Party government was nickel-and-diming the 

people of Saskatchewan. Well now they’ve stepped it up to 

quarters. Perhaps it’s because of the $1 billion deficit. 

 

This is an issue of public safety, Mr. Speaker, and all million 

souls in Saskatchewan should be sharing in this. The simplest 

thing to do would be to tax through the General Revenue Fund 

and just pay for the public safety portion of this. That would be 

by far the easiest and most effective and cost-effective way of 

doing this. The two bits a month, I just want to point out, is not 

just two bits a month, Mr. Speaker. It’s an extra two bits; it’s an 

extra quarter. So no longer nickel-and-diming, they’re 

quartering us, the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

So overall to sum it up, despite the colossal fiscal mudhole that 

the Sask Party has gotten us into, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased that 

this money is being spent on public safety. This is a good 

program, and I’m very much looking forward to its continued 

rollout. Thank you. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

  

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Crown and 

Central Agencies. 

 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. McMillan: — I am instructed by the Standing Committee 

on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 116, The 

Traffic Safety (Drivers’ Licences and Hand-held Electronic 

Communications Equipment) Amendment Act, 2009 without 

amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister Responsible 

for Crown Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration of Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that 

the Bill now be read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Crown Investments has 

requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole on Bill No. 116, The Traffic Safety (Drivers’ Licences 

and Hand-held Electronic Communications Equipment) 

Amendment Act, 2009 without amendment and that the Bill be 

now read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — It’s agreed. The minister may proceed to 

move third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 116 — The Traffic Safety (Drivers’ Licences and 

Hand-held Electronic Communications Equipment) 

Amendment Act, 2009 
 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill now 

be read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 

Responsible for Crown Investments that Bill No. 116, The 

Traffic Safety (Drivers’ Licences and Hand-held Electronic 

Communications Equipment) Amendment Act, 2009 be now 

read the third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly 



November 25, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3799 

ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the 

Standing Committee of Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to 

report Bill No. 99, The Emergency 911 System Amendment Act, 

2009 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister Responsible 

for Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and 

the Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 99. Is 

leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. The minister may proceed. I 

recognize the Minister Responsible for Corrections, Public 

Safety and Policing. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 99 — The Emergency 911 System 

Amendment Act, 2009 
 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill 

be now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Corrections, 

Public Safety and Policing has moved that Bill No. 99, The 

Emergency 911 System Amendment Act, 2009 without 

amendment be now read the third time and passed under its 

title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answer to question 540. 

 

The Speaker: — Question 540 tabled. I recognize the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — 541 ordered. 

 

The Speaker: — Ordered. I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — I wish to table the answers to questions 542 

through 544. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 542 through 544 are tabled. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 118 — The Milk Control Repeal Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, at the end of my remarks, I’ll be moving second 

reading of Bill No. 118, The Milk Control Repeal Act. 

 

The dairy industry has voted overwhelmingly in favour of 

forming a producer marketing board under The Agri-Food Act. 

Consequently The Milk Control Act and its regulations will no 

longer be required once a dairy industry marketing board is 

established. I am very pleased with this development, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Practices within the industry have changed considerably since 

the last revision to the Act. Producers are asking to be in charge 

of their industry. Government does not need to be involved in 

the day-to-day business of the dairy industry. Clearly it is 

important that there be adequate oversight, and The Agri-Food 

Act provides that oversight. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the dairy farmers of Saskatchewan, Saputo, and 

the Milk Control Board have been consulted. Dairy producers, 

the bulk transporter, consumer associations, retailers, and the 

hotel and hospitality industry, among others, have also been 

consulted through direct correspondence. 

 

We have been working with the dairy industry extensively since 



3800 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2009 

taking office. The previous government incorrectly transferred 

the provincial dairy lab to the Milk Control Board in April of 

2006 without having the proper authorities in place to do so. 

This change to create an industry marketing board will help 

rectify that issue. We will continue to work with the dairy 

industry on these issues as we move forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Ministry of Finance has reviewed and 

analyzed our proposal to repeal The Milk Control Act and has 

satisfied all financial, accounting, and administrative matters 

are addressed. Therefore I move that The Milk Control Repeal 

Act be read a second time. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Agriculture has moved 

second reading of Bill 118, The Milk Control Repeal Act. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member from 

Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I was 

interested to listen to the minister’s comments on The Milk 

Control Act being repealed and the changes that are being 

proposed or I guess the repealing of the Milk Control Board 

itself. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while the minister didn’t seem to have an awful 

lot of good comments about the Milk Control Board, I think 

there are many across the province that feel that the Milk 

Control Board served a purpose and did a very good job dealing 

with not just producers, but the scale of people that deal with 

the industry, right from producers into the retail areas. I’ve 

heard many people say that the regulations and the regulating 

that the Milk Control Board did was well-respected. And when 

you look at other provinces that have gone to a marketing 

board, that there are some weaknesses. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I know that the minister is looking at setting 

up his, from what I understand, a marketing board and having 

the industry in charge of itself — really, the producers. I think 

the minister said the producers want to be more in charge. 

 

And I truly hope, to be successful, that when he’s setting up the 

new marketing board, that they pay some particular attention 

not only to making the change, but to actually the mandate and 

the structure and the selection of that initial board. 

 

Because a great deal of work has to go into those early 

beginnings to make sure that the marketing board gets off on 

the right foot and to make sure that all stakeholders are included 

in the decisions. And that the marketing board’s future success 

really relies on what happens over the next year or year and a 

half, getting everything in place and making sure that the 

appropriate changes are made and that all the appropriate 

safeguards and consideration is given to the issues that need to 

be brought before the marketing board. But those early 

beginnings can be very important and can have a huge effect on 

whether this succeeds into the future or runs into problems 

down the way. 

 

[14:45] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I know that there are people across the 

province that have a stake. And it may not be something that is 

of a concern, a broad public concern across the province, but I 

know there are a number of producers and other interested 

parties that my colleagues and I would need to really have some 

conversations with. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s with consideration to the early comments 

that I’ve heard that the Milk Control Board had some good 

points, did some very good work. And if the minister feels that 

it needs to be done away with and moved into a marketing 

board, I hope we’re not just jumping into doing what other 

provinces have done, that in Saskatchewan we like to review 

the situation and put in place solutions that are suitable for the 

province itself. 

 

So I hope he’s taken the time to do the consultations, and that 

he takes the time, when they are putting in place the new board, 

to make sure that the board itself and the structure — many, 

many questions on what will it look like, who all will be 

involved, and how broad of input will be . . . how broad will the 

board be open to input from the public and from other interested 

parties. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I know that there are a number of my 

colleagues, in fact I think there are a number today that wish to 

make a comment. So, Mr. Speaker, I’ll make room for my 

colleagues to speak. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It really is 

a pleasure today to speak to this piece of legislation, Bill No. 

118, An Act to repeal The Milk Control Act, 1992. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I say it’s a pleasure to talk to this Bill today because 

although it seems to a certain extent insignificant generally 

because evolution within the industry is taking place. And there 

is always need to make changes in legislation and regulation to 

follow the evolution of the industry, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s also important to note that while there are a lot of 

individuals and communities involved in the dairy industry, 

most of those involved today want to ensure that their history is 

respected, their history is understood, and the role that they 

have played in the past is recognized by the people of the 

province. Because, Mr. Speaker, it’s only in recognizing what 

has taken place in the past that we can truly appreciate and 

support the work that’s going on in the future. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I know that in his opening remarks on this 

Bill the minister indicated a list of people that have been 

consulted. And my colleague who spoke just moments ago, the 

member from Moose Jaw Wakamow, Mr. Speaker, indicated 

that consultation is important. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, we on 

this side of the House have to do some consultation of our own. 

But, Mr. Speaker, I think simply knowing that the minister says 

it has been done and the opposition says we need to ensure that 

it has been done, Mr. Speaker, has to simply carry us . . . We 

can’t forget in doing that that there are some things that we 

need to remember. 

 

But first, Mr. Speaker, before I go through some discussions 

about where we’ve been and where we’re going, I simply want 

to outline for some of the people who are tuning in today who 

may not know what’s in Bill 118. The minister’s remarks were 

very short. The minister’s explanation of the Bill, Mr. Speaker, 



November 25, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3801 

simply indicated that the repeal of the Milk Control Board isn’t 

. . . The Milk Control Board, Mr. Speaker, isn’t necessary any 

more because producers have formed a marketing board. 

Therefore the Act is no longer required, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But there’s more in the Act than simply getting rid of something 

that has gone before. So, Mr. Speaker, we recognize the short 

title of the Act is cited as The Milk Control Repeal Act. Mr. 

Speaker, what does it do? It repeals The Milk Control Act, very 

simple. But, Mr. Speaker, what else is in the Bill? Well there’s 

a transfer of assets, liabilities, contracts, and personal property, 

Mr. Speaker. I think the people at home should know marketing 

board means the marketing board designated pursuant to section 

no. 2, that’s The Milk Control Act which is being repealed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Milk Control Board means the Milk Control 

Board as that board that existed on the day before the coming 

into force of this section. So, Mr. Speaker, the Milk Control 

Board is the board that’s basically in place. And of course 

definition of minister: “. . . the member of Executive Council to 

whom for the time being the administration of The Agri-Food 

Act, 2004 is assigned.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, simple language, but it means that this can be 

bounced around from time to time. Whoever the minister in 

charge of The Agri-Food Act is, Mr. Speaker, is the minister to 

whom the board reports. And then, Mr. Speaker, in addition to 

this section on transfer of assets, liabilities, contract, and 

personal property, we see that “The minister may make an order 

designating a marketing board established pursuant to The 

Agri-Food Act, 2004 for the purposes of this section.” So the 

minister has the power to designate, Mr. Speaker. We need to 

keep that in mind. 

 

The Lieutenant Governor in Council may, by order, 

transfer to and vest in the marketing board any assets, 

liabilities, contracts and personal property of the Milk 

Control Board, subject to any terms and conditions that the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council considers appropriate or 

necessary. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, again the cabinet may order the transfer of or 

the vesting of marketing board assets including liabilities, 

contracts, personal property of the board, Mr. Speaker. And that 

is the Milk Control Board which is the board that is being . . . 

Under the Act that’s being repealed, Mr. Speaker, the board that 

the minister indicated is no longer required because there’s a 

new marketing board in place. 

 

Then, Mr. Speaker, the Act in front of us states: 

 

Any assets, liabilities, contracts, and personal property of 

the Milk Control Board that are not transferred to the 

marketing board pursuant to subsection (3) are transferred 

to and become the assets, liabilities, contracts, and 

personal property of the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, if the minister in transferring the properties 

does not transfer all of the assets, liabilities, contract, etc. to the 

new board, then the assets become the property of the 

Government of Saskatchewan. So, Mr. Speaker, there is an 

element there that of course requires some review, evaluation, 

and some accountability on behalf of government. And I have 

every reason to believe that the new board will be watching that 

transfer provision very closely. 

 

And then of course, “As soon as possible after the minister 

makes the order pursuant to subsection (2), the minister shall 

cause the order to be published in the Gazette.” This is indeed 

part of the accountability process, Mr. Speaker. And those who 

know how government works, understand that that handful of 

people and multitude of lawyers who read the Gazette will 

know what the government is doing, Mr. Speaker. And 

hopefully this information is communicated regularly to the 

public. 

 

And then, Mr. Speaker, there’s also a section on auditing and 

annual reports. Ministry is interpreted in this section to mean 

the ministry over which the minister presides. Reporting period 

means the period commencing on April 1st. And, Mr. Speaker, 

then notwithstanding the repeal of The Milk Control Act, Mr. 

Speaker, the new Act says, “the Provincial Auditor shall audit 

the accounts and financial statements of the Milk Control Board 

for the reporting period.” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this is very important. The Provincial 

Auditor doesn’t always have access to all activities of 

government or agencies. On occasion, Mr. Speaker, the 

Provincial Auditor, in his annual report to the legislature, 

indicates that he would like greater access to certain areas of 

government spending, Mr. Speaker. And this part of the Act 

correctly ensures that the Provincial Auditor will be the auditor 

in question. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as a former minister of Health, I can indicate that 

the Provincial Auditor has in the past indicated an interest in 

having greater responsibility over provincial regional health 

authorities. Mr. Speaker, we find out in the question period 

today that regional health authorities halfway through the year, 

this year, Mr. Speaker, are indicating that they’re going to be 

running significant deficits, Mr. Speaker, when just six months 

ago in budget, they were indicating a surplus in accounts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while we realize that the Health ministry is under 

a lot of stress this year, particularly because of the advancing of 

the H1N1 pandemic. Mr. Speaker, this actually should have 

come as no surprise. Given that the regional health authorities 

have been planning for a pandemic for several years, Mr. 

Speaker — probably in excess of five years of planning — that 

indeed just six months ago, there should have been provisions 

included in their financial activities. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s 

the sort of thing that at the end of the year, the Provincial 

Auditor reviews, has access to the books, and explains to the 

public what is happening. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, while we need to know what’s going on in 

regional health authorities, quite often a lot closer to the public, 

Mr. Speaker, it’s also important for the people to know what 

expenditures are being made even for something like the new 

milk marketing board, Mr. Speaker. So this provision of the 

Provincial Auditor being in place is certainly welcome and 

warranted. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that just continuing here in explaining the 

Act and its provisions, let me just finish. There’s just two more 

sections: 



3802 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2009 

the ministry shall prepare and submit to the minister the 

financial statements mentioned in clause (a) [which is the 

Provincial Auditor’s report], and the minister shall lay 

those financial statements before the Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s important. After all the Act is a creation of 

the legislature, and the report should be laid in front of the 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, the Act says, “subsection 25(4) and 

section 27 of The Milk Control Act, 1992 [should] remain in 

force and apply, with any necessary modification, for the 

purposes of clause (b),” which is the preparation of reports and 

submission to the legislature. 

 

Why is this reporting and accountability important, Mr. 

Speaker? Simply because milk is a foodstuff. It is a product that 

we require, Mr. Speaker, in our daily intake. Dairy products, 

Mr. Speaker, generally are important for individual health and 

well-being. I know that there are some arguments, Mr. Speaker, 

throughout North America, Mr. Speaker, about the ultimate 

value of milk — whether it’s natural milk, whether it’s 

pasteurized milk, or whether it’s the processing of milk for 

other dairy products, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But milk is important to us, so therefore the responsibility of 

members of the Legislative Assembly for the health and 

well-being of Saskatchewan residents and important, Mr. 

Speaker. The health and well-being of the industry is important 

for the people of Saskatchewan to know. And as representatives 

of the people, Mr. Speaker, we have to ensure that we have the 

ability to review decisions that are being taken — not just by 

government, but by the agencies and boards established by 

government. 

 

[15:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s another reason for ensuring that 

government has some idea as to what’s taking place within the 

dairy industry. But before talking about that, Mr. Speaker, I 

notice that members of the Chamber were very interested earlier 

when I talked about the evolution of the industry. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I think there’s a couple of things that they remember 

that they know needs to be put on record. 

 

And more importantly, Mr. Speaker, I know that members of 

the Legislative Assembly that recognized it, a number of young 

people have entered the Chamber, something that we are very 

pleased to see. Mr. Speaker, I see you rising; I’ll take my place 

for a moment. 

 

The Speaker: — Thank you, member from The Battlefords. I 

ask leave of the Assembly to introduce a group of students who 

have joined us this afternoon. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — With us this afternoon — and they’ve just 

arrived in the Assembly — are 25 grade 4 students from the 

community of Kipling. I notice they’ve got their green sweaters 

on. With them, they’re accompanied by their teachers, Robin 

Roy-Hampton and Rhonda Balogh, and chaperones Rhonda 

Kapell, Ron Zepick, Tammy Joorisity, Merodee Hassler, and 

Dana Sproat. I want to welcome the students to their Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

What you observe taking place on floor right now is debate in 

second reading of the specific piece of legislation introduced by 

the Minister of Agriculture. And if you have a few moments, 

you’ll get a bit of an idea of what the legislation is and listening 

to the member from The Battlefords. But it’s my pleasure to 

invite the members to help me to welcome you to your 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Before I 

continue in my remarks, may I have leave to also welcome the 

students that you have introduced? 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has asked for leave as well for 

introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to, 

on behalf of the official opposition, welcome the students from 

Kipling to the legislature. I hope they can stay for a few 

minutes. I’m about to entertain a bit of a story about the past 

history of dairy and, Mr. Speaker, they may find it interesting. 

 

But I realize a lot of times students here on tour come in. They 

recognize what’s going on, and they continue their tour. I just 

want to ensure that they enjoy their stay here in the provincial 

legislature and want them to know that, as they mature in life 

and get a better education, that any chair in this place is easily 

accessible by Saskatchewan residents. And I welcome all of 

your interests in the political process and taking care of 

Saskatchewan people. Mr. Speaker, I welcome them with you 

to the Legislative Assembly. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 118 — The Milk Control Repeal Act 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Taylor: — All right, Mr. Speaker, back to Bill No. 118, An 

Act to repeal The Milk Control Act of 1992. I indicated, Mr. 

Speaker, that I see the milk industry evolving. And I think 

anybody that’s involved in the dairy industry . . . And I’m sure 

that anybody that comes from Kipling, Saskatchewan or North 

Battleford, Saskatchewan knows somebody that’s involved in 

the dairy industry. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, some time ago, I was campaigning on 

doorsteps to be a Member of Parliament in Ottawa. I was 

successful in that bid, Mr. Speaker, but I’ll never forget the 

conversation that I had with a older gentleman, an individual, 

Mr. Speaker, who had worked in the dairy industry all of his 

life. And he was retired and then living in Edam, Saskatchewan 

along Highway 26, north of The Battlefords. Well, Mr. Speaker, 



November 25, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3803 

this older gentleman and I had quite a good conversation on his 

back porch. And he was lamenting, Mr. Speaker, the changes 

that were occurring in the dairy industry at that time. 

 

The dairy industry of course was very local. It was serving a 

very local market. And it involved family business, Mr. 

Speaker, so that anyone raising dairy cows were always up 

early in the morning, taking care of those milk-producing cows 

and, Mr. Speaker, 365 days a year. If you were in the dairy 

business years ago, Mr. Speaker, you were a family farm and 

you worked 365 days a year. It was really difficult, Mr. 

Speaker, for that family to leave the farm for more than a day or 

two at any given time of the year, Mr. Speaker. And some times 

of the year were more difficult than others, whether it had to do 

with increasing the herd locally or when certain good 

milk-producing cows required some extra feeding or some 

medical attention, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the gentleman that I talked to was, what we would call in 

the education process, a substitute teacher. He was an expert in 

looking after cattle. He understood dairy cattle. He understood 

the breeds. And, Mr. Speaker, what he did, he made a living out 

of doing this job, Mr. Speaker. What he did his entire life was 

to travel from farm to farm to farm and providing relief services 

for families running dairy herds and producing milk for the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

He was providing relief for them so that if they needed to go 

away for family wedding in another province or in another part 

of Saskatchewan, if they had a family member that was ill and 

they had to travel to support that family member, if they’d had a 

good year previously — and there weren’t a lot of them, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker — if they’d had a good year and wanted to 

have a holiday break or go somewhere for Christmas, these 

family farms required someone to come, someone trustworthy, 

someone knowledgeable to come and take care of the cattle and 

ensure that that farm was still producing and still successful 

when they returned from their time away. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he was lamenting the fact that his job was no 

longer necessary, that he had been done out of the job of 

supporting family dairy farms because of changes in 

technology, changes in size of farms, the greater influence of 

the corporate structure within the farm, and more or less the 

loss of the small, family farm producing for a local market. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, part of the history of dairy and the evolution 

of the industry, Mr. Speaker, with the globalization of our 

economy, with the globalization of technology, with the 

globalization of markets, Mr. Speaker, things have changed 

dramatically. And as a result of these changes that have 

occurred, we have seen a number of changes become necessary 

in the way in which we legislate or regulate the industry. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I would hope that, in the changes that the 

government are making today, that they’re taking into account 

how this industry and how the world continues to evolve, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

There are some who are arguing that with the world 

marketplace having been so heavily influenced by cheap oil, 

Mr. Speaker, and globalization coming from cheap oil, that as 

the price of oil increases and we reach peak oil — and some are 

arguing we’ve already reached peak oil — that, Mr. Speaker, 

the future of rural areas in the world, North America included, 

Mr. Speaker, that reaching peak oil, reaching expensive oil, 

reaching the scarcity of moving into a world where oil might be 

more scarce, Mr. Speaker, there are those who argue that the 

need to become more local, especially in agriculture, Mr. 

Speaker, is increasing. The need to move in that direction is 

increasing. 

 

And I’m sure that there are many in the dairy industry, Mr. 

Speaker, who are recognizing that some of the major growth 

that has occurred might actually start to back up a bit, and the 

regulatory process is going to have to stay with and ensure that 

we are always able to have access as a public to quality, 

health-safe milk and dairy products. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve been reading a book that I think other 

members of the legislature have read. It’s available through the 

Legislative Library here. I know it’s also in other libraries 

across the province. And I know that it’s available on the 

bestseller shelves of most bookstores in Saskatchewan. It’s a 

book written by Jeff Rubin. He’s formerly the chief economist 

with CIBC World Markets. Jeff Rubin’s book is called, your 

world is about to get a lot smaller, or maybe more importantly, 

Why Your World Is About To Get a Whole Lot Smaller. 

 

And I just want to read, Mr. Speaker, the first three paragraphs 

in the chapter 1 of Jeff Rubin’s book. I want to put this on 

record, Mr. Speaker. This is the quote, the three paragraphs: 

 

When you don’t have enough money in your pocket to get 

on the subway, finding some change between the 

cushions of your sofa can seem like a pretty important 

discovery. And if it gets you to work on time, it is. 

 

But if you had to depend on finding spare change to get to 

work each and every day, well, you might start looking 

for another job a lot closer to home. 

 

Right now, the oil companies of the world have their 

hands deep between the cushions, and so far they have 

been coming up with enough dimes and quarters . . . to 

get us all to work. But there is only so much change to be 

found, and more people are heading out the door to work 

every day. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, I continue the quote: 

 

The world’s oil wells are running out of the stuff that 

keeps the whole system going. Every well will eventually 

run dry — in fact the well is tapped out long before it is 

empty. Even with the most advanced technology, oil 

companies get barely half the oil out before geophysics 

and economics conspire to make what’s left not worth 

going after. The question is how fast, and whether new 

supply can be found in time to replace it. Even if today’s 

depletion rate holds constant, we must find nearly 20 

million barrels per day of new production over the next 

five years simply to keep global production at current 

levels.  

 

That sets the stage, Mr. Speaker, for the argument that he lays 

out in the rest of the book. And the argument quite simply is, it 



3804 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2009 

might not be tomorrow. It might not be next year, and it might 

not be for another five or ten years. But, Mr. Speaker, the way 

that oil is being found and technology is being developed, Mr. 

Speaker, sooner or later our economy is going to have to shift to 

less oil and more expensive oil which affects transportation, 

which affects agriculture, and certainly which affects our 

quality of life. 

 

Why am I talking about that under The Milk Control Repeal 

Act, Mr. Speaker? It’s simply because our world will get a lot 

smaller, according to Mr. Rubin. Our world will get a lot 

smaller. It will become more local. And, Mr. Speaker, we won’t 

rely on milk coming from Ontario to support the market in The 

Battlefords. And North Dakota won’t be relying on milk from 

Saskatchewan to support the people of North Dakota, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The days that I referred to earlier, with small, family farms 

producing milk for a local market, may be — may be, Mr. 

Speaker, underline the word may be — in our future here in 

Saskatchewan. A more local market, family farms, less 

corporate dominated, not a lot of transportation because — 

remember — if the cost to transport becomes too great, the 

price of the product at the end of that transportation loop 

becomes unaffordable for the people who have it. 

 

So agriculture producers, not just dairy farmers, Mr. Speaker, 

but cattle and hogs and grain. Foodstuffs, Mr. Speaker, are 

going to become much more important to the local markets than 

ever before, since we started to develop our land base here in 

North America. 

 

[15:15] 

 

So I’m hoping, Mr. Speaker, that those who are now charged 

with ensuring that the regulatory process, the accountability 

process, the development of our milk control, our milk 

regulation system, are able to ensure that, as the industry 

continues to evolve — whether it gets larger or smaller — I 

hope that they have the tools necessary to ensure that the public 

is able to have access to quality, safe, healthy milk products, 

Mr. Speaker. I know the producers are going to produce the 

product. I’m very supportive of the producers, Mr. Speaker. But 

I need to know and I need to be assured that in fact the systems 

that are there supporting those producers, to make sure they stay 

in business and continue to do the work that they need to do, are 

able to do that in a way that benefits all of us and ensures that 

our quality of life is not too negatively affected. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to support my colleague who spoke a 

few minutes ago, the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow, who 

indicated that the previous board had done a good job, that 

stakeholders need to be included in the decision-making 

process, that indeed consultation may have occurred, needs to 

continue to occur to ensure that the public feels confident that 

the system is serving their interests in the long run. Their 

interests are very important to us, whether you’re a young 

person from Kipling, a working person from North Battleford, 

or a retired dairy support worker in Edam, Mr. Speaker. 

Everybody cares about the future of agriculture and the future 

of dairy production here in Saskatchewan. 

 

So having said that, Mr. Speaker, I look forward to hearing the 

remarks of other members of the legislature on this Bill. So 

therefore, Mr. Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity to put 

some of my thoughts on record, and I will take my seat with a 

great interest in how this Bill proceeds through the legislature. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a pleasure 

to stand up and present some remarks on Bill 118, An Act to 

repeal The Milk Control Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the issues that arise when one repeals an Act 

involve what’s in the legislation itself, what the intention is of 

the government as far as how they’re going to do the important 

work that’s been done under the existing legislation, and then 

how the whole area that’s being legislated about is going to be 

dealt with in the future. And I listened with interest to the words 

of my colleague from The Battlefords because he touched on a 

number of those aspects of the repealing of The Milk Control 

Act. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I come to this topic wearing a few 

different hats, and so I’m going to start, I think, and tell a little 

bit about one of them which is being the grandson of a woman 

who sold milk — actually she sold cream — to provide for the 

piano lessons for my mother and my aunt. And this was 

something that I think was done quite commonly across the 

province of Saskatchewan. And in many ways that cream can 

became a symbol of the independence of the women of 

Saskatchewan, because they were often the ones who spent the 

time milking the cows and then using the cream separator to 

separate the milk, and then making sure that it was delivered 

appropriately to the local dairies or to a local store. Sometimes 

it was sold directly. 

 

And I start with that kind of a perspective in saying that this 

area of milk control has always been a rather contentious area 

as it relates to the local community, because we are now quite 

used to the fact that in Canada we have controlled marketing 

right across the country. And in fact this particular legislation 

that’s going to be repealed is part of a national scheme. So you 

go from the small farm just south of Outlook that I recall going 

into the dairy barn — the cows were gone by the time I was 

around — but going there and realizing that that aspect of 

independence for the women of Saskatchewan ended up having 

some of the roots that ultimately resulted in the kinds of 

legislation that we have here and across the country. 

 

Now why is the issue of production of milk and the control of 

the production of milk so important for Saskatchewan? We 

know that in the national scheme of things, our farmers in 

Saskatchewan have had to fight for a national share of the 

production of milk. And I know, I think it’s about 30 years ago 

that there was little or no capacity in Saskatchewan to sell milk 

products into the industrial milk area — in other words, the area 

where milk was being used to produce cheese. 

 

And there were a number of people who were involved in that 

particular battle, and I know one of them ended up with a seat 

in the legislature as the member from Moosomin, Mr. Larry 

Birkbeck. And he came out of this time as a milk producer 



November 25, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3805 

where they were working to gain rights to participate in the 

national marketing scheme of industrial milk as opposed to the 

fluid milk, the milk that you buy in the stores. That fight was 

long and hard, and the ultimate result is that we got a very small 

percentage of the national market. 

 

And one might ask, well where is that national market? I think 

practically there’s a huge chunk of it that is controlled in the 

province of Quebec, and in Ontario, and also then in British 

Columbia. And we might not often think about that, but in 

Saskatchewan we had Dairy Producers Co-op which was all the 

dairy producers working together. They were the people who 

were regulated under this particular legislation that we’re 

planning to repeal. But they were able to provide the supply for 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Well we know that there’s been consolidation in the milk 

industry across the country and that there are many, many fewer 

corporations of a large national or international nature that are 

involved in the milk business. Now this may be the reason that 

this legislation is being brought forward for repeal. I’m not 

totally certain, from what I’ve heard so far, if that is the 

ultimate rationale. But practically, at the same time all of this 

internationalization or broad corporatization of the production 

of food as it relates to milk and dairy products is happening, 

there’s also a similar discussion about eat locally, buy locally, 

get your produce locally. Because that’s how the new world is 

going to be organized. 

 

And so the question becomes, what does this particular action 

that we’re taking today facilitate — the international control of 

the milk industry, or does it facilitate more a Saskatchewan 

local control, or is it some other thing that’s happening here? 

 

An added aspect to this particular issue relates to the incredible 

pressure on our national government and our provincial 

government in the form of the ministers of Agriculture as it 

relates to marketing boards in general. We in Canada have 

protected marketing boards in a number of different areas in a 

way that ends up being attacked from our neighbours to the 

south by our, I guess, world neighbours, because they think that 

we have ended up with a process that makes it difficult for 

others to compete in our country. 

 

And I think it’s not as obvious in Regina or Saskatoon or in 

Saskatchewan as it might be in some other parts of Canada. But 

if you live in the Lower Mainland of British Columbia or if you 

live in the Detroit-Windsor area or St. Catharine’s-Niagara Falls 

area, there are many people who actually will drive across the 

United States, buy milk, and bring it home again as it relates to 

the difference in cost. 

 

And that’s another sort of practical aspect from an ordinary 

family perspective that in a world where costs are increasing all 

around, one place where you can actually make some savings 

on your food budget is to shop in the United States, if that’s a 

practical thing to do. It’s not practical for most people in 

Saskatchewan and I don’t recommend that. But it is a factor as 

we look at legislation around like this particular Bill, Bill 118. 

 

So we’re into an area which has many different pressures on 

how milk production is controlled and then how it’s 

appropriately sold. And it’s quite fascinating actually to look at 

the legislation itself and see what kinds of things are authorized. 

If one goes from the legislation to the regulations, one will note 

that the price of every class of milk is set by regulation and 

those regulations are updated regularly. 

 

I note that the set of regulations here in the legislature, the most 

recent update of the pricing rules around milk was on July 24th 

of 2009, just a few month ago, and that there’s a constant 

adjustment in that legislation. Now it may be that this particular 

Bill is being repealed because there is that process of very 

publicly stating what the price of milk is that producers will get, 

and it’s a rather complicated way to get it changed, to have to 

go and get a regulatory change every time that you want to 

adjust the price of milk. 

 

Now we may eventually hear some of that — I’m not sure I’ve 

heard it so far — that that’s one of the rationales for the change 

that we’re talking about here. But it is interesting in how much 

detail what one has very publicly in the legislation. And 

obviously now you can go and look at these things online 

through the government website and keep track of what the 

prices are. 

 

And so basically the prices . . . The other factor in this 

legislation that ends up being quite interesting, and it’s not 

totally clear from what’s happening here, what new system is 

going to replace The Milk Control Act, but I might talk about 

that a little bit later. 

 

Now another hat that I wear when I come and look at this is the 

hat as a legislator and as a lawyer, as somebody who has been 

watching and looking at various pieces of legislation and 

regulatory change over the last decade and a half. And it’s clear 

that The Milk Control Act and the Milk Control Board under 

that Act is a little bit of a different entity than quite a number of 

the other product control or product marketing Acts that are 

under the responsibility of the Ministry of Agriculture. 

 

[15:30] 

 

And so it strikes me that there may be something in this 

particular legislation now that actually relates to that issue, 

which is how it’s administered within the Ministry of 

Agriculture and how it actually relates with the farmers who are 

members of the board or milk producers who are members of 

the board, and what the processes are that allow for that 

responsibility to be carried out by the board. 

 

I know that there have been a number of different marketing 

agencies that have been brought under The Agri-Food Act 

which is what I understand is one of the . . . It appears that 

there’s going to be something that’ll be done under that 

particular legislation as it relates to the Milk Control Board. So 

the question comes, well what differences will there be to the 

milk producers if, in fact, this is being administered in some 

relationship to The Agri-Food Act as opposed to what happens 

under The Milk Control Act as well? 

 

I know that from discussions and trying to understand how The 

Agri-Food Act works in its broadest sense, that there are 

common methods of administration going across many of the 

products that are controlled under that legislation. And I think 

what we will need to hear from the minister and from officials 



3806 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2009 

as we look at this over the next number of months, is what will 

the practical effect be for the farmers or the producers here, and 

how much of the control of their industry will shift into the 

control of the minister versus how much may shift back to the 

industry, and what are the trade-offs that are going to be 

proposed. 

 

Now as everybody can see, the Bill that we have in the 

legislature is barely one page long and so the information isn’t 

set out here. So what we have to do is say look at, based on our 

experience as legislators and as people who are able to go and 

contact those in the industry, to get information from them as to 

what the effect of this will be. 

 

Now the original legislation is interesting in the sense of what 

its purpose was. And when you look at legislation you always 

go and say okay, what are the powers that are invested in this 

board? You know, you get away from all of the issues around, 

well who’s on the board, where do they come from, what are 

their powers, but look at what is it that they’re given the job to 

do by the people of Saskatchewan through the legislature. 

 

And so basically the powers of the board are to deal with 

disputes in a lot of ways, but when you actually look through all 

the . . . I think it’s actually quite enlightening to do that. If you 

go to section 8 of the legislation that we’re going to repeal, it 

says: 

 

Subject to this Act and the regulations, the board may: 

 

(a) on its own initiative or on receipt of a complaint in 

writing, inquire into, hear and determine any matter 

relating to: 

 

(i) production; 

 

(ii) distribution; or 

 

(iii) both production and distribution; 

 

and may make any order it considers advisable with 

respect to that matter. 

 

So that’s the first power that’s given. The second one is that it 

can: 

 

(b) regulate its own practice and procedure for the 

conduct of hearings and inquiries held pursuant to the 

Act. 

 

A third one is sort of a power of setting up committees to 

investigate where there are problems around the legislation. The 

fourth area is they can determine the remuneration and 

reimbursement for the expenses of the members of the 

committees that are established. A fifth area is they can enter 

into contracts where those contracts will accomplish the 

objectives of the Act, and it also gives the standard clauses 

about buying and selling and holding or mortgaging and owning 

property so that they can fulfill the purposes of the Act, and it 

also allows them to invest the money that they have in their Act. 

And then in (h) they can: 

 

designate or hire agents on those terms that the board 

considers to be in the public interest to: 

 

(i) collect and purchase producer milk; 

 

(ii) transport and sell milk to distributors and processors 

 

(iii) collect deductions and levies [that’s a key one] from 

producers; and 

 

(iv) for the purpose of doing the things . . . 

 

(A) handle funds; and 

 

(B) keep records in accounts; . . . 

 

And it can generally do all of the things that are set out in that 

legislation. And so basically what you have is a self-contained 

system of controlling the milk area and dealing with the total 

milk production. 

 

And as we know from looking at the newspapers and also, I 

think, some of the court records over many decades, there were 

often disputes between people who wanted to produce and sell 

milk to their neighbours or to local towns versus the Milk 

Control Board, which has the responsibility of marketing and 

dealing with milk for the whole province. And so often the 

kinds of things that the board was asked to deal with related to 

these disputes over whether the Milk Control Board actually 

had jurisdiction over their production, or whether some of the 

ways that milk was being marketed were contrary to the rules 

that had been set up under this particular legislation. And so 

what we have, as I said, is a system that has been developed. 

 

Now one of the things about creating organizations or creating 

methods or creating systems to do things is that they will 

sometimes make mistakes. But they also gain experience in 

managing and doing a good job of managing the purposes for 

which they’re originally created. 

 

And so once again, one of the questions becomes then, around 

Bill 118, is what will be the continuance process? And how will 

the powers that are presently available under The Milk Control 

Act, how are those powers transferred forward and where do 

they go? Do they go to the minister? Do they go to a new 

board? Do they go to some of the senior officials in the 

Department of Agriculture, or do they go to some other place? 

Or are all of these controls just going to be gone within a period 

of time? And some of those things, I don’t know if we have 

heard fully as to how this is going to be happening. 

 

Now I know that often as the Minister of Agriculture probably 

wouldn’t hear very much about this whole area of the ministry 

unless there were problems or unless there were issues. And so 

I don’t know whether there have been complaints that have 

come forward where people have said, well let’s get rid of that 

milk control Act because it’s messing up our industry, or that 

there may be certain individuals who want to change the power 

structure, or if there are some other ways that the matter may be 

managed through the Ministry of Agriculture which will allow 

for a different way of collecting the fees and the levies that 

happen on the production. 

 

Now one question obviously comes, as far as where this 



November 25, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3807 

legislation takes us, is there’s clearly a lot of money flowing 

through this particular legislation and it does relate to monies 

that are collected on the production right across the province. 

And so where will this money go? How will it be used? Will it 

be used primarily in the milk industry or will it possibly be used 

in other aspects of the Ministry of Agriculture? 

 

And this may not have been a question three or four weeks ago, 

but now that we have this mid-year report with pressures on the 

government to find money wherever they can, we need to then 

ask the question if this is a method of a money grab or what is 

it. So, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of questions around that 

particular issue that we’ll need to continue to examine. 

 

Now any time that there’s change within an industry, there are 

questions that are asked. And it may be — we don’t know; we 

can’t tell from this particular Bill — but it may be that in the 

21st century there’s a different way to organize and deal with 

the milk industry. We haven’t heard that, but that may be what 

is happening here. And if in fact that is what the situation is, 

then I think we will probably have to have a chance to talk to 

people who will be affected by the legislation. We’ll need to 

hear from the minister. We’ll need to hear from his officials as 

to what they see the changes will be when this legislation 

ultimately is finalized. 

 

I’m not certain that anybody’s entirely clear as to what is going 

to happen, and so as a result, I guess we’ll have to wait and 

maybe in committee or another situation get more information. 

It probably would be a good idea for the milk industry itself to, 

or the minister, to actually provide much more information 

about why this is being done so that everybody in the public can 

understand exactly why this is being brought forward at this 

time. 

 

What we don’t want to see is what sometimes happens when 

there’s a change in government, is that there’s a new group of 

people who are interested in changing who actually controls 

something like the Milk Control Board. And if that’s what’s 

happening, well then we’ll have a lot of questions about that. I 

don’t have any reason to believe that at this stage, but I think it 

is important to ask that question as well. 

 

Now there are a number of national and international 

negotiations that are happening over the next number of months 

that may also affect this particular legislation. And we will also 

want to hear from the minister what aspects of the international 

negotiations will affect what we’re doing locally here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

We all know that the number of the smaller dairies anywhere in 

North America have dropped drastically, and most of our milk 

production comes from very large plants in some of our larger 

cities both in Canada and the United States. And so we need to 

understand what that actually means for Saskatchewan. I mean 

it seems logical that this would be an area where Saskatchewan 

producers and then the whole agri-food industry could provide 

food for a much broader group of people right across the 

country or across the world, and it may be an area for expansion 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

[15:45] 

 

What we do know is that the traditional division of the quotas 

across the country left Saskatchewan substantially out of the 

industrial milk market because they were based on population, 

not on the ability to produce. And we’re in this interesting place 

called Saskatchewan where we have 43 per cent of the 

agriculture land of Canada, but we only have 3 per cent of the 

population. And so sometimes the policies that are based on the 

people and the population of the country don’t make as much 

economic sense as they should. And so we’re interested to find 

out whether this aspect has been thought about by the Minister 

of Agriculture and by his staff and we’ll look forward to 

hearing about the place of this particular change in the broader 

international context. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are quite a number of clauses 

and powers that are in this particular Act and it is possible that 

we should actually go and ask, well what’s going to happen 

when the rules are no longer there as set out in this Act? And I 

guess, being a lawyer, the one I look at the most is, what are the 

new rules going to be around resolution of conflict between 

producers and distributors, between some of the pricing 

mechanisms, and what remedies will be available for people to 

correct those things? If a lot of those are no longer available in 

this legislation, will they be available under The Agri-Food Act 

or will there be rules somewhere else or will the parties be 

forced to enter into contracts of a whole new nature or what is 

going to happen? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there are quite a few unanswered questions 

about this. But I think at this stage, I will adjourn debate on this 

particular motion. And I know some of my other colleagues 

may, another day, have some comments to make about it. 

Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 118, The Milk Control 

Repeal Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 119 — The Ticket Sales Act 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 

privilege to rise today to move second reading of The Ticket 

Sales Act. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, The Ticket Sales Act responds to consumer 

complaints about recent concerts and sporting events which 

sold out instantly, while tickets were available from ticket 

resellers at the same time. Saskatchewan does not have 

legislation to prevent secondary sales and this Bill will change 

that. 

 

We recognize that there are many situations where secondary 

sales are not only appropriate but in fact necessary. For 

example, consumers who purchase tickets and through no fault 

of their own are unable to use them, there must be a way for 

those people to transfer their tickets to willing purchasers. 



3808 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2009 

We also recognize that there will be circumstances where ticket 

exchanges will be necessary and appropriate. For example, the 

Saskatchewan Roughriders allow season ticket holders to 

transfer tickets that they cannot use. Those types of exchanges 

will be exempted from the legislation through regulation. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan residents however are 

entitled to know that even if they do not get the tickets they 

wanted, they at least had a fair chance. Our goal is to ensure the 

broadest possible distribution of tickets to the ticket buying 

public. This Act will increase transparency and public 

protection in the following ways. 

 

First, the legislation will prohibit the primary seller from having 

links to reseller websites on a primary ticket website. The 

legislation will also prohibit a secondary ticket seller who has 

any legal association with the primary ticket seller from selling 

tickets to the same event except by the exceptions in the 

regulations. And finally, it prohibits a reseller from advertising 

for sale in any manner to a Saskatchewan event until 48 hours 

after the tickets go on sale to the public. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we feel that this is very significant 

protection. Consumers who are unable to obtain tickets initially 

will still be able to buy them from secondary sellers. However, 

they will be able to make a more informed choice if 48 hours 

has passed since the initial disappointment. 

 

One growing concern is that some resellers have tickets for sale 

in large volumes earlier than they should have been able to 

acquire them. The Bill will make it an offence to use computer 

software to break the code intended to prevent automated ticket 

buying. The accompanying regulations will include reporting 

requirements for publicly owned venues. This way the ministry 

will be able to call for reports as needed to determine whether 

the sale was fair to consumers. 

 

Fines are up to $5,000 for individuals and $100,000 for 

corporations for first offences, and up to $10,000 for individuals 

and $500,000 for corporations for subsequent offences. 

Individuals can be jailed for up to one year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we wish to acknowledge the co-operation of 

Ticketmaster and the venues in crafting this legislation and 

working with us to develop solutions. We also wish to 

recognize the assistance of Saskatchewan venue operators for 

their insights into this business. 

 

This is a changing industry with changing technology. It is not 

our goal to impede in any way, which is why we will be able to 

use regulations to keep up to date with the constant innovations 

and changes. It is not our desire to have events and sporting 

events, concerts, etc., that will not come to our province 

because of our legislation. This legislation . . . [inaudible] . . . 

create as many tickets for an event as there are consumers who 

wish to attend. That is clearly impossible. It will however, 

create transparency and fairness. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the media has asked me when this Bill 

will likely be passed and come into force. I’ve indicated to the 

media that this Bill should have no political ramifications and 

should be supported by both sides of the House, and would like 

to urge the members opposite to give speedy passage of this 

Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to now move second reading of 

The Ticket Sales Act. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved 

second reading of Bill No. 119, The Ticket Sales Act. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member from 

Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to rise and offer some comments on the Act respecting 

the sale of tickets. The minister raised a couple of issues in his 

comments. And I do know that this was a fairly substantial 

public issue a short time ago when there was issues with a 

number of event tickets that were sold and resold basically, and 

where many people either couldn’t get a hold of tickets — they 

were sold out quite quickly — or the tickets that they did have 

access to were substantially higher priced than what they had of 

been, if you had of been able to buy them from the primary 

seller. 

 

And this actually has become a fairly large issue right across 

North America and I believe in Europe also, where we have 

seen some performers who have boycotted tickets being sold in 

certain ways, and we have seen a number of statements being 

made. And I don’t disagree that each of these, whether 

performers or promoters or whichever end of this entertainment 

industry that they may work on, they’re all entitled to make a 

profit. But really, Mr. Speaker, there were some shortcuts being 

made that really were only harmful to the consumers. 

 

So when we look at this Bill and we look at the short title, it’s 

fairly self-explanatory: The Ticket Sales Act. And interpretation, 

the interpretation and the definitions are always interesting, Mr. 

Speaker, because it gives us a better understanding of the 

legislation and, when we look through the Act, what exactly the 

wording means. 

 

So of course the primary concern here is the consumer. And 

that means, “. . . an individual who participates, as a purchaser, 

in a transaction involving the sale of a ticket.” Also gives a 

definition of the minister. And prescribed means, “prescribed in 

the regulations.” And, Mr. Speaker, that’s always the interesting 

part. We always wait to see what the regulations will say and 

what will be contained in the regulations. 

 

Some governments had had a policy of having more, or had 

been more prone to having the bulk of the information and 

direction in the legislation. For one thing, when there is any 

changes that are to be made, it will be brought back to the 

Legislative Assembly and will have to go through a process of 

scrutiny, both by stakeholders, interested parties, and the 

opposition. And at that time there’s also an opportunity to ask 

questions directly of the minister when we are in committee. 

 

But when we see a fair bit of information, some governments 

prefer to have things in regulation which are much easier to 

change. They can be done through cabinet, and there is 

absolutely no public scrutiny when regulations are to be 

changed. So it’s always an interest to see what exactly is 

contained in the legislation itself and what will be contained in 

regulation. 



November 25, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3809 

There also is definitions for primary seller. It means: 

 

. . . a person, other than a secondary seller, who is 

engaged in the business of making tickets available for 

sale, and includes the owner of the place to which a ticket 

provides admission, the promoter of the event occurring 

at that place and any agent or broker of those persons. 

 

Also gives a definition for secondary seller, Mr. Speaker. Lays 

out quite clearly whom that person or operation may be. And it 

also gives a definition for a ticket, which could be a card, a 

pass, a paper, a “document or thing, whether in electronic form 

or otherwise” and “that, on presentation, entitles the holder to 

an admission to an event.” 

 

And I guess, quite clearly, Mr. Speaker, when you start looking 

at the Act itself, quite quickly it gets into prohibitions re 

primary seller and secondary seller. And really, Mr. Speaker, 

I’m definitely not a person to be using any type of legal 

language, but the short and sweet of this legislation was, what 

we had was companies and primary sellers that were basically 

scalping their own tickets to make a higher profit. 

 

And it was truly to the detriment of consumers. And not just 

maybe consumers who had decided at the last minute and went 

to what we would more traditionally view as a scalper out in 

front of an event and paid a little bit higher of a price for a 

ticket, but these were actual tickets that would go on sale, and 

within minutes they would be sold out to the secondary seller 

who would then sell them in a variety of methods and venues at 

a considerably higher price. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what we were having was just 

impossible situations where the average consumer could not 

even buy a ticket at what would be considered a traditional 

price for some of these concerts. And we’ve seen markups. I 

mean, it was in the hundreds of dollars that people would pay 

for tickets. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it quite clearly lays out: 

 

In this section, a primary seller and a secondary seller are 

associated if they are associates within the meaning of 

The Business Corporations Act. 

 

And also: 

 

Subject to any prescribed . . . [exemption], no secondary 

seller shall make a ticket available for sale for admission 

to an event in Saskatchewan if a ticket to the same event 

is or has been made available for sale by a primary seller 

who is associated with the secondary seller. 

 

So that’s quite clear in what it does. And I know that there will 

be many people in the province of Saskatchewan who will be 

happy to see this legislation because I clearly remember that 

when this issue first became quite public — I think it was about 

a year ago; could be a little bit longer — there was lots of 

comments on the radio, lots of people writing into blogs and 

various other formats that were furious over the difficulty that 

they had been facing, and that Saskatchewan had no legislation 

to address this. 

 

[16:00] 

 

And I believe the minister was in the media at that point in time 

saying that he would look at moving something forward in the 

province of Saskatchewan. So this is it. So I would imagine, 

Mr. Speaker, that he has looked at other provinces, what works, 

what doesn’t work, and has put together a piece of legislation 

that is something that’s workable here for the province of 

Saskatchewan, but it also goes on to talk about no references or 

links to secondary sellers permitted. 

 

So it’s subject to any prescribed exemption, and with any piece 

of legislation, Mr. Speaker, there are exemptions. So we need to 

find out what the prescribed exemptions are or will be: 

 

. . . no primary seller shall permit, for an event that will 

take place in Saskatchewan, a reference to, or a link to, a 

secondary seller: 

 

[And it’s] (a) in the primary seller’s promotional 

material; 

 

on an Internet website of the primary seller; or 

 

as part of any sale of tickets by the primary seller. 

 

So and it also goes on to advertising of tickets, and this I 

believe is important that: 

 

No person, other than a primary seller, may sell, advertise 

or list for sale, in any manner, any tickets to an event in 

Saskatchewan until at least 48 hours after the tickets to 

that same event were made available to the general public 

by a primary seller. 

 

So we should no longer see the circumstance where the minute 

tickets go on sale they are gone, and consumers are left 

wondering how they couldn’t have dialled quick enough or got 

in quick enough on the Internet. And even though 

Saskatchewan has lots of high-speed Internet, there was many, 

many that were concerned because tickets would be gone by the 

time they got in on the electronic sites. But this should make a 

huge difference when there’s the restrictions in place that at 

least 48 hours after tickets for the event have been made 

available to the general public by the primary seller. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the legislation also talks about software, which 

I’m going to totally avoid. And I’m hoping that the minister has 

received some very good advice on software and why 

specifically. It’s questions I’ll have to ask though, why this 

specific software needs to be in the legislation itself, and we’ll 

get further information I’m sure from the minister. 

 

But now one area where I do have some questions, other 

questions, Mr. Speaker, “Reports by owners of public 

venues.” This is section 8 and it says: 

 

Every venue owned or operated by the province or a 

municipality at which events are held shall provide a 

report to the minister in accordance with the regulations. 

 

So I’m not sure what is being required to be reported and how 

often this will be and how cumbersome it will be and what is 



3810 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2009 

the necessity. Because I also know near the end there is in 

section 13 under regulations there, is section: 

 

(c) respecting the report to be provided to the minister 

pursuant to section 8, including: 

 

(i) the information to be included in the report; 

 

(ii) the manner in which the report is to be provided; 

and 

 

(iii) the times at which the report is to be provided. 

 

But I’m still not clear here on what is to be reported and why. 

So those are going to be some of the questions that we have for 

the minister once this legislation moves into committee. 

 

But I think one thing that will make consumers very happy is a 

consumer may commence action. So the legislation clearly lays 

out that a consumer, as a result of a contravention of sections 4, 

5, 6, or 7 may commence an action in a court against a person 

who has contravened one of these provisions. So there are 

remedies and there are also . . . the court. If a court finds that a 

person has contravened any of these sections, the court may — 

and there’s a list of what the court may order: 

 

(a) order restitution of money or other consideration 

given . . . 

 

(b) award the consumer damages in the amount of any 

loss suffered because of the contravention . . . 

 

(c) grant an injunction restraining the person from 

continuing to contravene the provision; 

 

(d) make an order of specific performance against the 

person; or 

 

(e) make any other order the court considers 

appropriate.” 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there are, contained along in the legislation, 

the offences and penalties. And it’s quite clear what the 

penalties shall be. And those are quite clear. And they’re fairly 

steep, Mr. Speaker: 

 

(i) in the case of an individual, to a fine of not more 

than $5,000, to imprisonment for a term of not more 

than one year or to both; and 

 

(ii) in the case of a corporation [this is for the first 

offence, in the case of a corporation], to a fine of not 

more than $100,000; and 

 

(b) for a second or subsequent offence: 

 

(i) in the case of an individual, to a fine of not more 

than $10,000, to imprisonment for a term of not more 

than one year or both. 

 

So the fine increases, prison term doesn’t, possibility of prison 

term. But the fine is definitely increased and “in the case of a 

corporation, to a fine of not more than $500,000.” 

So there’s other requirements that are in here. There is a 

limitation on prosecution. And I’m not sure why the limits and 

if that is common practice among this type of legislation or if 

it’s something that the minister felt was important to put in. But 

those are questions that we will be able to ask as we go into 

committee and as we move through with this piece of 

legislation. 

 

So a number of questions. What exemptions would be in place? 

Why the reporting? And reporting of what information? And, I 

guess, why the limits on prosecution, and why there would be 

the flexibility or the limits, I guess, that don’t seem particularly 

long when it comes to these type of events. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I know that there are a number of my 

colleagues that would also like to make comment on this 

legislation. But I think all in all there may be some specific 

issues that we have questions on, but I think most people will be 

pleased that the minister has brought this forward. So I’ll leave 

time for my colleagues to make comment. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again I 

am pleased to be able to rise today to speak to legislation 

introduced into the Legislative Assembly today at second 

reading. The Bill in front of us is numbered 119. It’s An Act 

respecting the Sale of Tickets. And, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased 

to have been in my place to hear the explanation by the Minister 

of Justice in presenting the Bill to us today and to hear the 

comments from my colleague, the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow, who has laid out some of the terms of the 

legislation. 

 

We always ask, Mr. Speaker, why is a piece of legislation 

necessary when we are in this Chamber. Every year, regardless 

of who sits in the government benches, Mr. Speaker, there are 

35, 40, maybe as high as 50 or 60 pieces of legislation that 

come into the Assembly. And each piece of legislation comes 

with some motivation behind it. Some are political. Some are 

consumer-based, and some, Mr. Speaker, are simply intended to 

improve the quality of life of the people within the province. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think the legislation in front of us, when we 

ask why is this legislation necessary, fits, Mr. Speaker, into the 

categories of both improving the quality of life and addressing 

needs that have been expressed to government by members of 

the public. 

 

But when that happens, Mr. Speaker, of course it’s necessary to 

ensure that the response that government makes to the requests 

or needs of the public actually will meet the needs of the public. 

More importantly, Mr. Speaker, actually meets the expectations 

of the public. Sometimes those two words — needs and 

expectations — are actually different. So we have to read the 

legislation carefully. We have to consult with members of the 

public and with those affected by the legislation and, Mr. 

Speaker, ensure that the needs and expectations of the public 

are met by the specifics of the Bills that come before us. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, that’s the circumstances we find ourselves in 

on Bill No. 119. And I’ve got a number of things that I want to 

comment on with regards to that. The member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow indicated some of the things that are in the Act, and 



November 25, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3811 

I’m going to repeat a couple of those as I express some of my 

concerns. 

 

But I think, when we go back to what I said earlier about the 

needs of the people of Saskatchewan and their expectations, we 

are talking about a quality of life that we have in Saskatchewan 

that complements any anywhere in the world. And so our 

legislative response to needs and expectations are becoming 

more sophisticated than we’ve needed to have in the past 

because, of course, our quality of life competing with that of 

people who live anywhere in the world demand it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’re blessed in Saskatchewan with a quality of life that 

ensures that not only do we feel secure in our homes and within 

our communities, but we are healthy. We like to laugh. We like 

to socialize, Mr. Speaker. We like to share our personal 

environments with others. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have welcomed people from across the 

country, the continent, and the world into our province and into 

our communities. We have welcomed visitors. We’ve 

welcomed new residents, Mr. Speaker. And we’ve done that 

because we have always been, from the First Nations people 

who originally inhabited this land through the first waves of 

immigration into our province, Mr. Speaker, we have always 

been a people that like to socialize, like to gather, like to share 

information and, Mr. Speaker, like to laugh and have fun. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we who live in a large geographical area with a 

small population have had to, for commercial purposes and 

other reasons, build a system of transportation in this province 

to ensure that we are able to move from community to 

community reasonably and quickly, Mr. Speaker. Everyone in 

this province knows that, whether it was originally the horse 

trails that covered the province or the cart trails or later the 

railroads, and then finally, Mr. Speaker, this massive highway 

system that we have in Saskatchewan was developed to move 

not only goods across the province, Mr. Speaker, not only 

goods across the province but also people. And so we have 

recognized for a long period of time that the public in 

Saskatchewan likes to travel, likes move around to various 

events. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in every one of our communities, we have 

tickets being sold to events that draw large crowds. And I do 

not believe that the minister intends this legislation to apply to 

the Saskatchewan Junior Hockey League games where sellouts 

occur regularly, Mr. Speaker, in most of our cities. I don’t think 

the minister intends this to apply for tickets to our community 

theatres where sellouts, Mr. Speaker, occur in our smaller 

communities and cities on a regular basis. 

 

And I don’t think, Mr. Speaker, this legislation is intended to 

apply to many of the community suppers and music festivals 

that occur in our communities and are also sellouts, Mr. 

Speaker, as people compete with each other locally and with 

surrounding communities for tickets for these events. I know 

that in the spring of every year when the rodeos begin and the 

Kinsmen start selling tickets to rodeos, Mr. Speaker, in The 

Battlefords for example, that people want good seats. And they 

compete against each other for those seats at the spring rodeo in 

our community, Mr. Speaker. And I don’t believe that this 

legislation is intended to meet the needs or expectations of 

those people. 

 

[16:15] 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we have a province and a group of citizens 

that travel extensively throughout the province. We have 

venues, particularly in Saskatoon and Regina, Mr. Speaker, 

very good venues that attract large crowds. My first experience 

with that, Mr. Speaker, was in, I think it was, 2006 when the 

Rolling Stones came to Saskatchewan following the hard work 

done by former premier Lorne Calvert, Mr. Speaker, premier of 

the province of Saskatchewan, to build up an economy and 

beginning, for the first time in many years, this sense of 

optimism that continues through the province of Saskatchewan 

today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my first experience with a very large venue 

concert was at Mosaic Stadium here in the city of Regina, the 

capital of our wonderful province, to see the Rolling Stones, 

Mr. Speaker. Tremendous concert. The people of Saskatchewan 

travelled from all over the province. People from Manitoba 

came. They sat in front of me at the event, Mr. Speaker. These 

crazy people from Manitoba sat there at a Rolling Stones 

concert saying, go Bombers, go Bombers. It was absolutely 

crazy, Mr. Speaker. But they had a right to be there. They had a 

right to be there and they enjoyed the concert in a venue in 

Saskatchewan, and no doubt they purchased those tickets from 

a seller that could be influenced by this legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have been blessed over the years with quite a 

number of events at credit union place in Saskatoon, at the 

teachers’ credit union place in Saskatoon as well, and, Mr. 

Speaker, the Brandt Centre here in Regina, the Centre of the 

Arts here in Regina — venues that attract world-class events. 

People want to go — whether it’s Elton John or whether it’s 

AC/DC or whether it’s world-class comics or ballets. The Royal 

Winnipeg Ballet was recently in Saskatoon, the Moscow Ballet 

recently here in Regina. Mr. Speaker, tremendous events. 

People drove all over this province, Mr. Speaker, in order to get 

here. 

 

They want to be certain that when they’re searching for a ticket, 

whether they live across the street from Mosaic Stadium or 

whether they live four hours away in North Battleford, 

Saskatchewan, that they have fair access to the tickets that are 

available to attend that event because that’s who we are, Mr. 

Speaker. We will travel four hours, five hours, six hours. We’ll 

spend all night driving, Mr. Speaker, to attend an event because 

we are social people. 

 

Some members will remember when there was a talk of a 

National Hockey League franchise in Saskatchewan. Bill 

Hunter was trying to bring the NHL to Saskatoon, and he went 

to the people of Saskatoon and northwest Saskatchewan and 

even south of Saskatoon as far as Regina. And he said we need 

to prove to the NHL that we can support a team. And they sold 

season tickets, Mr. Speaker, on spec. Interestingly enough those 

tickets, Mr. Speaker, were sold throughout the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And it really was interesting, Mr. Speaker. It really was 

interesting to see that the majority of those tickets were sold in 

groups of three. And why was that, Mr. Speaker? There was 



3812 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2009 

some speculation as to why these tickets were sold in groups of 

three, National Hockey League seasons tickets in Saskatoon, 

because that’s how many people drive in a half-ton truck, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s how many people can sit across the bench in a 

half-ton truck. 

 

This is Saskatchewan. We care about our hockey. We care 

about our events, and we will drive, Mr. Speaker, together in 

order to go to events. And the sale of those tickets proved that 

the beginning of Saskatchewan’s ability to support events were 

tremendous. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have a number of things that I would like to talk 

about on this legislation, but I do know that there are other 

members who wish to speak before the legislature adjourns for 

today. So, Mr. Speaker, with that I thank you for the 

opportunity to address some of these matters in this Bill, and I 

look forward to the comments made by other members. I think 

the member from Regina Lakeview is interested as well. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

rise to speak about Bill 119, An Act respecting the Sale of 

Tickets. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m hoping by the time we’re 

through looking at this particular Bill that we won’t have a Bill 

of unintended consequences but that we will actually have a 

Bill that deals with a particular problem. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, my understanding of the issue which arose, 

which raised the public’s ire and also the consternation of legal 

officials and people within the consumer protection branch of 

the Ministry of Justice, did relate to section 4 of this proposed 

legislation, which is that relationship between a primary seller 

and a secondary seller. 

 

And I think the Minister of Justice set out this particular 

problem where a certain block of tickets would be set aside by 

the primary seller into another corporation or another entity 

because they knew that they would be able to market those once 

the initial batch of tickets had been sold. So it appears that that 

is the triggering problem. 

 

Now often what happens when you try to attack a particular 

problem, you have quite a bit of difficulty in actually drafting 

the legislation so that it deals only with that problem. And my 

comments today will relate to what are the possible unintended 

consequences of this legislation. And I raise them in this 

context because there may be some possibility of fixing 

unintended consequences as we proceed with the legislation. 

 

So basically when you look at the Act, it has a number of 

definitions that are laid out in section 2. Now that’s, you know, 

basically pretty straightforward, except section 3 effectively 

gives the ability by regulation to totally remove people or 

classes of people or certain circumstances from the legislation. 

And it’s a pretty broad clause. Now normally when you see a 

clause like that in a piece of legislation, that means that they 

know that there may be places where they’re going to have 

problems. So when something pops up, well then you’ll end up 

with another place where a prescribed person or a prescribed 

group of people or a prescribed circumstance is excluded from 

the effect of the legislation. Well that’s not very comforting to 

people who are trying to figure out what the legislation is all 

about. 

 

So you have a definition of the consumer, and that means an 

individual who’s going to buy the ticket. You have a definition 

of minister. Well that’s relatively obvious. They have a 

definition of the word prescribed to say, “prescribed in the 

regulations.” Well I think they’ve actually put that definition in 

here because it’s used so often that they want people to 

understand that there’s going to be regulations that are going to 

have to try to define this. 

 

Now this may actually be a Bill where we will not want to 

finally approve it until we actually see what the nature of the 

regulations are. Now that’s often the case, but in this particular 

Bill, it may be actually a prerequisite to having the matter dealt 

with because there’s so much that is not set out. 

 

Now obviously a couple of key definitions here are primary 

seller — and it says, obviously, “a person,” so that could be a 

corporation as well — and then the secondary seller. So those 

definitions are there. Then it goes on to define a ticket. And 

basically that’s also becomes a challenge because of the world 

we’re in now where your ticket can be on your BlackBerry or 

iPhone or whatever as a digital record of some kind. And I think 

it does cover that in the definition here. But if it’s not covered 

in these definitions, well you just go to section 3, and you can 

exclude anything you inadvertently included. 

 

Now I’m not sure. I suspect there’s probably a clause in here 

which allows you to add anything as well, which makes it very 

interesting. So you both can include things and then you can 

add things. 

 

And in fact it is there under the regulatory power, the first 

power, which is section 13(a). It says that cabinet can make 

regulations “defining, enlarging or restricting the meaning of 

any word or expression used in this Act but not defined in this 

Act.” And so we end up with a situation where it may not be 

entirely clear who will be caught by this legislation. 

 

Now my friend from The Battlefords, the member from The 

Battlefords and also the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow 

ended up talking about certain circumstances where this 

legislation may apply. Well obviously if something doesn’t 

work, there’s enough wiggle room in this one that you can 

change everything to adjust to that. Now normally that’s not a 

good basis for proceeding with a Bill because you end up not 

having the certainty that you require if you’re going to try to 

enforce it. 

 

Now to add on top of that, there are certain other issues that are 

being dealt with here where it’s not totally clear what the 

intention is. So I think that sections 4 and 5, about primary 

sellers and secondary sellers, that ends up dealing with the 

issues that I think triggered the whole review and ultimately this 

legislation. 

 

But then you get into advertising of tickets in section 6, and this 

one I think will end up causing problems because of trying to 

define who is the primary seller, secondary seller. Perhaps they 



November 25, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3813 

think that, within the definitions, they’ve fully defined that but I 

think there are quite a few problems in that one. 

 

Then you go into section 7 and this is an admirable attempt to 

provide some regulation around the software applications that 

may or may not be affected in the electronic purchasing of 

tickets. And this perhaps adds a layer of protection to people 

who operate those kinds of systems. But I think when you look 

at the whole of section 7, the key word is equitable — equitable 

ticket buying process. What is attempted here is to try to create 

a level playing field, a fairness in how tickets are purchased. It’s 

an admirable goal, but does the Bill actually do that? And I 

think that’s the question that is going to have to be asked as we 

move forward looking at the Bill itself. 

 

[16:30] 

 

Now I think that all of us are in support of equitable ticket 

buying, but if in fact it makes it such that you can’t buy certain 

kinds of tickets that have been readily available or if it has 

unintended consequences somewhere else, we should know 

about that before the legislation is passed in the legislature. 

 

The next section is curious because it separates out owners of 

public venues. And it says these venues owned or operated by 

the province. So I assume that’s the, you know, the Casino 

Regina, Casino Moose Jaw. Or owned by . . . and maybe the 

new Dome Stadium, if that ends up being owned by the 

province or a municipality. That all of these venues will have to 

“. . . provide a report to the minister in accordance with the 

regulations.” 

 

Now it doesn’t say what the report’s about. Now we can assume 

it might have something to do with ticket sales, but it doesn’t 

say that. So what is this report going to be about? Another 

example of why we need to see what the regulations are before 

we actually pass the Bill because we need to understand what it 

is that’s to be reported. 

 

Now it’s curious that there’s no obligation on owners of private 

venues to provide reports, so we need to know what’s the 

difference there. It also doesn’t say anywhere here whether a 

school that has a public auditorium that they rent out, is that a 

public venue that needs to report on there because it’s not 

owned by a province or a municipality? That’s not clear. What 

about universities? 

 

Another particular issue is there may be some venues that are 

public-private venues. So does this, are they caught by section 

8? We can’t tell from this legislation at all. 

 

Now the next area goes into methods of enforcement of the 

provisions of the Act. And there are two ways you can enforce 

this. One is as a, under section 11, which is effectively a penalty 

or criminal-like process, but section 9 and 10 gives some ability 

to start a civil action to remedy the problems that have arisen.  

 

Now it’s curious because we don’t have many tickets in our 

province that cost $100 or more, but if you as a consumer suffer 

a loss, you’re not allowed to take it to small claims court. You 

have to go to the Court of Queen’s Bench. I’m not sure what the 

rationale for that is. We’ve increased the limits for your claims 

in small claims court, and so it would appear that there’s some 

rationale for this, but it’s not obvious here. And that the types of 

remedies that are available as set out in section 10 are not the 

types of remedies that would ordinarily be available in the small 

claims court. They need to be dealt with in the Court of Queen’s 

Bench, which as we know is a court of equity. 

 

And so I understand that, but if you think about the cost and the 

methods of getting into the Court of Queen’s Bench, and also 

you think about from the court’s perspective, I’m not sure how 

often they would want to be having cases come forward to them 

involving a $100 ticket or a $50 ticket or even somebody who 

bought 10 tickets, so it’s $500 or $1,000. I’m not sure that the 

remedy in sections in 9 and 10 will be of any practical effect at 

all for people of Saskatchewan. So if it doesn’t have any 

practical effect, why is it here? 

 

I think this needs to be looked at, and maybe there are some 

other remedies. Now there may be a way whereby the Ministry 

of Justice would be responsible for the costs and would step in 

on behalf of a consumer and actually take the kinds of cases 

that are involved here because then it would be a shared cost of 

all of the people of Saskatchewan. But the way those sections 

are set up now that’s, I would say, an insurmountable hurdle on 

the cost side to make a claim for a $50 ticket or a $100 ticket. 

 

Then when you go into the next area, there are penalties. And 

penalty, I think amounts there are reasonable within the 

traditional levels of penalty. And so that is a possibility, but to 

go and get a remedy under section 11, you would need the 

co-operation or the authorization of a prosecutor to proceed 

with the case. And for a $50 ticket or $100 ticket, do you want 

to use that whole system that is there that’s dealing with other 

kinds of crimes? Well that’s another question that needs to be 

asked. 

 

So I think there are a whole number of issues as it relates to the 

enforcement of this legislation that haven’t been fully thought 

out or costed or looked at. And I think that it may be that we 

should have this returned to the Minister of Justice and the 

people in his consumer affairs area to look at. 

 

Now it’s also interesting that section 12 puts a limitation on the 

prosecution of two years. So in other words, you can’t 

prosecute a person for a contravention of this Act more than 

two years from the date on which the offence is alleged to have 

been committed. I think this probably needs better definition 

because this is the kind of case that goes into the commercial 

fraud area in our police departments. And we know from 

experience that they are extremely difficult cases to investigate. 

 

And so there may be situations where that $100 ticket doesn’t 

exactly move to the top of the pile of the kinds of cases that are 

of the greatest importance, and they end up being not fully 

investigated within two years of the date on which the offence 

is alleged to have been committed. So there maybe needs to be 

further work on that section to actually provide sufficient time 

for investigations. Or if you’re going to have a limitation, at 

least have a limitation then that allows for matters to be dealt 

with. 

 

Now it is possible that these kinds of problems that are listed 

here are better dealt with through some mediation process or 

through some other process. And it’s perfectly legitimate for the 



3814 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2009 

Ministry of Justice officials to look at that and see whether there 

isn’t some other much less expensive way to resolve disputes 

that may arise related to the offences in this legislation. 

 

And so what you have is a problem with some fairly large 

corporations which triggered all of these things, and then you 

end up with remedies that, you know, envision some fairly large 

expenses. But you also then suggest that the individual 

consumer gets caught into this very expensive process to try to 

resolve their particular problems. 

 

So here we have legislation, as I said earlier, that may have 

unintended consequences that is not as clearly defined as 

legislation we normally like to have in this legislature. And 

frankly I think it’s legislation that maybe should go back for a 

bit more work to provide the information that sets out how this 

is done. If that’s not the intention of the minister, then I suggest 

that we end up getting full copies of the proposed regulations by 

the time we get to committee on this particular legislation so we 

can have a better understanding of how it’s supposed to work. 

 

But I have quite a few questions about whether this is going to 

accomplish what is intended, and it may be trying to do too 

much in a particular piece of legislation. If there’s one specific 

problem with some fairly large sellers and resellers or primary 

sellers and secondary sellers, maybe we do something that’s 

specifically related to them and leave out all of the other people 

that might inadvertently be caught in this legislation. 

 

So as it stands so far, I think the concept is right. I think the 

actual execution of what’s supposed to be done isn’t there yet, 

and I would suggest that it go back for further work. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Just to the member, did I hear you say you 

adjourn, adjourn the motion? 

 

Mr. Nilson: — I adjourn the motion, yes. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview has 

moved adjournment of debate. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. 

 

Bill No. 120 — The Financial Administration 

Amendment Act, 2009 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased 

to rise and move second reading of Bill 120 to amend The 

Financial Administration Act, 1993. Mr. Speaker, this 

government is committed to developing a strong public 

infrastructure built for the 21st century to meet the growing 

needs of Saskatchewan residents. The Financial Administration 

Act incorporates The Fuel Tax Accountability Act which 

commits fuel tax revenue from fuel purchased for on-road 

purposes to maintenance and construction of our provincial 

highways. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Act requires that the public accounts include 

an annual report that shows the difference between eligible 

road-use tax revenues and eligible highway spending. The Act 

defines eligible highway spending to include all monies 

appropriated to the Ministry of Highways and Infrastructure 

except expenditures on airports, executive management, and 

amounts received from the federal government for highway 

infrastructure. However there is no legislative authority to 

deduct any other new or unforeseen expenditures undertaken 

through that ministry which are not associated with highway 

investment, such as water and sewer infrastructure for the 

Regina global transportation hub. 

 

This legislative amendment will enable these types of 

non-highway related expenditures to be excluded from the 

annual fuel tax accountability report. Mr. Speaker, this 

amendment will maintain a clean and clear link between road 

use, fuel tax revenue, and provincial highway spending in 

support of our government’s commitments to the maintenance 

and construction of provincial highways. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ll be pleased to answer questions concerning this 

proposed legislative amendment when discussing the Bill 

during committee review. Mr. Speaker, I move second reading 

of The Financial Administration Amendment Act, 2009. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has moved has moved second 

reading of debate on Bill 120, The Financial Administration 

Amendment Act, 2009. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, since I first had a look at 

this Bill, I actually was quite anxious to get up and make a 

number of comments on it. And it was actually interesting to 

hear the minister’s comments about The Fuel Tax 

Accountability Act which I believe is in 1997, and also the 

amendments that were made that dedicate fuel tax to highways. 

 

For someone who had this in their platform during the 2007 

election, this legislation was in place long before that. And 

that’s often why you will hear hooting and hollering when these 

guys talk about, when the government talks about how many 

commitments and platform promises they have kept because, 

Mr. Speaker, it would not hold up in the light of day. 

 

But anyway, Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to stand up and 

make comments on this Bill. Quite simple, very short, and 

really what it does is it expands the power of the ministry to 

spend dollars and allows for greater flexibility. And I think after 

the last couple weeks when we have been leading up to and 

when we have been dealing with the mid-term financial report, 

it’s appalling that this government would come forward with 

something that allows greater financial flexibility. 

 

[16:45] 

 

And when we look at the circumstances that the province sees 

itself in and the lack of accountability from this government . . . 

And I guess what’s even more frustrating — and I know for 



November 25, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3815 

people that will comment to me when they are listening at home 

and watching on the legislative channel — the attitude from this 

government that next year is wonderful. 

 

Now this is another sore spot, Mr. Speaker, even though two 

throne speeches ago the minister stood in this House and he said 

that this is no longer next year country. We’re here and now and 

we’re moving ahead. Well that’s great. But all of a sudden, now 

when every time the Minister of Finance gets up or the Premier, 

he talks about last year’s figures and next year’s opportunities. 

He’s kind of ignoring the here and now and where this province 

actually finds itself in. 

 

And I know also the member from Saskatoon Northwest stands 

up and entertains the House and does his little comments about 

turn your frown upside down. I don’t know whether it entertains 

at parties or not, but I’m afraid there needs to be a little bit more 

paying attention to the business of the House and the business 

of government. 

 

And clearly when we look at the mid-term financial and what 

that laid out for the people of Saskatchewan, for this minister to 

bring forward The Financial Administration Amendment Act 

and expect greater flexibility, that’s pretty difficult. And it’s 

going to be open to a great deal of scrutiny because the 

mid-term financial clearly showed that over the past two years 

— two short years — we have seen a 32 per cent increase in 

spending by this provincial government. 

 

And that’s often why we talk about the reckless spending, and, 

Mr. Speaker, clearly reckless because I don’t know any of us in 

this House in our day-to-day lives, I don’t know any of my 

constituents in their day-to-day lives who could increase their 

spending by 32 per cent over two years and expect to be able to 

maintain that. I mean sight unseen, here we are. We’re just 

going to continue increasing spending, and that’s the way we’re 

going to live. Well people don’t live like that. 

 

People plan. They make improvements when they are sure they 

can afford it and when the money is there to sustain you into the 

future. When I get my paycheque, I don’t just say, whoop-de-do 

I got a big load of money. I’m going to spend it all today and 

I’m not going to worry about the bills next month. None of us 

do. None of us live like that and expect to be able to sustain it. 

But yet we’ve seen this government, who has with this 

mid-term financial, released the most current data that’s 

available, and what we’ve seen is a 32 per cent increase in this 

reckless spending. 

 

And truly some questionable priorities, Mr. Speaker, I mean 

priorities, the things that I’m hearing in Moose Jaw, the things 

that my colleagues are hearing across the province about cost of 

living, about students being under stress because of tuitions, 

finding a place to live when they’re off to either improve their 

post-secondary education or access post-secondary or training 

— the cost of accessing those basic, basic needs in our lives are 

getting more and more expensive. Those are the things I’m 

hearing at home. 

 

I’m hearing about five buildings in the city of Moose Jaw that 

have been bought out and residents, all low-income residents, 

have been given notice that in six months from now their rent is 

going to double. So we have people who in many cases earn 

$800 a month or less . . . Mr. Speaker, I would like to see half 

of us go back to living on $800 a month. It would be tough if 

not impossible. It would. And for us in this position, to expect 

residents in our constituencies to live on that kind of income 

and then turn our backs and not provide adequate housing and 

adequate supports, is appalling. 

 

So here I have five apartment buildings in the city of Moose 

Jaw that have been bought recently to someone — I believe the 

company is from Regina — and right away notice was given to 

these low-income residents; their rent is going to double. So for 

people who live on $800 or less a month, their rent is going 

from 320, 370, that range, to over $600 a month. How the heck 

does somebody live on $800 a month when their rent is 600? 

You can’t do it. You can’t feed yourself. You can’t pay your 

light bill. You can’t pay a phone bill. You can’t afford to buy 

new clothes or buy winter boots. It’s ridiculous. It just doesn’t 

work. 

 

These are the things I’m hearing. So when we talk about 

questionable priorities of this government, those are the things 

we’re talking about. I’m not hearing anyone in Moose Jaw 

clamouring that Saskatchewan should have a pavilion at the 

Olympics in Vancouver for the tune of millions of dollars. 

They’re asking for reasonable rents. They’re asking for 

reasonable utility costs. 

 

But these guys are spending in Vancouver . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Now the minister is hollering across the floor 

about Olympic jackets. And if he, you know, has a problem 

looking into a budget for me, well I apologize for bothering him 

and asking him to look into something that was addressed in my 

office. The minister can hoot and holler all he likes. But you 

know something? If he feels that’s a reasonable . . . then come 

clean with the cost, come clean with the cost, and lay it on the 

table. How long you there for? How many ministers are going 

to be in Vancouver for nice photo ops? You . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. Order. Order. I 

just want to remind the member, the members, to direct all 

comments in debate through the Chair, and I’d ask other 

members to allow the member to make her comments without 

interference. I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 

I realize I’m to make comments to you and through the Chair 

on the Bill that I’m addressing. And, Mr. Speaker, these are the 

issue that I’m hearing at home. And these are the things that 

need to be addressed. And they’re the everyday issues of people 

across this province. 

 

So when we are seeing fiscal mismanagement, when we are 

seeing poor choices being made, Mr. Speaker, we have to 

question why this minister would bring forward a Bill that 

would offer and look for more financial flexibility for this 

government. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s not just . . . We can talk about the potash 

till the cows come home, but if this government had of watched 

its spending, made some good choices, and maybe spread the 



3816 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2009 

initiatives out over a period of time where they could actually 

afford them, it wouldn’t have mattered what potash came in at 

because there’s over $9 billion in revenues coming into this 

provincial coffers of this provincial government. 

 

And we’re also seeing a deficit. So here we are. We want more 

money. We want more flexibility. We have a deficit. We’re 

seeing the Crown corporations being expected to borrow more 

money while they give almost $1 billion to the General 

Revenue Fund. And we’re also seeing debt mounting in other 

places. So, Mr. Speaker, a lot of people say, why the worry 

about a deficit? Well basically what it is — and you can look up 

the definition — deficit spending is in excess of revenue of 

funds raised by borrowing rather than by taxation. And 

basically, Mr. Speaker, they’re spending way more than they’re 

taking in, and sooner or later the taxpayers in the province of 

Saskatchewan have to pay that back. 

 

There’s no way around it. Somebody pays. And there’s only 

one taxpayer — it’s us — in the province of Saskatchewan. The 

people of this province pay the bills. So when this government 

is running a deficit and requiring that the Crown corporations 

provide excess and special dividends to the General Revenue 

Fund to bail out this government and borrow money to do the 

business that they need to do, we’ll pay a billion dollar deficit. 

And they’re looking for more financial flexibility. 

 

And I guess the big thing is, do we see any steps being taken or 

any indication that this government is looking to correct some 

of their mismanagement or rein in this out-of-control spending? 

And do you know what, Mr. Speaker? There’s absolutely 

nothing. There’s no indication that there is any changes coming. 

There is no indication that they have any concerns. In fact I 

don’t think there’s any indication that the Premier has any 

concept of the slippery slope that this province now is sitting 

on. 

 

And not only are they contending that we still have a balanced 

budget — well we’ve taken a billion dollars from the Crowns, 

made them borrow for what they need to do — we have cleaned 

out a big chunk out of the rainy day fund, even though it’s been 

some of the sunniest days in Saskatchewan’s history with 

historic revenues into the provincial coffers. 

 

But still there doesn’t seem to be a realization that we are on a 

slippery slope with some real problems. And now we’re looking 

for more flexibility which really relates to less accountability to 

the taxpayers of this province and less accountability here in 

this Assembly. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we have already seen a number of areas 

where this government, after this disastrous mid-term financial 

. . . And the opposition asked for the session to be extended so 

that we could do scrutiny on the mid-term report which made 

substantial changes. Mr. Speaker, there’s something like 295, 

$293 million in cuts in 19 different government departments 

and agencies. But yet we’re still seeing $65 million in increased 

spending in eight different government departments or 

agencies. 

 

So when we asked, the Premier said oh, no, no. We offered you 

more time. You can ask all the questions you like. In fact, Mr. 

Speaker, in question period the Premier stood yesterday and he 

said, and I quote: 

 

And last night those supplementary estimates were 

introduced for discussion and debate. Some of the 

changes that have occurred would be reflected in the 

mid-term report. 

 

And then he went on in his answer, and he said: 

 

Yesterday members opposite had a chance to ask detailed 

questions till midnight if they wanted on Advanced 

Education, Social Services, First Nations and Métis 

Relations, and Municipal Affairs. But what did members 

opposite do? They are so concerned about these budget 

issues that they called the clock. 

 

Well you know what? That’s not really being straight up with 

the people of this province because on both of the committees 

that I’ve sat in the last two nights, each of the chairpersons have 

sat there, quite clearly at the beginning of the committee, and 

they have said debate is restricted only to a certain vote. I can’t 

ask questions on anything as the Premier said in question period 

yesterday. And they want more financial flexibility when they 

can’t even be accountable for the money and the changes that 

they have made and are hiding behind the rules of this 

Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, any government that had the wherewithal to make 

these decisions should darn well have the wherewithal to stand 

here and be accountable for . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Not 

allowed? Oh I apologize, Mr. Speaker, if I strayed over the line. 

 

But anyway, Mr. Speaker, there is many, many questions on 

this piece of legislation. When this government is asking for 

more financial flexibility, there are huge questions. They have 

avoided financial questions so far on the mid-term report. And 

instead of standing up and being accountable to the people of 

this province and allowing this Assembly to work, they’re 

hiding behind the rules but asking for more. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I know many of my colleagues have 

questions on this piece of legislation, and there will be a 

number of my colleagues that will rise to join in this debate. 

And, Mr. Speaker, until this government . . . I mean, I could go 

on and on about Municipal Affairs, about the Municipal 

Financing Corporation. They’re adding debt to this province 

and not being accountable for it. 

 

They won’t stand up for the questions, and they won’t allow 

this Assembly to do an honest-to-goodness job of scrutinizing 

the mid-term report. And, Mr. Speaker, this piece of legislation 

will be under debate for a long time. 

 

The Speaker: — Being now the time of adjournment, this 

Assembly stands adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3787 

  Yates ............................................................................................................................................................................... 3787, 3788 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3788 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3788 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3788 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3788 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3788 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3789 

  Allchurch ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3789 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3789 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3802 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3802 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3789 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3789 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3789 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3790 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3790 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3790 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3790 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3790 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 International Day for the Elimination of Violence Against Women 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3791 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3791 

 Podium Affords Access for Wheelchair Occupants 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3791 

 Young Man Receives Youth Award for Philanthropy 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3791 

 Innovation Place Receives Award of Excellence 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3792 

 A Cautionary Tale 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3792 

 Twenty-Sixth Canadian Western Agribition 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3792 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Municipal Financing Corporation Budget 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3792 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3793 

 Financial Management of Crown Corporations 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3794 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3794 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3794 

 Financial Projections and Activities of Health Authorities 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3795 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3795 

 Harmonized Sales Tax 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3795 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3795 

 School Construction 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3796 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 3796 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Province-Wide Public Safety Radio Telecommunications Network 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3797 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3798 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3798 

 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3799 



 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 116 — The Traffic Safety (Drivers’ Licences and Hand-held Electronic Communications Equipment) 

 Amendment Act, 2009 
  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3798 

 Bill No. 99 — The Emergency 911 System Amendment Act, 2009 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3799 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3799 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 118 — The Milk Control Repeal Act 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3799 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3800 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3800 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3804 

 Bill No. 119 — The Ticket Sales Act 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3807 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3808 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3810 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3812 

 Bill No. 120 — The Financial Administration Amendment Act, 2009 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3814 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3814 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium Development 

Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

 Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

Government House Leader 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. James Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Capital Commission 




