




















































Hansard: April 02, 2009


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 44A  THURSDAY, APRIL 2, 2009, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2645 

 April 2, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to the rest of the Assembly, I‟d 

like to introduce three people that are seated in your gallery. 

 

The first one, if you could just give a wave, is Doug Kirby who 

is from Billings, Montana. He‟s the governor of the Optimist 

International district 13. This district 13 is quite a large district. 

The district includes Alberta, Montana, Saskatchewan, and 

northern Wyoming — a big area. 

 

Also seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, is Paul Rozet, the 

vice-president of the Billings Breakfast Club from Billings, 

Montana. As well as Brian Duck from the High Nooners 

Optimist Club here in Regina. 

 

Governor Kirby is here for the Optimist International Under 18 

2009 Curling Championship taking place here in Regina at the 

Callie Curling Club. There are 24 boys‟ and girls‟ rinks from 

across Canada, including two from here in Saskatchewan. There 

are other teams, five from the States as well as two from Japan. 

The final will be here in Regina on Sunday. I‟d like all 

members to welcome these three gentlemen to the gallery. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟d like to introduce to 

you, through you and to all members of the Assembly someone 

that‟s seated in the west gallery. His name is Michael Cassano; 

perhaps he could stand when I mention his name. 

 

He is the president of the Regina Multicultural Council. He 

does that on a volunteer basis, of course. He is also the general 

manager for SaskTel Max on Demand, and he wears many 

other hats within his cultural community of the Italian 

community here in Regina. 

 

So I‟d all member of the House to welcome him to the 

legislature today, and thank him for the volunteer efforts that he 

gives on behalf of the community of Regina. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I would ask leave for an extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has asked leave for an extended 

introduction. Is leave granted? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the Minister of 

Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you and to the members of the 

Assembly, I‟d like to introduce 12 of Saskatchewan‟s 250 

volunteer crop reporters. These crop reporters are being 

recognized today by the Ministry of Agriculture for their 

volunteer service to Saskatchewan‟s ag industry. 

 

For the past 25 to 30 years, these individuals have volunteered 

their personal time to collect information about crop 

development and moisture conditions in the RMs [rural 

municipality]. They have faithfully submitted this information 

to the ministry to meet the weekly crop reporting deadline. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the information provided by these crop reporters 

helps to provide a timely and accurate Saskatchewan crop 

report. We recognize the crop reporters here today for their 

commitment and dedication to Saskatchewan crop reporting 

service. I would ask the crop reporters and their spouses to 

stand as I introduce them. 

 

For their 25 years of service: Lyle and Leah Argue of the RM of 

Lacadena; George and Mildred Fast of the RM of Rosemount; 

Murray and Penny Janis of the RM of Glen Bain; Delwyn 

Jansen of the RM of LeRoy; Brett and Rana Meinert of the RM 

of Bone Creek; Edward and Sharon Olszewski from the RM of 

Hazel Dell — and I hope I pronounced that right, and I 

apologize if I haven‟t; John and Norma Slabik of the RM of 

Gull Lake; Keith and Eunice Stacey, the RM of Moose Range; 

Jim Hornford from the RM of Elfros. 

 

Three crop reporters who have served for 25 years, and their 

wives were not able to join us today. And they are: Lawrence 

Beckie of the RM of McCraney; Percy and Anilliese Schiele of 

the RM of Meadow Lake; and Rick Taylor of the RM of 

Meeting Lake. 

 

And now, for their 30 years of service, I would like to introduce 

the following crop reporters and their wives: Glen and Liz 

Mackenzie of the RM of Pinto Creek; Cecil and Mary Reimer 

of the RM of Barrier Valley; Lloyd and Ruth Wagner, the RM 

of Kelvington. 

 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, four crop reporters who have 

served 30 years and their wives were not able to join us today. 

And they are: Dave and Irene Ehman of the RM of Craik; Ed 

Shulver of the RM of Pleasantdale; Bruce and Marilyn Meeds 

of the RM of Meadow Lake; and Norman Langager from the 

RM of Loreburn. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join with me in 

welcoming and recognizing these crop reporters for their 

volunteer service to the province of Saskatchewan and to the 

agriculture industry. Thank you very much. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 



2646 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2009 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 

to also on behalf of the official opposition welcome the crop 

reporters to the Assembly this morning. I know that the crop 

reporters across the province have done primary research in our 

province for decades, and we know that that primary research 

that crop reporters conduct has led to a lot of information 

contained in the Ministry of Agriculture that helps the ministry 

determine what kinds of programs and services should be 

available for people involved in the agricultural sector. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m glad the minister mentioned the farm women 

in the gallery this morning because I suspect that, on many 

occasions, those farm women have been the primary researchers 

in the various municipalities across the province. So welcome 

to the Assembly, and I‟m pleased that the province of 

Saskatchewan is recognizing your contribution to public policy 

in our province. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As my 

colleague was reading through the list of names of guests in the 

gallery, I noticed the constituency of Cypress Hills was 

represented well. But I also noticed the name of Brett Meinert 

and his wife. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I just want to take this occasion to mention the 

fact that I first met Brett when I was a salesman. And I think, in 

the days previous, I‟ve also indicated that many of the people 

who come here, my first contact with them was when I was 

trying to sell them something. And I think that would be the 

explanation for my relationship with Brett. I always had a good 

product to sell, however, and I still do. 

 

But the other thing I want to acknowledge this morning is 

Brett‟s leadership role with South West Terminal. South West 

Terminal is an idea that has come to fruition. It‟s about 10 years 

old. It‟s located along the TransCanada Highway between 

Webb and Gull Lake. And that terminal went from just an idea 

at a kitchen table in some farmhouse to one of the most 

important and impressive companies operating in Saskatchewan 

today. It is ranked in the top 50. In fact, I believe that in the 

latest ranking for value, South West Terminal is now about 

number 47. 

 

That goes to show, Mr. Speaker, the quality of people and 

persistence that originates in Cypress Hills. And I‟m so pleased 

that this gentleman‟s here today on behalf of the Ag ministry, 

but his part played on behalf of a very important success story 

in southwest Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for First Nations and 

Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also recognize 

a number of my constituents in the gallery today. And not to go 

over the top, but I‟d like everyone to notice that I have five 

representatives from my constituency in the gallery, and 

obviously we are over-represented when it comes to 

volunteerism. And I have to tell you how proud we all are of 

you, and thank you for being here today. Welcome to your 

gallery. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu‟Appelle Valley. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Now I have 

been getting a little bit of ribbing here from my colleague next 

to me, that he said, if I was taller, they may see me. 

 

But anyway, I also wanted to join with the member opposite in 

welcoming the president from the Regina Multicultural 

Council. I had the opportunity to spend all day Sunday with him 

and had the opportunity to hear so many bright, young students 

present at the public speaking contest. So thank you very much 

for providing the venue for those students to stand up and shine. 

Congratulations and thank you very much and welcome to your 

home. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre.  

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I present a petition today on 

indexing minimum wage. And, Mr. Speaker, as we all know 

indexing minimum wage would ensure minimum wage earners 

would be able to maintain a standard of living as the cost of 

living increases. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to indexing Saskatchewan‟s 

minimum wage to ensure that the standard of living of 

minimum wage earners is maintained in the face of the 

cost of living increases. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the petitions are signed by residents from Pilot Butte, 

Prince Albert, Kamsack, Melville, and Major. I so present, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — My apologies, it should have been Saskatoon 

Fairview. Now Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 

petition today calling for wage equity for CBO 

[community-based organization] workers. And we know that so 

many of the workers in community-based organizations in 

Saskatchewan have traditionally been underpaid and many 

continue to earn poverty level wages. And so I‟d like to read the 

prayer. 

 



April 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2647 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the development and 

implementation of a multi-year funding plan to ensure that 

CBO workers achieve wage equity with employees who 

perform work of equal value in government departments. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And these petitioners come from Regina, Montmartre, Pilot 

Butte, Earl Grey. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition on 

behalf of rural residents of Saskatchewan who question why the 

Sask Party government is leaving them behind when it comes to 

providing safe and affordable water. Mr. Speaker, the prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to financially assist the town of Duck Lake 

residents for the good of their health and safety due to the 

exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency, and that this government fulfills its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good residents of 

Laird, Rosthern, Waldheim, and Duck Lake. I so present. Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m pleased today to 

rise to present a petition in support of the government policy on 

green vehicles. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners note that the 

Saskatchewan Party platform in 2007 contained a promise that a 

Saskatchewan Party government would ensure all new vehicles 

purchased by the provincial government would be hybrid or 

high fuel-efficiency vehicles. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners ask: 

 

. . . the Legislative Assembly to cause the government 

ministers named in this petition to follow their own 

platform and government policies and trade in their Jeep 

Libertys for vehicles that are on the SGI 2008 list of 

recommended fuel-efficient vehicles. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by residents of The 

Battlefords. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition in support of fairness for post-secondary 

students here in Saskatchewan through the necessary expansion 

of the graduate retention program. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately expand the graduate retention 

program to include master‟s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people who signed this petition are students 

from the University of Saskatchewan, as well as students from 

the University of Regina, as well as a number of health care 

professionals working here in the province who have graduate 

degrees. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I so rise today to present a 

petition to support a long-term care facility in La Ronge. The 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately invest in the planning and 

construction of new long-term care beds in La Ronge. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by the good people of La 

Ronge and area. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 

 

World Autism Awareness Day 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today is 

the second annual World Autism Awareness Day, and this day 

shines a bright light on autism as a growing global health crisis. 

The aim of this day is to raise global awareness about autism 

and to promote early diagnosis, intervention, and services for 

individuals and their families coping with this disorder. 

 

Autism affects individuals from all walks of life, as well as their 

families, friends, and caregivers. Autism can be defined by 

certain behaviours which come in combinations and in varying 

degrees of intensity. The symptoms often include difficulties 

with social interaction, communication and behaviour. 

International studies suggest that autism affects 6 out of every 

1,000 children. 

 

[10:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, by declaring today World Autism Awareness Day 

will not fix things overnight. Families will have to struggle with 

the demanding and difficult task of providing, finding, and 

buying care for their children with autism. Parents will still 

have to worry about caring for their child with autism. 



2648 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2009 

By proclaiming April 2 as World Autism Awareness Day is just 

one small step in a journey to see that all people with autism 

and their families have the care and support they need. However 

we still require enhanced knowledge of the condition and a 

greater understanding of the most effective treatments and 

interventions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and all members of this Assembly, let‟s make this 

an important day for those who work with autism. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Regina Multicultural Council Public Speaking Competition 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, on Sunday, March 29, I had the 

privilege of being asked to serve as one of the judges of the 

Regina Multicultural Council‟s 22nd Annual Public Speaking 

Competition. The other two judges were Mike O‟Donnell, 

Regina city councillor for ward 8 and Chief Troy Hagen of the 

Regina city police. 

 

This competition provides an excellent opportunity for students 

to develop confidence, creativity, and to express their ideas in 

relationship to multiculturalism. For example the question for 

category A was, if you could experience a new culture which 

one would you choose and why. A common response was the 

Italian culture because of pizza. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the competition had three categories and the 

winners were: category A, grade 4 and 5: first place, Salma 

Rashad; second place, Shravan Murthy; third, Layla Moumin. 

Category B, grade 5, 6, and 7: first place, Ala Mohamed Eisa; 

second, Barzany Ridha; and third, Nitasha Rubab Salim. And 

category C, grade 9, 10, 11, and 12: first place, Arnav 

Jatukaran; second, Amir Aboguddah; and third, Lisa Poon. Mr. 

Speaker, the competition was very difficult, given that there 

were 31 participants. 

 

A competition of this size and success requires many dedicated 

volunteers and I would like to mention a few of them: Michael 

Cassano, president of the Regina Multicultural Council; Anne 

Lindemann; Julene Summerfield; and Joseph Fleming. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I encourage everyone to experience the 

competition by viewing it on SaskTel Max on Demand and 

thank the participants and the organizers for promoting this 

important event. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Weyburn. 

 

Saskatchewan Hosts 2010 Sporting Events  

 

Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to rise today to 

share some news about yet another national event which will 

take place in Saskatchewan in 2010. We are already welcoming 

some very high profile sport events, beginning with the 2010 

World Junior Hockey Championships taking place in Regina 

and Saskatoon. There‟s also the Ford World Women‟s Curling 

Championship taking place in Swift Current in March 2010. 

 

And yesterday, Mr. Speaker, Hockey Canada announced that 

Regina will be the host of the 2010 Esso Cup, which is the 

national female championship at the midget triple A level with 

players aged 15 to 17. The championship will feature five 

teams: the Regina Rebels is the host team and four regional 

teams representing Pacific, West, Ontario, and Atlantic regions. 

Officials stated that the upgrades to the facility at Evraz Place 

was crucial to attracting the championship to Regina. The gold 

medal game will be televised on TSN [The Sports Network]. 

 

Congratulations to the Saskatchewan Hockey Association for 

their hard work in promoting the creation of this championship 

as a counterpart to the Telus Cup national midget triple A men‟s 

championship and for bringing this event to Regina. 

 

2010 is going to be a busy year, Mr. Speaker, and this latest 

announcement is one more indication that Saskatchewan has a 

well-earned reputation as a world-class event host, and that if 

you want to be at the centre of attention and action, this 

province is the place to be. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Poverty and Human Rights 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. People are 

talking and they‟re talking about how active citizens and 

effective states can change the world. And they‟re talking about 

the links between poverty and human rights. 

 

I had the opportunity to hear Mark Fried of Oxfam Canada 

launch their new book, From Poverty to Power. It was 

wonderful to see so many people out, especially young people 

who want to make a difference in the world where we are 

seeing an alarming increase in the income gap and affordable 

housing that is sorely lacking. Oxfam‟s latest research says an 

effective anti-poverty strategy includes voice, power, 

opportunity, and redistribution — very innovative, solid, 

research-based work, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And last week, more people gathered at the poverty and human 

rights learning forum, Making the Links — sponsored by 

Poverty Free Canada and CLASSIC [Community Legal 

Assistance Services for Saskatoon Inner City] of Saskatoon — 

tackling a wide range of topics from housing, welfare to prison 

reform. 

 

Court wins like Victoria (City) versus Adams and losses like 

the Quebec Gosselin case make us think about our basic human 

rights that we all enjoy. But there‟s so much more to be done, as 

the Elizabeth Fry Society spoke of the struggle women 

prisoners find themselves in. And they continue to be denied 

basic human rights, for example, they are more likely to go to 

jail and for longer sentences when charged with the same 

offence as men. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the time is right for making poverty history in 



April 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2649 

Saskatchewan. Let‟s not be forced by the courts into admitting 

that we can do better. Let‟s do the right thing now. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

St. Paul’s Hospital Fundraising Campaign 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Mr. Speaker, St Paul‟s Hospital in Saskatoon 

just wrapped up a fundraising campaign. The Embracing the 

Future campaign celebrates the 100th anniversary of this great 

hospital. The fundraiser began in March 2007. They had an 

ambitious goal of $8 million, and on Tuesday announced the 

campaign had exceeded its target. 

 

The campaign was proud to announce they brought in over $10 

million from over 5,000 generous donors. One of the most 

impressive donations came from the Dubé family who 

contributed $2 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the campaign focused on three priority areas: a 

urology centre of health, a nuclear medicine gamma camera 

which allows for early detection of prostate cancer, and a third 

MRI [magnetic resonance imaging] machine for the hospital. 

 

One entertaining event was a boxer bash chaired by Alain 

Gaucher, John Gormley, and Brett Wilson from CBC [Canadian 

Broadcasting Corporation] Dragon’s Den. Participants were 

encouraged to wear their boxer shorts, and even the infamous 

John Gormley showed up in a fancy pair. This event alone 

raised $1.6 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is amazing how the people of Saskatchewan 

came together for the hospital to make it one of the leading 

facilities in Canada. I would like to ask all members of the 

Assembly to recognize the efforts of the campaign team and to 

thank all donors for their contributions. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Canadian Cancer Society Daffodil Month  

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. April has come to be 

known by many as Daffodil Month, and more commonly, the 

National Cancer Control Month. Every April the Canadian 

Cancer Society organizes a door-to-door campaign that takes 

place across the country. Thousands of volunteers hit the streets 

during Daffodil Month, knocking on doors to collect funds to 

support the work of the Canadian Cancer Society. 

 

Daffodil Month has been a Canadian Cancer Society tradition 

since 1948. This tradition began in Toronto when a group of 

Canadian Cancer Society volunteers organized a fundraising tea 

and decided to decorate the tables with daffodils. These 

gatherings came to be known as daffodil teas. Daffodil teas and 

door-knocking campaigns were supported by local stores and 

restaurants. When some people tried to pay for the flowers, the 

Canadian Cancer Society quickly realized the sale of daffodils 

would generate additional funds. 

 

Since then the daffodil has become the Canadian Cancer 

Society‟s symbol of hope in the fight against cancer. The bright, 

cheerful flowers create an atmosphere that seems to radiate 

hope and faith that cancer can be beaten. Thanks to the 

generosity of donors, the work of volunteers and staff, the 

Canadian Cancer Society is leading the way in cancer control to 

actively prevent, cure, or manage cancer. 

 

They do this through funding research, cancer research, raising 

awareness, and providing reliable information that empowers 

citizens and allows them to take control of their health. They 

also believe that no one needs to face this disease alone, as the 

member from Yorkton so eloquently pointed out. And they 

offer individual or group support programs. 

 

This month is about more than raising funds. It‟s also about 

acknowledging the work of the Canadian Cancer Society — the 

work they do to eradicate cancer and enhance the quality of life 

of people living with cancer. Mr. Speaker, I encourage all 

members to support and congratulate these volunteers and the 

Canadian Cancer Society and the work they do for our 

community. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member Moose Jaw North. 

 

New Branding Initiative for Moose Jaw  

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The city of Moose 

Jaw unveiled its branding logo yesterday during a luncheon at 

Temple Gardens Mineral Spa. Community leaders and citizens 

waited the unveiling of what will portray the community‟s 

uniqueness in this new branding initiative. 

 

The new brand was surprisingly unexpected when you consider 

all the amenities of what, may I say, is this remarkable 

community. The name Moose Jaw itself offers distinct 

connotations besides the friendly city, the band capital, home of 

the Canadian Snowbirds, the tunnels, the spa, the murals, the 

home of Saskatchewan‟s technical institute now known as 

SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 

Technology], even the historic downtown. The challenge of a 

branding label is somewhat overwhelming. 

 

After much research and consultation with citizens and 

businesses, the organization came up to the conclusion that 

there was so much to identify Moose Jaw, with the activity 

involvement of the city, it was surprisingly unexpected. 

 

That, in its simplest terms, Mr. Speaker, describes Moose Jaw 

— Surprisingly Unexpected. And it identifies the community 

spirit of what might be expected in Moose Jaw. The logo of an 

exclamation mark made up of moose antlers further symbolizes 

Moose Jaw — Surprisingly Unexpected. Whether you‟re 

fortunate enough to live in Moose Jaw or would like to or are 

looking for a place to visit with lots of things to do during your 

stay, you‟ll probably find something that is surprisingly 

unexpected. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 



2650 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2009 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Cancellation of Keewatin Country 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Last 

week we learned that a vital lifeline of information, news, and 

commentary for the people of northern Saskatchewan will be 

disappearing. Keewatin Country, CBC Saskatchewan‟s only 

Aboriginal program which is celebrating its 30th anniversary 

this month, will be cancelled. 

 

The member from Cumberland and I have written the federal 

CBC minister, James Moore, and I quote from that letter: 

 

It is with a profound sense of urgency and despair that we 

forward this correspondence urging you to reconsider 

your decision to discontinue CBC‟s Keewatin Country 

program. 

 

The quality of programs, the unique language service, the 

topnotch talented hosts and the comprehensive programs 

all provided a vital link to an underserved region of 

Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Northern Affairs: will she 

contact her federal cousin demanding that he change his mind 

on this ill-advised decision to kill off Keewatin Country? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for First 

Nations and Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I know that many people in 

this House do listen to CBC radio in the morning, and they have 

heard the members from the North speak on this important issue 

on CBC radio. But I also know that there‟s another radio station 

in the North — Missinipi Broadcasting — that is heard well 

across our province. We have an opportunity to speak to them 

very often as well. So I believe that there is a . . . I‟m really 

pleased that the North does have a voice, and that we have a 

chance in southern Saskatchewan to hear from the North as 

well. So I appreciate the comments from the member opposite 

and I think that he should write his letter to the government in 

Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Funding for Fond-du-Lac Arena 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m sure the Minister of 

Northern Affairs is also aware that the roof at the Fond-du-Lac 

arena has collapsed. The remaining structure is now unstable 

and creating a severe safety hazard for the residents of this First 

Nations community. Not only that, Mr. Speaker, but if the 

remainder of the building collapses, it could also take out a 

power substation, some power lines, and a water and sewer 

pump. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of First Nations 

and Métis Relations: will she help this isolated First Nations 

community, located in the heart of the northern Saskatchewan‟s 

uranium industry, to finance a solution to address this serious 

public safety issue, and rebuild their much-needed arena? Mr. 

Speaker, will the minister commit to that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Well I welcome the member‟s question. I‟d also welcome the 

opportunity to provide a few facts that will help explain the 

situation. 

 

It is in fact a federal responsibility, so perhaps this question 

should be addressed to the federal Government of Canada, but I 

would also like to take this opportunity to point out that 

northern communities have received $6 million in Building 

Canada fund money under the first intake of applications. A 

second round of applications is under way right now and all 

northern communities are warmly welcome to put in 

applications. Advisers at Municipal Affairs are on call for 

assistance, if requested. They‟d be delighted to help. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m sure the chief will be very 

pleased with that response. 

 

As we know, the clock is ticking on this public safety issue for 

the citizens of Fond-du-Lac. Mr. Speaker, Fond-du-Lac‟s 

population is very young and yet the crime rate is very low, 

thanks in part to this arena which helps keep many people 

occupied, Mr. Speaker. As Chief Albert Mercredi said, and I 

quote: 

 

You have provincial land all over the First Nations, with 

roads, power lines and airports, so it just doesn‟t make 

sense why First Nations are left behind when it comes to 

public safety. This is a huge blow to this First Nations 

community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again my question is to the Minister of First 

Nations Relations: what kind of help will she offer the 

Fond-du-Lac First Nations, and what kind of financial support 

can she provide, given the billions of dollars that they are 

currently sitting on, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Another 

welcome opportunity to discuss this particular issue of great 

importance to the North. Actual grant payments to northern 



April 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2651 

communities provided by the province of Saskatchewan will 

increase dramatically from $8.45 million in 2006 to $10.02 

million in 2008 — a full 20 per cent increase, Mr. Speaker. 

We‟re certainly doing our job, and I warmly welcome the 

member‟s interest in this particular issue. Thank you very 

much. 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Forestry Industry 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, more than 1,500 forestry 

workers in several different communities have lost their jobs in 

recent years. Those job losses include: Prince Albert, more than 

700 jobs; Wapawekka, 55 jobs; Hudson Bay, 400 jobs; Big 

River, 260 jobs; Carrot River, about 116 jobs; Meadow Lake, 

about 190 jobs. And, Mr. Speaker, that does not include all the 

jobs lost in northern Saskatchewan in the forestry sector. To the 

minister: what is the Sask Party‟s plan to put those 1,500 

workers and their families back to work? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, any time that people lose jobs 

in Saskatchewan, we view it as a very serious situation. We are 

talking to the forestry companies about the FMA [forestry 

management agreement] changes that we are making. They 

welcome those changes, as the member knows full well. We are 

looking at the different opportunities in terms of value-added — 

cogen, value-added products through the forestry centre. Those 

are the kinds of initiatives that we‟re working with the industry 

on. 

 

And the member would also know, though, that when you see 

housing starts in the US [United States] market, which is 

primarily where all of these supplies, lumber supplies go is into 

that market, when you see that market essentially evaporate 

from 3 million housing starts to less than 500,000 housing 

starts, it makes it very challenging for the industry. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, this minister told the media 

that the Kirsch report would be made public. When asked if the 

media could see the report, the minister said, “I don‟t see why 

not.” To the minister: why did he refuse to table this document 

that he promised to the media and would make public? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member 

opposite would know full well what I said to the media all right. 

What we said was, is the document that was produced by that 

member was incorporated into the most public document that 

there was with respect to the Saskatchewan Party, our election 

document. It‟s fully incorporated into that, discussion was 

incorporated in it. The people of Saskatchewan had an 

opportunity to look at that document, and they chose in a 

resounding fashion to say yes to it and no to you people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, there are only two reasons why 

the minister would not table this document — it doesn‟t exist or 

he wants to hide something. To the minister: which is it? Does 

the report not exist or is he trying to hide information? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, I will be happy to send a copy 

of the platform over to you. We‟ll be happy to do that. We‟ll 

make sure that before the . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I ask members to allow the 

minister the same opportunity to respond to the question. The 

Minister of Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟ll be happy to 

send a copy over, perhaps for every one of the members 

opposite if they like. I‟ll be happy to do that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, unfortunately, as I said, the industry is going 

through a downturn. But one thing we do know in 

Saskatchewan with respect to the industry, that in addition to 

the losses of jobs we would have also, through the taxpayers of 

this province, we‟d have seen $100 million evaporate before 

our eyes had we followed the direction of the previous 

government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Feasibility Study and Consultation 

Regarding Nuclear Development 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this has 

been the week of rolling blackouts. Mr. Speaker, we‟ve 

identified documents that have been provided to the public of 

Saskatchewan with sentences blacked out. We‟ve provided 

documents that this government has released to the public with 

paragraphs blacked out. Well today, Mr. Speaker, I have a 

document again I‟ve received for the public through a freedom 

of information request that talks about the Bruce Power 

feasibility study. Not only, Mr. Speaker, are sentences blacked 

out, not only are paragraphs blacked out, Mr. Speaker; in this 

document, pages are blacked out, Mr. Speaker. 

 

My question then to the Minister of Enterprise is: will he do 

today what he has done for the last two days: come clean, 

provide to the public a full, unedited copy of the Bruce Power 



2652 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2009 

feasibility study background note from CIC [Crown 

Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan]? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

we operate under freedom of information legislation that was 

introduced by that previous government. Under that process, the 

minister‟s office does not get to decide what information is or is 

not released. That is done by information officers within the 

ministries and Crowns, as that former premier would know 

better than anyone else in the province. 

 

There are certain reasons that information can be withheld, Mr. 

Speaker — if it compromises commercial interests, which is the 

case with that particular document; if it compromises cabinet 

confidentiality or an individual‟s personal privacy. It‟s often a 

judgment call and in this case I think our officials were 

overzealous in protecting information, especially since we want 

to have a very open and public debate on the uranium industry, 

which has been my stated position both publicly and privately 

since the outset. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the panel is now essentially finished its work and 

therefore we are releasing these documents, Mr. Speaker: the 

RFP [request for proposal] to consultants, the consultant‟s 

contract, in fact . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The minister‟s time has elapsed. I recognize 

the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My questions today 

have to do about the Bruce Power feasibility study. We‟ll come 

to the UDP [Uranium Development Partnership] in a few 

moments but right now we‟re talking about the Bruce Power 

feasibility study, of which many paragraphs and pages have 

been blacked out. But interestingly enough, Mr. Speaker, some 

sentences that have been released have some points of interest. 

It is indicated by this document that the Bruce Power feasibility 

study began by public announcement on June 17. But 

interestingly enough, Mr. Speaker, this document indicates that 

the government was aware of the findings of that study by 

September 29 — September 29. Mr. Speaker, that‟s a period of 

about 15 weeks. 

 

Does the minister believe a period of 15 weeks was an adequate 

time to do a full, comprehensive feasibility study about the 

future of a nuclear reactor or reactors in Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, as I was saying, today I 

have tabled to this Hon. Assembly, the RFP, the request for 

proposals to consultants; the consultant‟s contract, Mr. Speaker, 

which was not even requested; the work plan and timeline for 

the UDP; and most importantly, tomorrow I will announce the 

most open, thorough public consultation process on this 

industry ever. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on that specific question, the answer is that that 

was Bruce Power‟s study. I don‟t know if that‟s enough time or 

not. It has nothing to do with this government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — So, Mr. Speaker, we are predicting then and 

planning the future of the electrical supply of Saskatchewan — 

never mind what it might cost the electrical consumer in this 

province — on a feasibility study to which the minister now 

volunteers in the House that he‟s not sure if it‟s any good or 

not, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a very peculiar situation. 

 

From this information, most of which has been blacked out, we 

also learn that while the government was aware of the findings 

of the Bruce Power feasibility in September — September 29 to 

be exact — it wasn‟t until November 27 that the public of 

Saskatchewan were informed of this knowledge. Why the 

two-month delay from when the Sask Party government knew 

of these findings to when the people of Saskatchewan were 

provided the information? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, as I have stated repeatedly 

in this House and in public forums and privately, this 

government was not responsible for the Bruce Power . . . 

whatever it was. Whatever it was. But, Mr. Speaker, our 

government is about to embark on the most open and broad 

public consultation process on the uranium industry ever 

undertaken in this process. 

 

We will release the entire UDP report tomorrow. There will be 

public meetings throughout this province, and individuals who 

can‟t attend the meetings will have numerous other 

opportunities to make their voices heard. And we are going to 

have an open and public debate about one of the most important 

industries in our province — something that never happened 

under that government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Even the NDP [New Democratic Party] doesn‟t want to have 

that debate. Their minds are made up. Sadly, Mr. Speaker, 

they‟re made up on both sides of the issue. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the minister says he has nothing 

to do about the Bruce Power feasibility. The day it was 

announced, he and the Minister of CIC, I believe, were at the 

press conference to announce it. When the results were finally 

made public in November, who was there? A host of Sask Party 

ministers and members at the Bessborough hotel. And now they 

say they have nothing to do about it. 

 



April 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2653 

Well, Mr. Speaker, in this information — again the few parts 

that are not blacked out — we learned that Bruce Power has 

reported to this government that the feasibility, the feasibility of 

a reactor or reactors in this province is dependent on a growth 

in electrical consumption. But get this, and I quote, Mr. 

Speaker: “. . . contingent upon Saskatchewan being committed 

[committed] to make the required upgrades to the provincial 

electrical system.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question is to the minister. Has the Sask Party 

government given a commitment that — to Bruce Power or 

anyone — that the necessary infrastructure will be put in place 

and paid for by the people of Saskatchewan? Has that 

commitment been made? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — No. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there‟s an editorial in today‟s StarPhoenix. The 

headline reads, “Anti-nukes dragging NDP back to [the] past.” 

Here are some quotes from that editorial, Mr. Speaker. The 

editorial says: 

 

After three decades of grappling with the issue of uranium 

development and nuclear power, the inability of many 

New Democrats to get beyond fearmongering and 

pandering to ignorance continues to threaten the progress 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

The attempt this week in the legislature by departing NDP 

Leader Lorne Calvert to suggest untoward government 

meddling . . . only underlines the silliness that pervades 

the party‟s ranks on matters nuclear. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will be announcing a process for that intelligent 

public debate tomorrow. I invite the NDP to stop living in the 

past and join us in building a uranium industry that creates jobs, 

builds our economy, and moves our province forward. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m pleased to hear that the 

minister reads The StarPhoenix. Perhaps he should read a little 

more of what‟s going on in his own government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, tomorrow the minister will release, as he‟s 

indicated today, the report of the UDP. He will also, we 

anticipate, announce the consultation process that is going to be 

offered to the people of Saskatchewan. He has already indicated 

to the public that this consultation process, which is to begin we 

assume very quickly, is to be concluded — get this, Mr. 

Speaker — to be concluded before the beginning of summer. 

Concluded this spring. 

 

How can this minister or anyone over there believe a period of a 

few weeks is an opportunity sufficient to allow the people of 

Saskatchewan to give a real, considered presentation to this 

government? How do they believe that in three or four or six 

weeks, people who are involved in seeding in this province 

during that period of time, Mr. Speaker, how will they have an 

adequate opportunity to be consulted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, isn‟t it interesting listening to the NDP opposite as 

they talk about the timing and the consultations. Mr. Speaker, I 

couldn‟t . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I‟ll just bring to members‟ attention, the more 

often the Speaker stands up, the quicker question period is over. 

So allow the Deputy Premier to respond. 

 

[10:45] 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

the NDP for years have done a cover-up. We know, we know 

about SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 

Company]. We know about the Murdoch Carriere event. We 

know about the NDP caucus fraud. We know all about those 

things, Mr. Speaker. But you know, the . . . I guess I‟ll just have 

to talk louder, Mr. Speaker, because they don‟t want to listen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, from their very own document . . . You know, the 

Leader of the Opposition challenged the minister to read The 

StarPhoenix articles. Well I challenge that member to read from 

his own Energy and Climate Change Plan 2007. Mr. Speaker, 

on page no. 16, the following quote: 

 

Ongoing assessments of the potential for a nuclear reactor 

to supply Saskatchewan‟s domestic requirements or for 

export are regularly carried out by SaskPower. 

 

None of that information was released by the NDP former 

government, Mr. Speaker. It took the Saskatchewan Party 

government to release that information to the public of the 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, our son plays in a rock band. 

When they don‟t know the music, they turn up the volume. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, my question, Mr. Speaker, is to 

the Minister Responsible for Enterprise Saskatchewan, whom 

we assume will be responsible for the consultation process 

which we assume he is going to announce tomorrow. My 

question, Mr. Speaker, is: will the minister extend this 

consultation period at least until the end of the year? Will he 



2654 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2009 

extend this consultation period to December 2009? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

the minister has disclosed what he will do tomorrow. He will 

release the report in its entirety. He will put in place a 

consultation program involving all of Saskatchewan. He will 

indicate what will be done tomorrow. And as he‟s indicated, 

he‟ll release the entire report. 

 

You know, the member talks about his family member playing 

in a band. You know, what we hear from the NDP is the same 

old tune, Mr. Speaker — the same old tune. Okay, the rhetoric 

that we hear from that opposition is, you know, always in the 

past, Mr. Speaker. When they were government, there were no 

wrongs, there were no cover-ups. There was no minister 

standing on this side of the House in an NDP government who 

apologized, Mr. Speaker, who apologized to the people of 

Saskatchewan for misleading the people of Saskatchewan for 

six years . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I want to remind the minister that 

words like misleading have been ruled out of order. And I 

would ask the minister to withdraw that comment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Absolutely, Mr. Speaker, I‟ll withdraw 

that comment. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m going to try again to have the 

minister who is responsible for this file to answer the question. 

 

The Minister of Enterprise publicly has indicated, number one, 

that he wants a consultation process to be meaningful. He has 

indicated very publicly that what the public of Saskatchewan 

say through this consultation process will determine the 

decision making of his government. That‟s what he has said. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he refuses to stand in the House today and make 

this an adequate consultation period. But you know why, Mr. 

Speaker? I think I know why. Because the Minister of 

Enterprise at his own party convention last year, at his own 

party convention last year said the following: “We‟ve set up a 

nuclear development partnership, the UDP, funded by the 

Crown Investments Corporation.” And then he goes on to say, 

Mr. Speaker, note these words, “The purpose of this particular 

lobby is not to advise whether or not we should proceed in the 

full nuclear cycle. It is to help us understand how best we can 

do it.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the decision has been made. They intend to 

proceed on a full nuclear cycle, including reactors, no matter 

what the . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I ask members to come 

to order so we can hear the question placed by the Leader of the 

Opposition. I ask for the question. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — My question, Mr. Speaker, is: how is it that the 

minister responsible says to his party convention, we are going 

to proceed no matter what; all we‟re asking is to be told how to 

do it. How can he square that with a commitment that a 

consultation process is going to be meaningful and will guide 

the decisions of government? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, the Deputy Premier has 

outlined some of the issues in the past with consultation. On 

other occasions certainly, Mr. Speaker, that former NDP 

government used the consultations process to just delay the 

decision-making process and put off decisions that should have 

been made, decisions that should have been taken for the good 

of the province. And certainly a number of them were put off 

until after the end of their term, Mr. Speaker, as every day they 

remind us of all the things that they were going to do, but didn‟t 

get around to it. 

 

Well we‟re getting around to it, Mr. Speaker, and we‟re going 

to hold this full and open and accountable public consultation 

process, and we‟re going to have it done by the beginning of 

summer, like I said we would from the start. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I invite members to come to order. The 

Minister of Health will come to order. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

PRIVATE BILLS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 902 — The Stephen and Michelene Worobetz 

Foundation Amendment Act 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In a matter of 

moments, I‟ll be very, very pleased to move the Bill No. 902, 

The Stephen and Michelene Worobetz Foundation Act. 

 

Just before I do that though, I do want to say, Mr. Speaker, as 

I‟m sure all members are aware, Dr. Worobetz served as the 

Lieutenant Governor of the province of Saskatchewan. I believe 

he was our 13th Lieutenant Governor. He served during the 

‟70s — ‟70 to ‟76, I think that was about the period. 

 

Dr. Worobetz was born in Krydor, Saskatchewan and was 

always so very, very proud of his Ukrainian heritage, his 

Ukrainian descent. He studied in this province and beyond this 

province in his field of practice, which was medicine. He was a 

medical doctor. 

 



April 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2655 

He served overseas in the Second World War in Italy, if I recall, 

in a very distinguished service career with the Canadian 

military at that time. He then practised virtually a lifetime in the 

city of Saskatoon — widely regarded, well known, and a strong 

proponent of the community. We were proud as a people of 

Saskatchewan to call Dr. Worobetz our Lieutenant Governor for 

that period of time. 

 

That commitment to community is reflected in the Stephen and 

Michelene Worobetz Foundation which exists to provide 

benefits to the community, a very generous, generous bequest 

of Dr. Worobetz and his wife. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, just about a year ago, almost a year 

ago to the week, the Stephen and Michelene Foundation made a 

very substantial, a very generous donation to the Ukrainian 

Museum project in Saskatoon, a project I am very excited 

about. It will be very close to the constituency of Riversdale. It 

will provide a new facility, a state-of-the-art facility to house 

the artifacts, to house the history, to house the story of the 

Ukrainian people in Saskatchewan. 

 

We attended a function, some of us, just a few days ago where 

again other donors had been recognized. And progress is 

proceeding very quickly towards the achievement of that project 

including, if I may say it, the most recent event, the very lively 

support of the new bishop, Bishop Bryan Bayda. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to have the opportunity to 

move the motion on behalf of the Stephen and Michelene 

Worobetz Foundation. Therefore I move that Bill No. 902, The 

Stephen and Michelene Worobetz Foundation Amendment Act 

be now read a second time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Opposition Leader 

that Bill No. 902, The Stephen and Michelene Worobetz 

Foundation Amendment Act be now read a second time. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — Pursuant to rule 100, this Bill stands referred 

to the Standing Committee on Private Bills. 

 

Bill No. 903 — The Ancient Order of Melchizedeq, Inc. Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — I move that Bill No. 903, The Ancient Order of 

Melchizedeq, Inc. Act be now read a second time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 

Saskatchewan Rivers that Bill No. 903, The Ancient Order of 

Melchizedeq, Inc. Act be now read a second time. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — Pursuant to rule 100, this Bill stands referred 

to the Standing Committee on Private Bills. 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Saskatchewan Energy Industry  

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed 

a pleasure today to rise and move a motion on this private 

members‟ day in a segment that is 75 minutes in length, in 

which members of both sides of the House can make comments 

on a motion — in this case a motion that I‟m bringing forward, 

Mr. Speaker — and then allow some questions between private 

members before the end of the motion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, members of this Assembly have seen this motion 

on the order paper now for a couple of days, Mr. Speaker. And I 

think members opposite will recognize that this motion is very 

similar to a motion that the government members have had on 

the order paper and that has been subject to some discussion 

since this session began, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So for the record, Mr. Speaker, I will put the motion that I am 

raising today into the record, Mr. Speaker. And I will be 

moving this motion before I conclude my remarks in a few 

minutes. Mr. Speaker, the motion that I am supporting today 

reads as follows: 

 

That the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan supports 

the consideration of the further value-added development 

of Saskatchewan‟s energy industry including energy 

conservation, nuclear, solar, wind, hydro, geothermal, and 

other alternative power generation, and as part of that 

consideration, which would obviously involve extensive 

public consultation, recognize not only the potential 

benefits to the growth and prosperity of the people of our 

province, but also the social and environmental impact of 

all of the options. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the reason this motion has been drafted like this, 

Mr. Speaker, is to provide a demonstration, not only to the 

people of Saskatchewan, but almost more importantly, Mr. 

Speaker, a demonstration to the members opposite of the way in 

which a government should address issues of importance to the 

Saskatchewan people. We will notice, Mr. Speaker, that a 

government motion that comes forward later in the day and 

perhaps for a vote today, Mr. Speaker, a motion that the 



2656 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2009 

government has brought forward expresses an interest in 

discussing a value-added development, Mr. Speaker, of the 

nuclear industry or of the uranium sector, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the government has forgotten in this process, Mr. Speaker, 

how important it is to deal with options and the entire mix that 

Saskatchewan people have available to them. So, Mr. Speaker, 

as I open my remarks today and before I outline the arguments 

for this motion, I want to indicate, Mr. Speaker, to the members 

opposite that because their motion calls for the consideration of 

certain matters relating to the uranium development cycle, Mr. 

Speaker. And we believe that any government, any reasonable 

body, Mr. Speaker, should consider all of its options, as we‟re 

demonstrating in this motion, Mr. Speaker, that when it comes 

time for that motion to be concluded, Mr. Speaker, this caucus 

will support the motion brought forward by the government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[11:00] 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Our motion, Mr. Speaker, our motion makes it 

very clear what we consider to be consideration, what we 

consider to be the energy sector, and what we consider, Mr. 

Speaker, to be broad-based, adequate public consultations. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what‟s in the motion that I‟m raising today? 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it quite simply outlines what we consider to 

be the proper way to address the future energy needs of the 

people of this province. It acknowledges, Mr. Speaker, that 

before consideration can occur, Mr. Speaker, and before debate 

can occur, that of course you have to establish need. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you also have to determine what your inventory is 

— in other words, what exists, what you need, and what options 

you have, Mr. Speaker, in order to meet those needs based on 

the inventory of power being able to provide power is . And of 

course, Mr. Speaker, there has to be recognition and 

understanding of what the assumptions for growth really are. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this motion acknowledges that Saskatchewan has 

the most diversified mix of electrical generation options of any 

province in Canada. Mr. Speaker, some provinces have no 

options whatsoever, Mr. Speaker, and they look for ways to 

generate power. But this province, Mr. Speaker, has the most 

diversified mix already. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, we have 

opportunities here that exist nowhere else in Canada and 

perhaps, Mr. Speaker, that exist nowhere else in North America. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this motion also acknowledges that, once need has 

been established, that options are properly identified and 

studied. Mr. Speaker, no government, certainly no cabinet, 

would consider a recommendation without alternatives being 

provided to that recommendation, Mr. Speaker. Every cabinet 

decision item that I‟ve ever seen in my career, Mr. Speaker, has 

included a recommendation and alternatives or options. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the motion that the government puts forward 

differs from the motion that I put forward, Mr. Speaker, because 

it ensures that the study of and the recommendations relating to 

other options are part of the major consideration of government, 

Mr. Speaker. So we need to ensure that we‟ve got all of the 

options on the table and prepared in a manner in which they are 

understood to be thoroughly presented to the public of the 

province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this motion also acknowledges that risks 

must be examined and costs identified — either as direct or 

indirect consequences for Saskatchewan taxpayers. Mr. 

Speaker, only the result of a freedom of information request did 

we today recognize that the government is being asked to 

commit to extensive resources, public resources for the 

transmission of power, should the value-added opportunities for 

nuclear power generation be brought forward by a private sector 

proponent, Mr. Speaker. Only today did we find that out 

because this government does not believe in open and 

transparent disclosure of information, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This motion recognizes that we have to know what our risks 

are. We have to know what our costs are, not only of one means 

of generating electrical capacity in the province, Mr. Speaker, 

but all methods of generating electrical capacity in this 

province. And, Mr. Speaker, this motion acknowledges that 

those risks or benefits can be social and environmental, Mr. 

Speaker. They are not just benefits to the people of 

Saskatchewan, but the benefit and the risk is social and 

environmental as well as the single source of value-added 

development. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this motion acknowledges we need to examine 

need; we need to examine options; we need to examine risks; 

we need to examine costs. And yes, Mr. Speaker, we must all 

examine benefits. Because, Mr. Speaker, if any decision, not 

only by government or by the cabinet ministers who make the 

decision on behalf of government, but the people of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker — all need to understand the ability 

to make a decision with side-by-side comparisons. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you can‟t make a decision that you support one 

means of energy generation in this province with its diversified 

mix, Mr. Speaker, without knowing how the decisions on that 

particular sector, Mr. Speaker, compares to the costs and 

benefits and risks of all the other sectors, Mr. Speaker. Very 

important. And don‟t forget energy conservation as part of the 

mix because the best means, Mr. Speaker, of increasing 

capacity is to reduce the demand through a variety of means. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the motion also recognizes as we work to 

creating an energy plan for the future in this province — and 

that‟s the goal of government; that‟s a stated goal of 

government, creating an energy plan for the future of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker — we also have to ensure that we 

have a proper understanding and interpretation of what public 

consultation means. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the government motion that we‟ll consider 

later uses the word, that we consider. Well, Mr. Speaker, I do 

believe seriously that the government members‟ interpretation 

of the word consider is different than the New Democratic 

Party‟s interpretation of consider — or in fact, as the public are 

finding out, the public‟s interpretation of what consider means. 

 

So bottom line, Mr. Speaker, we want to ensure that the public 

understands what we believe real public consideration is all 

about, Mr. Speaker. There has to be real consultation, and that 

means including in the preparation of information, in the 



April 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2657 

distribution of that information, in the providing of opportunity 

to create feedback, and of course, Mr. Speaker, providing 

people, after information has been put out there, providing 

people who would be available to answer questions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the test of a successful consultation is in the 

results. Do those who participated in this consultation feel that 

they were heard and that their opinion was valued and 

considered? This doesn‟t happen, Mr. Speaker, in a six-week 

information campaign that the government has indicated that 

they‟re going to put out there with regards to the Uranium 

Development Partnership report, Mr. Speaker. This doesn‟t 

happen in six weeks, that in fact you can collect information by 

a biased panel. 

 

Let‟s recall, Mr. Speaker, that we also find out from freedom of 

information that this panel that‟s recommending information to 

the government was asked to read one book on the benefits of 

nuclear power, Mr. Speaker. Well I just want to indicate to all 

those who are watching that it is not the New Democratic 

Party‟s belief, it is not our interpretation of consideration that 

the future of energy policy in Saskatchewan should be made in 

a style similar to that of an Oprah book club debate, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

This is a series of information sessions, Mr. Speaker, that we 

believe have to be held across Saskatchewan in a town hall type 

manner in which people are able to gather information, share 

information, question information, and provide opinions, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The public wants an informed debate. They want their 

government to provide them with a real forum in which that 

debate can take place in a very real way. They want their 

government to provide them with unbiased, honest information. 

They want to know that the process is transparent and objective, 

so that when facts are presented and opinions are expressed that 

they will have confidence in the information and the process. 

 

And obviously, Mr. Speaker, they want then to be able to 

express their opinions to government without feeling that their 

efforts were a waste of time — that the government is not just 

going through the motions because the government‟s collective 

mind has been made up. 

 

And again in question period today, Mr. Speaker, the minister 

responsible for this refused, Mr. Speaker, refused to 

acknowledge his own words that he said to his own party 

convention, Mr. Speaker, that the purpose of the advice from 

UDP is not to advise government, but rather to help the 

government how best to advance their proposal and their 

perspective, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Saskatchewan people are saying let‟s consider all of the 

options. Let‟s have the debate, but let‟s do it fairly. Let‟s do it 

with transparency, the transparency of a newly squeegeed 

window, Mr. Speaker. And let‟s make sure that we have a 

government that is willing to coordinate this process in a very 

fair way. 

 

There must be an independent and objective research project. 

The business plans — considering all the options; comparing 

data; keeping in mind needs, costs, risks — are prepared, Mr. 

Speaker, financed and prepared and made public. And that 

public consultation does include town hall type meetings where 

questions are asked, opinions justified. And let‟s make sure we 

have a government that is willing to really, Mr. Speaker, really 

and adequately respond to what Saskatchewan people has to 

say. We need a process that respects Saskatchewan people. 

There needs to be a reasoned discussion with all the facts on the 

table, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We believe in considering all of the options. Our fear, of 

course, is that the Sask Party‟s interpretation of consideration 

and public consultation is very much different from our own. So 

therefore, Mr. Speaker, as my time is running out, I wish to 

move the following motion: 

 

That the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan supports 

the consideration of the further value-added development 

of Saskatchewan‟s energy industry including energy 

conservation, nuclear, solar, wind, hydro, geothermal, and 

other alternative power generation, and as part of that 

consideration, which would obviously involve extensive 

public consultation, recognize not only the potential 

benefits to the growth and prosperity of the people of our 

province, but also the social and environmental impacts of 

all of the options. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so move. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Will the members take the motion as read? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Meadow Lake. 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a 

pleasure to rise in this Assembly today to speak to this motion 

that was introduced. And I‟m glad to say we support this 

motion. We are doing what the motion is indicating. We‟ve 

been doing that since we took government. 

 

And the other thing I would like to note, I appreciate that 

member‟s support for my motion which will be voted on here 

later today. I think it‟s a very positive thing that we have the 

legislature speaking with one voice on the development of 

uranium going forward. I think it‟s a positive thing for the 

province that the opposition endorses our government‟s position 

— our government‟s very responsible and prudent approach to 

this issue. We very much appreciate that support. I think it‟s, as 

I said, a positive thing for this province that all legislators are 

united on this issue. 

 

I would note though, Mr. Speaker, that there is some significant 

division within the NDP, obviously. I guess we‟ll see how 

many members show up to vote on this motion later today. But 

we did hear from a couple of the NDP leadership candidates — 

actually three of the NDP leadership candidates — who 



2658 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2009 

indicated opposition, one of whom‟s a member of this 

legislature. So we‟ll see how she votes later on today. It‟ll be 

very interesting to see. 

 

But we did see from one candidate in particular — Mr. Yens 

Pedersen, I believe — who said that the entire industry should 

be shut down, Mr. Speaker, who wants to curtail even the 

mining of uranium. And I‟ve got to tell you, Mr. Speaker, I find 

that position to be very irresponsible. 

 

In northern Saskatchewan, which I had represented in another 

chamber at a different time, I know what the importance of this 

industry is to the people of northern Saskatchewan. Thousands 

and thousands of people are employed in northern 

Saskatchewan by the uranium industry. Thousands of them are 

Aboriginal, Mr. Speaker. Approximately half of the employees, 

directly or indirectly employed, are Aboriginal. 

 

And I find it very troubling that we would have a situation of an 

NDP leadership candidate, an individual who aspires to be an 

NDP premier, to threaten these individuals, to tell them if he 

were to take power, he would shut down that industry. He 

would take their jobs and he would put them out of work, Mr. 

Speaker. And I think it‟s very troubling, very troubling that the 

NDP would go down that path and play political games with the 

jobs of thousands of northern Aboriginal people. I think that‟s a 

very irresponsible thing. 

 

[11:15] 

 

One thing I would like to, I‟m going to read the whole thing 

into the record I think, Mr. Speaker. There was an editorial in 

today‟s Saskatoon Star Phoenix which I think the members 

opposite would be very well-advised to read and to pay heed to, 

but I‟m going to read it into the record, Mr. Speaker. And this 

today‟s Star Phoenix editorial: 

 

After three decades of grappling with the issue of uranium 

development and nuclear power, the inability of many 

New Democrats to get beyond fearmongering and 

pandering to ignorance continues to threaten the progress 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

The attempt this week in the legislature by departing NDP 

Leader Lorne Calvert to suggest untoward, government 

meddling in a $2.5 million consultant‟s report to be 

released on Friday by the Uranium Development 

Partnership only underlines the silliness that pervades the 

party‟s ranks on matters nuclear. 

 

There‟s little doubt that the governing Saskatchewan Party 

is supportive of pursuing the nuclear power option if it‟s 

viable. However, Enterprise and Innovation Minister Lyle 

Stewart has provided assurances that public sentiment will 

determine whether Saskatchewan builds a reactor or 

adopts measures to add value to the uranium that‟s mined 

here but is now shipped elsewhere to be refined and 

processed. 

 

What‟s nearly incomprehensible about Mr. Calvert‟s 

theatrics in the house is that they come from a man who, 

as premier, said his government might consider a proposal 

to build a small reactor if there was a business case for it 

— a prospect made all the slimmer by his NDP 

predecessor‟s decision to send packing AECL from 

Saskatoon, where it was researching the development of 

just such a reactor. 

 

As premier, Mr. Calvert was in Europe to pitch the idea of 

the French company, Areva, choosing Saskatchewan as a 

site for a uranium refinery that would create jobs, and 

vowed that his government would press the federal 

government to ease regulatory burdens and duplication in 

order to stimulate more uranium exploration and 

development. He even claimed that the public opinion in 

Saskatchewan had changed since the bad old days of the 

1970s, when agitators riled up Warman area residents 

against locating a uranium refinery, and identified the 

Battlefords and Shellbrook as communities that were 

interested in hosting such a facility now. 

 

Of course, with the anti-nuke forces again hard at work in 

the province now that Premier Brad Wall‟s government 

has picked up where Mr. Calvert‟s left off, the NDP leader 

seemingly sees the need to retrench from adopting a 

technology that‟s been safely delivering electricity to 

Ontario, many U.S. jurisdictions, China, India, Japan and 

several European nations for decades. 

 

Apparently, the NDP out of office has reverted to form, 

with the agitators and fear-mongers seeking to crowd out 

party members who dare to consider a pragmatic approach 

to nuclear power and uranium development in a province 

that for 50 years has profited from the sale of the 

commodity and used the cash to fund its progressive 

social programs. 

 

Two contenders to replace Mr. Calvert as the party leader, 

Ryan Meili and Yens Pedersen, released statements on 

Tuesday that condemned any notion of building a nuclear 

reactor, with Mr. Pedersen reportedly eschewing any 

further development of uranium mining. Meanwhile, the 

acknowledged front-runner Dwain Lingenfelter, who had 

taken a decidedly pro-nuclear stance by touting it as 

“clean, safe and affordable energy to power oilsands 

development,” lately has become more circumspect, 

saying that the cost of building a reactor can only be 

justified if the excess power can be exported to the United 

States. 

 

While Saskatchewan indeed needs to have an intelligent 

debate on nuclear power that considers everything from its 

immediate and long-term costs to safety and 

environmental considerations, with a similar analysis of 

conventional coal- and gas-fired plants that will be needed 

to ensure secure base-load capacity even under the 

alternative power generation options touted by “green” 

advocates, what the province doesn‟t need is anti-nuclear 

rhetoric that panders to ignorance. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have the Saskatoon StarPhoenix taking a 

clear position, giving direction, I think, that would be well 

heeded by the members opposite, but we do know that there is 

division within that party. We have seen, I‟ll quote again the 

Whitehorse Star from Whitehorse, Yukon from the former 

premier, the member for Riversdale: “The notion that you could 



April 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2659 

build a reactor that‟s economic is a very, very questionable 

assumption. And this isn‟t a clean source of power. It‟s 

probably the dirtiest . . .” That was a quote from the former 

premier. 

 

We have a quote from the member for Moose Jaw Wakamow as 

well, who has taken a very strong position against nuclear, and 

I‟ll quote, “There has never been and may never be a business 

case for nuclear in Saskatchewan. Nuclear energy is the way of 

the past.”  

 

And that was from that member‟s website. I believe it‟s up 

there right now. So it‟ll be very interesting to see how she votes 

on this motion and how her supporters vote as well in caucus. 

It‟s going to be quite fascinating. 

 

Ryan Meili calls on NDP MLAs to oppose Sask Party nuclear 

resolution: 

 

Nuclear power is being sold to us as a means to provide 

cheap energy, as a means of addressing immediately 

energy needs, even as a means of protecting our 

environment. But none of these sales pitches are based on 

the facts. 

 

So I guess Mr. Meili obviously commands a great deal of 

support within the NDP caucus, considering how the House 

Leader indicated they‟re going to be voting. 

 

More from Yens Pedersen who is an NDP leadership candidate: 

 

In all the research that I‟ve done over the last year (which 

is a lot), [so I guess Mr. Pedersen‟s a nuclear physicist as 

well] it is clear to me that the costs associated with proven 

nuclear technology outweigh the benefits.” 

 

So obviously Yens commands a great deal of support within 

that caucus as well. 

 

What is interesting is some quotes from Dwain Lingenfelter 

who‟s running for the leadership of the NDP. And I quote, “If 

Tommy Douglas were here, it would be exactly what he would 

be doing.” So we have the endorsement of Tommy Douglas as 

well, Mr. Speaker, which I think is a positive thing, and it‟s 

obviously channelled through Mr. Lingenfelter, but we 

appreciate that endorsement nonetheless. Another quote, “The 

opportunity is big. The only question is can we reach out and 

grab it.” That was Mr. Lingenfelter as well. We have even 

more, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Bruce Power or any other company that wants to come in 

and invest tens of billions of dollars is not going to want 

to step into a hornet‟s nest of political or public debate. 

They want that sorted out and they want a commitment 

from that community that is on side with this kind of 

investment. 

 

So for Lingenfelter, no consultation necessary. We‟re going 

ahead and we‟re doing it. So I find it passing strange, Mr. 

Speaker, when members opposite make noises about 

consultation when Mr. Lingenfelter has indicated there‟s no 

need for any debate. The debate is over; the time for talk is 

over. He‟s going full steam ahead. So we‟ll see how these 

members vote. I particularly am interested to see how the 

supporters of Ms. Higgins vote. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m 

extremely pleased this morning to enter into this debate. Mr. 

Speaker, what we have before us is a motion to consider very 

carefully and hold public consultations on the various forms of 

energy generation in our province, something that we need to 

do on a regular basis as legislators. We need to understand what 

the potential is for energy generation in our province. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, it‟s also very important to understand 

what our potential is to save through energy conservation to 

reduce our need for new energy in the future, Mr. Speaker. 

These are all things that we need to very seriously consider. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, when the New Democratic Party was in 

government, all members of this House will know that we did 

just that. We, on a regular basis, analyzed all the options that 

were before us. We looked at the options of renewable energy, 

Mr. Speaker. We looked at the options of wind power, hydro 

power, geothermal, Mr. Speaker. We looked at also issues of 

conservation. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, yes, yes, we did look at the issue of nuclear 

as well, Mr. Speaker. We openly, regularly had SaskPower 

review what all the options were and bring forward those 

recommendations to the government. That‟s what any 

responsible, pragmatic government would do. And, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, we did just that. We continued to examine all the 

options before us, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And as our motion talks 

about today, that type of examination should continue to go on, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we need to look at what is the best option for 

the people of the province of Saskatchewan on a regular basis, 

Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite can say, 

you know, that we should look at only one option. But we 

should look at them all. And we should compare the costs of 

each of those options and looking at what the energy needs for 

the people of our province are. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and as the members gleefully say 

regularly, yes, when we were government we looked at the 

nuclear option. We looked at whether or not it was the 

appropriate way to meet our generation needs moving forward, 

Mr. Speaker, as any prudent government should. They should 

look at the full, full gamut of opportunities and possibilities for 

that generation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And today, earlier today we had them quote from a report that 

was done by the former government called Energy and Climate 

Change Plan 2007. And, Mr. Speaker, on page 16 it does say, 

“Ongoing assessments of the potential for a nuclear reactor to 

supply Saskatchewan's domestic requirements or for export are 

regularly carried out by SaskPower.” And it goes on in the same 

paragraph to say, Mr. Speaker, “. . . SaskPower‟s studies 

identify that current nuclear power technology is not a viable 

option for any new or replacement electricity generation that 

will take place before 2020.” 

 



2660 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2009 

And this document was a public document that the entire 

province could look at, Mr. Speaker. So it‟s there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk today about the motion in front of us 

and where we go with this motion, Mr. Speaker. The motion 

talks about looking at all the options. And that‟s something that 

we all should be very willing to do, should want to do, Mr. 

Speaker, and we should do it in a very public way. We did this 

on a regular basis when we were government. These papers 

were available if people had interest in them, Mr. Speaker. I 

don‟t recall the members opposite ever asking for them, ever 

requesting to see these documents, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I want to say what we won‟t do. I also want 

to say what we won‟t do, Mr. Speaker, and that‟s this: we won‟t 

pick a single option without analyzing the others. We won‟t 

decide we‟re going to do something before we even look at it, 

Mr. Speaker. If we were ever going to proceed down a line of 

direction, Mr. Speaker, we‟re first going to study it, first know 

what our alternatives are and what our options are, Mr. Speaker. 

And then, then only after looking at all the options, looking at 

the cost-effectiveness of those options, and looking at the 

impact of those options, then will we proceed down a line of 

business, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what we have here by the government of 

today is just the opposite, Mr. Speaker. We have a government, 

we have a government that has decided that, and announced at 

their own convention, with or without the studies being done — 

and the studies aren‟t about whether they‟re going to do it or 

not; they‟ve already made the decision they will do it, Mr. 

Speaker — they said very clearly, the minister said very clearly 

to his convention that the UDP study is not about whether or 

not they‟ll proceed down that road, Mr. Speaker. It‟s how to 

proceed down that road. So they‟d already decided they were 

going to do it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, studying the issue, considering, and 

examining is not a problem. We do that many times. 

Proceeding‟s not a problem either, Mr. Speaker, if the business 

case is there, if it‟s the best way to proceed, and if it‟s what the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan want, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But what is a problem is when you decide, before you‟ve even 

done any study of the issue, that you‟re going to do it. And 

what‟s even a greater problem, Mr. Speaker, is what they‟ve 

done. They‟ve decided that a single company, a single company 

should have the option of doing it, Mr. Speaker. And that single 

company, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, that single company has 

done a feasibility study, Mr. Speaker, with the support of the 

government, to carry out the development of nuclear generation 

in the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, there‟s some fundamental flaws in what 

they‟re thinking. Because, Mr. Speaker, they haven‟t looked at 

all the options. They‟ve decided a company should do it. 

They‟ve decided a private company should do it. They haven‟t 

looked at whether or not it should be done, if they‟re even going 

to go down that road, in-house, in SaskPower, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, let‟s put this in some context. What‟s being 

talked about is between 2 and 3000 megawatts of electrical 

generation, Mr. Speaker, which is over half the total electrical 

generation today in the province of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. 

Speaker, if a private company‟s doing that generation, Mr. 

Speaker, then what role does SaskPower play in the future? 

 

Is this the backdoor privatization of SaskPower, one of our 

Crown utilities, Mr. Speaker? Those are the things that the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan need to examine and 

look at, Mr. Speaker. We need to know and we need to examine 

what is the intent of the government, Mr. Speaker. Is the intent 

of the government to privatize SaskPower through a back door? 

Well, Mr. Speaker, are they afraid to have that debate? Are they 

afraid to have that discussion, Mr. Speaker? They‟ve gone 

forward with an agenda, Mr. Speaker, without, without having 

the public debate whether or not . . . 

 

[11:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. They‟ve 

gone ahead and decided that a private power generation is the 

way to go, just like they went ahead and decided nuclear was 

the solution before they had the debate. Mr. Speaker, we may 

end up there. But first there should be the process in which the 

public and the people of Saskatchewan compare all the 

alternatives; they compare what type of generation they want; 

they look at issues like energy conservation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But we‟ve had none of that. We have not had due process in 

this issue at all. We have a government that goes to their own 

party and says, it‟s not about whether or not we‟ll do it. 

They‟ve already made the decision. They‟re going to do it 

without looking at all the alternatives. If it‟s the best option for 

the people in the province of Saskatchewan, if it‟s the best 

option for the people, no, they‟re not concerned whether it‟s the 

best option. They‟ve already decided they‟re going to do it. 

 

And then they talk about the UDP process, uranium 

development process that they‟re putting forward. The panel 

they‟re looking at is not about whether or not it‟s good for the 

province of Saskatchewan or should be the way they proceed; 

it‟s how to proceed, Mr. Speaker. And that is what the minister 

said at his own Sask Party convention. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, they had predetermined that they‟re moving 

down this road, and now it appears they‟ve predetermined that a 

single company, private-sector company, will be the only 

option for development, Mr. Speaker, because they allowed a 

single company to come in here and do feasibility studies and 

work with them, taking out any other examination or options, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So they‟ve decided (a) they‟re going to do it; and (b) they‟re 

going to do it with a single company which results in the 

backdoor privatization of the SaskPower Corporation, Mr. 

Speaker, because over half the generation that‟s needed in this 

province — perhaps up to two-thirds or 75 per cent, Mr. 

Speaker — would come from an outside private company, Mr. 

Speaker, driving SaskPower into privatization, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that may not be what they want to state publicly as their 

intent, Mr. Speaker, but that‟s the end result that they go down 



April 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2661 

that road. So, Mr. Speaker, let‟s say just right upfront and 

unequivocally, Mr. Speaker, that we will not support the Bruce 

Power option in any form, Mr. Speaker. We will not support 

Bruce Power and their prospects in any form, the private 

generation of that power, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we need to be open and honest. We need to know 

where we‟re going with this issue, Mr. Speaker, and we have to 

talk about this in the public of . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Member‟s time has elapsed. I recognize the 

member from Regina Qu‟Appelle Valley. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Our government is committed to seeking 

environmentally friendly ways to produce, consume, and 

conserve energy. So we are in support of a motion that allows 

us to have the opportunity to debate the energy industry in 

Saskatchewan. Under our government, Project Porchlight has 

continued to raise awareness about switching to more 

energy-efficient light bulbs, such as compact fluorescents. 

 

Switching to more efficient light bulbs can produce savings of 

nearly 40 per cent for consumers, while also reducing emissions 

by lowering demand on our power plants. Under the NDP, 

Project Porchlight ignored our rural areas, only doing 

giveaways in six cities. Our government has taken steps to see 

that this project reaches the whole province because we don‟t 

ignore our rural Saskatchewan residents. 

 

Our government is committed to energy efficiency, and we‟re 

taking multiple steps to make sure that Saskatchewan residents 

know what programs are available. Now SaskPower offers the 

Energy Star loan program for furnaces, and energy management 

manuals for area arena and rink operators. And SaskEnergy 

offers a rebate on programmable thermostats as the EnerGuide 

for housing program, an energy-efficient rebate for new homes 

and commercial boiler programs. SaskWater offers energy 

guides, toilet replacement programs, and targets urban water 

conservation programs. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, these are everyday, small solutions, but they 

have tackled a big problem — our dwindling energy supply. 

Mr. Speaker, our government is being very proactive. We are 

looking at ways to generate power through wind power, clean 

coal, energy conservation, hydro power, solar power, and 

geothermal. 

 

Geothermal is known as earth‟s energy system. It takes 

advantage of the earth‟s natural heating and cooling properties 

to heat and cool entire buildings. A pumper compressor is used 

to circulate water and an antifreeze mixture so it can work well 

in any climate. Now these systems have been used in Europe 

since the 1920s, and for the last 30 years in North America. 

Geothermal is a more environmentally responsible heating 

source than either electricity, oil-burning furnaces. 

 

Now our government has developed a number of programs 

designed to encourage the use of environmentally responsible 

energy sources, and these programs include a new loans 

program for people who will install certified geothermal heating 

systems and/or generate their own power from renewable 

sources such as wind or solar. 

 

These programs provide financial support to a growing number 

of Saskatchewan people who want to heat their homes with 

geothermal. Encouraging small-scale, environmentally 

responsible generation is part of the Saskatchewan Party 

government‟s commitment to curb greenhouse gas emission and 

ensure our province has a sustainable and reliable energy supply 

mix. Those eligible can receive a loan of up to $25,000 for 

installation of a geothermal system, and/or a loan of up to 

$25,000 for installing a renewable system in a new or existing 

home. 

 

This program is delivered through SaskPower, the utility profile 

of energy efficiency, conservation, and load-management 

programs. We recognize that the interest in geothermal systems 

and self-generation will increase as the actual cost of producing 

the energy comes down. By providing financial support for our 

residents, we can make it even more feasible for our customers 

to pursue these environmentally responsible choices. 

 

Our government made enhancements to existing energy 

efficient rebates for new home programs delivered through 

SaskEnergy. Saskatchewan residents who build a new Energy 

Star qualified, R-2000 certified, or EnerGuide 80 homes may be 

eligible to receive a rebate up to $3,500 for the installation of a 

geothermal system. 

 

Within my riding of Regina Qu‟Appelle Valley I‟ve had the 

opportunity to visit two such homes. The one homeowner, Phil 

and Sherri, have taken being energy efficient and responsible to 

heart. They have designed and installed a geothermal system in 

their home. And I remember in the 1980s when I looked at an 

environmentally responsible solar home that was built in the 

Walsh Acres area of the city, I remember looking at the 

2-foot-thick walls and the windows that were about the size of a 

piece of paper, because at that point the understanding wasn‟t as 

good as it is today of what is needed to provide an energy 

efficient home. 

 

Those homes were very uncomfortable to live in. They had very 

few windows, because at that point the building products 

weren‟t as efficient as they are today. When you go into Phil 

and Sherri‟s home, you do not realize that this is a home that 

provides a different source of heating. But rather you realize 

that this is a very comfortable home that each and every one of 

us would enjoy residing in. 

 

Now Phil and Sherri have taken being environmentally 

responsible citizens to the heart. They also drive a smart car as 

their second car, and their other car is a hybrid car. As they 

have said to me, we do not consider that we are reducing our 

environmental footprint on this earth. We are doing an 

environmental fingerprint. So congratulations to residents in my 

riding that really understand what it means to be good citizens. 

 

The province has also topped up support to the net metering 

program. Residents who wish to self-generate electricity using 

environmentally friendly sources, such as wind or solar, could 

now receive a rebate of up to $35,000 retroactive to April 1, 

2007. And I know that Phil and Sherri are looking at this 

program also and are looking at installing solar panels to again 

augment their heating system. 

 

Saskatchewan will not have the same need for geothermal as 



2662 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2009 

Manitoba. In Manitoba 55 per cent of the residents use 

electricity for heating, while only 4 per cent of Saskatchewan 

homes do. Natural gas is a more efficient heating source, and so 

our government is also encouraging the purchase of 

high-efficient gas furnaces through other programs. 

 

We expect approximately 150 new installation of geothermal 

heating systems in 2008 to 2010 period to take advantage of our 

programs. Homeowners who are currently using natural gas but 

would like to switch to geothermal can do so as long as they 

install an on-site renewable energy source — wind, solar — that 

is large enough to offset the increase of the electrical load. Now 

this requirement is to ensure that the move towards geothermal 

system does not cause an increase in greenhouse gas emission. 

This would be either a 6 kilowatt solar system or a 3.5 kilowatt 

wind system. We are looking to design geothermal programs 

for larger commercial customers in the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is being very proactive in 

providing environmentally friendly ways to produce power. 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s my pleasure today 

to stand and support the motion put forward by the opposition 

today, and I want to speak to this motion. I want to start by 

saying that energy conservation measures are by far the 

cheapest and most efficient source of new energy. The next 

kilowatt or the next BTU [British thermal unit] of energy that 

we create should be one that we create out of savings. There are 

all kinds of products available today. Insulation has improved 

over the past few decades. 

 

Solar thermal water heaters are going to be coming into their 

own now in Saskatchewan, and I predict even further around 

the world. And I‟m not confusing that with a photovoltaic — 

that‟s where you make electricity out of the sun — but the 

thermal just directly moves the heat off your roof system and 

into your domestic hot water system, and it‟s a lower cost of 

operation for the homeowner. Incidentally, between a quarter 

and a third of the energy used in houses is just in the heating of 

our domestic hot water, so there‟s just tremendous opportunities 

for efficiencies that we have not even begun to scratch. 

 

Germany is really making massive, huge strides in both energy 

conservation and wind power, and I know they‟re moving into 

solar now. There‟s a prediction out of Germany that by between 

2040 and 2050 that we would be able to, if we put our effort 

into solar photovoltaic panels on every house, we would be able 

to provide half of the power needs of industrial countries. 

 

So if we put photovoltaic panels on all of our houses, we could 

take care of half of our electrical needs and, Mr. Speaker, in a 

very environmentally friendly way. And there would be no 

lasting waste, as is the case with what the government seems to 

be going full speed ahead without consultation. They‟re saying, 

well it‟s not a question of should we, should we go further into 

the nuclear cycle; it‟s how should we? And of course what I‟m 

saying, Mr. Speaker, is that there are many, many ways that we 

can avoid having to go down the nuclear cycle or the more 

expensive cycle, the more expensive cycle that there is. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, I know I‟ve hit some nerves because 

of the amount of heckling from government members opposite. 

And I‟m reminded that anytime everyone agrees, as the Sask 

Party wants everyone to just monolithically agree, we just . . . 

like trained seals . . . [inaudible] . . . Every time everyone 

agrees, Mr. Speaker, it means someone‟s not thinking. That‟s 

what it means. 

 

And I remind members that in a democracy, what it‟s about is 

the minority shall have its say, and of course then, conversely, 

the majority shall have its way. Well I‟m having my say 

because they have the majority. I don‟t think they have the 

majority of environmentalist thinking people, but they clearly 

have the majority in this legislature. 

 

[11:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, we say, as this motion does, we have to look at all 

forms of electrical supply. Energy conservation I‟ve just spoken 

to. Photovoltaic. There‟s many, many others. I believe we have 

an obligation to look at the nuclear cycle. I believe we have an 

obligation to look seriously at that cycle, Mr. Speaker. I wish 

that people would investigate the good things; I wish that 

members opposite would investigate the good things about the 

nuclear cycle, and then I wish that you would investigate the 

flip side of it with an equal vigour. 

 

That‟s all that we need to do, and I think we have an obligation 

as legislators, as MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly], 

to consider the facts. And there are many good facts about the 

nuclear cycle, but there are many areas of concern, Mr. Speaker. 

Not the least of which is when it comes to some of the nuclear 

waste. 

 

I want to quote from the US Nuclear Regulatory Commission 

just for about a minute here. This is quite helpful; it helped me 

in my thinking as I was researching here. This is a quote. You 

can find it on the Internet or I‟m sure at the library and other 

places. 

 

The basic fuel of a nuclear power reactor contains 

uranium 235, which is in ceramic pellets inside of metal 

rods. Before the fuel rods are used, they are only slightly 

radioactive and may be handled without special shielding. 

During the nuclear reaction, the fuel “fissions,” which 

means that an atom of uranium is split, releasing two or 

three neutrons and a small amount of heat. The released 

neutrons then strike other atoms, causing them to split, 

and a chain reaction is formed, which releases large 

amounts of heat. 

 

And it goes on, Mr. Speaker. In the interest of time I‟m going to 

skip a paragraph, but only because of time. It goes on: 

 

The splitting of relatively heavy uranium atoms during 

reactor operation creates radioactive isotopes of several 

lighter elements, such as cesium-137 and strontium-90, 

called “fission products” . . . 

 

Plutonium is also created. Strontium-90 and cesium-137 have a 



April 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2663 

half-life of about 30 years. Mr. Speaker, the Plutonium-239 

that‟s created has a half-life of 24,000 years. And it‟s the most 

deadly known carcinogen to man. 

 

I invite members to just consider if the Egyptians had had 

nuclear power and they stored their waste in the pyramids — 

who would have looked after that nuclear waste after the 

Egyptian civilization fell and until we hit more modern times? 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have much to consider. 

 

One of the things that also I want us to have a public discussion 

around — and not a phony, less-than-90-day, so-called 

consultation that the minister has referred to — but there‟s 

another thing to consider, and that is that SaskPower is looking 

at its capitalization going from . . . It took them 60 years to get 

to a capitalization of roughly $4.5 billion — that according to 

the minister on March 31 in this very Chamber. And he says in 

the next five years the capitalization is going to go from 4.5 

billion to $16 billion — four and a half to $16 billion. And we 

know who it is has to pay all of that. Much of it is going to be 

borrowed. According to the minister, between 60 and 70 per 

cent of that money would be borrowed. By my calculations, that 

means roughly $7 billion of new debt for SaskPower — that‟s 

massive. And we all know who it is that‟s going to be paying 

for that. 

 

This is for power lines to handle a nuclear power plant that the 

Sask Party are determined to go ahead. And what I‟ve tried to 

do is scratch the surface, Mr. Speaker, and point out that there 

are many, many ways that are more cost-effective, that are more 

efficient, that will actually provide more jobs in Saskatchewan 

quicker, and will provide an environmental benefit much 

quicker than if we just leap and put all of our baskets into a 

huge nuclear power plant. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have an obligation to look at nuclear power 

and all of the others. What the government is missing is looking 

at all of the others. They‟ve admitted that. The minister at the 

Sask Party convention says, we‟re not asking this committee 

that he set up to look at should we proceed with nuclear. We‟re 

asking it to tell us how we can steamroller through it all. How 

can we absolutely make it happen. And that‟s a shame. 

 

I wish that government members would simply spend a fraction 

of the time looking at all other energy forms that they spend 

looking at nuclear. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is much, much more to say. I will be 

supporting our motion and I‟ll be standing with my colleagues. 

I expect there‟s a vote on the government motion. It says we 

have to look at power options, and I believe we have to look at 

all the power options. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

motion we‟re discussing here this morning is something that I 

find very similar to the motion in which we will be voting on at 

1 o‟clock. And, Mr. Speaker, imitation is the greatest form of 

flattery, and I would just like to make a bit of a comparison 

here. I think that people that watch the legislative channel at 

home would find it interesting that, in fact, it‟s almost verbatim. 

Mr. Taylor‟s motion that he put forward says that the 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan support the 

consideration . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Just to remind the member that 

you don‟t refer to members by their first name but by their 

constituency. Thank you. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will certainly 

follow that. 

 

The motion put forward that we‟re discussing right now states 

the Legislative Assembly support the consideration of further 

value-added development of Saskatchewan energy industry, 

considering the consideration of nuclear, solar, wind, hydro. 

 

The motion we‟ll be voting on earlier, which was put forward 

by the member from Meadow Lake, it is: “That the Legislative 

Assembly . . . supports the consideration of further value-added 

development of Saskatchewan uranium industry . . .” Mr. 

Speaker, almost, almost verbatim. 

 

Now the members opposite who put forward their motion and 

pretty much copied ours. They did add in solar, wind, 

geothermal — all very valuable, all initiatives that in fact our 

government has been doing since we took government. We 

have a excellent track record. We have made announcements. 

We have programs. We are leading on geothermal. We have the 

second largest wind farm in the country. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I look at theirs and they don‟t have anything 

on clean coal. Now I don‟t know if this is an oversight, or if 

there‟s an ideological problem on that side of the House that 

clean coal isn‟t acceptable or that they feel we aren‟t going to 

go that direction, for some reason that I don‟t quite understand. 

 

I think it‟s important that we put on the record that coal makes 

up almost 50 per cent of Saskatchewan‟s power needs. That is 

one of the largest proportions in all of Canada. It‟s something 

that if we want to move forward, we have 300 years of coal 

supply in the ground. There‟s so much, they‟ve almost stopped 

looking for coal because we have so much. 

 

So if their government isn‟t willing to look at clean coal as an 

option, I think that‟s a real problem. And I think we could be 

facing a disastrous situation if they are so narrow-minded that 

clean coal isn‟t even an option. I‟d just like to flesh out a little 

further that we not only have made statements about clean coal, 

that we think that it‟s somewhere we should go on. And that‟s 

what we saw from the NDP when they were in government. 

 

But we lobbied our federal counterparts. We got them to invest 

a substantial amount of money — $250 million, Mr. Speaker, 

quarter of a billion dollars — to Saskatchewan for a project. We 

have committed the other billion. We‟re bringing in some 

private sector investment. 

 

Clean coal, Mr. Speaker, may supply going into the future. It‟s 

never been done commercially, but if it is possible — and we 

are going build a plant and prove it; a 100 megawatt power 

plant — it‟s going to be supplying power to Saskatchewan. And 

once the technology is worked out, it could be a real solution 

for our province, other provinces, for places around the world, 

to ensure that CO2 isn‟t just let off into the atmosphere to cause 



2664 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2009 

the damages it causes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, I will also say that when their motion came forward 

I was quite surprised that they would want to be on the record 

so publicly on such a divisive issue within their own party, Mr. 

Speaker. And it really gave me time to think, like what could 

bring this forward? The only explanation I had, Mr. Speaker, 

was on Tuesday I read in the newspaper that two of their 

candidates, two of their younger candidates, a Mr. Meili and a 

Mr. Pedersen, had press conferences, very publicly said — this 

I believe was Mr. Meili: “I am calling on all 20 New Democrat 

MLAs to vote „no‟ . . .” 

 

Mr. Speaker, they‟re getting their marching orders to vote no on 

this coming thing. Mr. Pedersen, also on Tuesday, just two days 

ago, said, I urge his 20 MLAs to vote against the motion. Mr. 

Speaker, a clear message from two of their candidates came 

forward that they are to stand and vote no. 

 

On Wednesday, Mr. Speaker, on Wednesday they bring forward 

a motion that throws mud in the face of these two candidates. I 

can only presume that the members of the Legislative Assembly 

are saying in fact, thanks, but no thanks. We will not take the 

marching orders from these two candidates for leadership. 

 

I think that possibly some of the statements that have come out 

of their leadership candidate, Mr. Dwain Lingenfelter, may be 

influencing them more heavily. Mr. Lingenfelter has been 

clearly on the record for many years with some fairly extreme 

views on this issue. 

 

This here is from 2005 Star Phoenix, and this is a quote out of 

the paper, “Former NDP deputy premier Dwain Lingenfelter 

not only champions building [a reactor] nuclear power plants in 

Saskatchewan, but also embraces locating a nuclear waste 

facility in the province . . .” 

 

 Now, Mr. Speaker, I think that the fact that they have brought 

this motion forward as a party, as a bunch of MLAs has really 

solidified around possibly this as a leader. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Lingenfelter, as quoted earlier, also invoked 

their Tommy Douglas as someone who, if he were here today, 

he would embrace nuclear power. So if you are getting the nod 

from people like Tommy Douglas, I guess they had no choice 

but to support it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, from 2008, Murray Mandryk, Saskatoon 

StarPhoenix: 

 

Former NDP cabinet heavyweight Dwain Lingenfelter 

says the case for nuclear power generation in 

Saskatchewan is greater now than when he delivered a 

major speech on the subject in Saskatoon more than two 

years ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that‟s 2008. That‟s less than a year ago. He is on 

the record and he is very positive on this, Mr. Speaker. Now I 

can only think that if things go forward and one of the young 

men that is also running happens to win the leadership, that 

maybe some of the members will be overdue for retirement. It 

might be all 20 of them that become overdue very quickly. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, just a couple more things I 

would like to get on the record is their leader will not be 

contradicting himself too heavily from some of the comments 

he has made in the past. “We are ready to refine and process 

uranium when the time is right.” Mr. Speaker, that was the 

leader of the NDP. “Now development of the industry is a 

priority for Lorne Calvert.” This is a quote, Mr. Speaker. Lorne 

Calvert, NDP government, having formally backed uranium 

refining and processing in Saskatchewan when it released its 

action plan for the economy in late September. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that there‟s a real divide in that party. I 

think that they‟re doing some soul-searching, but I think the fact 

that there‟s no divide in their caucus members, Mr. Speaker, is 

extremely telling. The results of their leadership vote, which 

comes up here this spring I think, may reignite some internal 

struggles if one of the young members who has demanded his 

20 members vote against it, happens to win. It may be a cold 

day for them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But standing on this side of the House, I applaud them for their 

stance. I don‟t care if they‟re doing the right things for the 

wrong reasons, as long as they‟re doing the right things, Mr. 

Speaker. I think it‟s the right thing for Saskatchewan to look at 

all our options. It‟s not about whether clean coal is good or bad, 

or solar is good or bad, it is time we looked into the future and 

said, we are going to have demands. 

 

[12:00] 

 

This Saskatchewan Party government is driving our economy 

forward. More people are moving here. We need electricity. 

When we look at our power needs going to the future, they are 

dramatically rising for many reasons. And if those members, if 

those members are willing to look at all options, I applaud them 

for that. I don‟t really care what is their decision-making 

process, as long as the good of the people of Saskatchewan is 

what comes out at the end, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s also a time for our government to say, we need 

some expert advice. We have asked the UDP to put together 

some recommendations. We have asked them to bring in some 

experts, to do some research, and to give recommendations. 

And our minister has been very upfront and clear. He will be 

delivering that report here shortly and it‟s part of the process. 

It‟s very transparent. I think that‟s important on this issue, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I think it‟s also important that we go forward with the clean 

coal. And I will ask those members again, is this just an 

oversight that clean coal isn‟t in this while you‟ve included 

most other things? Or is there is an actual problem with clean 

coal that you aren‟t willing to vocalize or voice here in the 

Assembly? If there is, I‟d ask you to have the confidence to 

raise your voice and tell us what is your ideological problem 

with clean coal. You don‟t like coal? You don‟t think that that‟s 

going to be going into the future as something we can do? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I would just like to say again that I support 

them for bringing this forward. I will be supporting our motion 

coming up . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The member‟s time has elapsed. 



April 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2665 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, to 

follow up on what my fellow . . . comments of the people on 

this side, Mr. Speaker, there‟s over 44 commercial nuclear 

power reactors operating in 31 countries around the world. 

That‟s 364,000 megawatts of total capacity. There‟s . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Time. Time has elapsed for the 65-minute 

debate. We‟ll move to oral questions. I recognize the member 

from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I do have a 

question for the member from Meadow Lake, Mr. Speaker. At 

the beginning of his remarks earlier today, he indicated that the 

motion in front of us was acceptable, Mr. Speaker, and that he 

would be prepared to vote for the motion in front of us. 

 

As we know, Mr. Speaker, the member from Meadow Lake has 

a motion on the paper for debate and perhaps vote later in the 

day — a very similar motion, Mr. Speaker, but not as extensive 

as the motion in front of us today. 

 

I ask the member from Meadow Lake: given that he has an 

interest in supporting the motion presented right now, is the 

member from Meadow Lake prepared, as I am, Mr. Speaker, to 

give up the rest of the Q & A [question and answer] period and 

take this motion directly to a vote at this time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Meadow Lake. 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

would point out to that member that we‟re going to have a vote. 

It‟s going to be at 1 o‟clock, and it‟s going to be on the motion 

that I brought forward previously. And we‟re going to have a 

very, we‟re going to have a very interesting vote. We‟re going 

to be able to see which members show up, which members 

aren‟t here. And I think that‟s going to say a whole bunch about 

where they‟re at in their leadership race and the divisions within 

that party. 

 

I would ask, I would ask the member for Battlefords, Mr. 

Speaker, if he would agree with his next leader, Mr. Dwain 

Lingenfelter, that “If Tommy Douglas were here, it would be 

exactly what he would be doing.” 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 

the member from Battleford. The people of The Battlefords 

have been asking me if I would have an opportunity to ask this 

question of the member: if a nuclear project was possible, and if 

it was possible in that part of the world and would involve 

2,000 jobs during a five-year construction period, 1,000 jobs, 

permanent jobs forever, where does the member stand on the 

nuclear issue? And this would be very interesting for the people 

of The Battlefords. They‟re listening this morning. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Interesting 

question from the member from Cut Knife-Turtleford who 

people in The Battlefords have asked me about: where does he 

stand on the immediate, immediate construction of 

Saskatchewan Hospital, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Not only, Mr. Speaker, not only are people in 

The Battlefords concerned about potential construction jobs 20 

years out, Mr. Speaker; they‟re interested in the creation of 

construction jobs two years out, Mr. Speaker. So the member 

from Cut Knife-Turtleford should be on the record speaking 

about immediate needs in The Battlefords, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That having been said, and knowing my time is limited, this 

motion today, Mr. Speaker, puts forward the argument that I‟m 

making in The Battlefords and everywhere in Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker — that this issue requires extensive research and 

debate. Everybody needs to participate in it, including 

representatives in The Battlefords community, Mr. Speaker, and 

the proponent . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Member‟s time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 

question is for the member from Meadow Lake. Mr. Speaker, as 

he would be well aware, the undertaking of building a nuclear 

reactor is a very expensive process. Today to get that capital is 

not possible without being backed by a government, Mr. 

Speaker. So my question is, does he believe that a single source 

company like Bruce Power should have the right to build a 

reactor without having consideration for other companies, like 

AECL [Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd.] and/or Areva and 

others, who may be interested in operating in the province of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Meadow Lake. 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

And I listened carefully to the member for Regina‟s comments, 

during his speech particularly, Mr. Speaker. And I would just 

indicate to him that I‟m sure his leadership candidate, Dwain 

Lingenfelter, was watching, I presume. And I would just 

caution him to be careful because his role as deputy leader 

might be in jeopardy. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Weyburn. 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in the 

summer of 2006, the former premier of the province, the 



2666 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2009 

member for Riversdale, went to France to lobby for not only a 

refinery for uranium in the province, but also talked about 

building a nuclear reactor, and also even went so far as to talk 

about storage, Mr. Speaker, in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I would ask, Mr. Speaker, to the member of Regina 

Dewdney, who was an important member of that government 

— or at least that‟s what he tells me — the question is, before 

the former premier went to France to lobby for all of these 

things to develop the nuclear industry, what consultation did the 

former premier take with the people of this province before he 

left the country to sell . . .  

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As you‟re 

well aware, when the former premier was out meeting with 

companies across the world who have interest in the very 

valuable commodity we have in this province — uranium — 

they wanted to talk about our future in development of uranium, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the premier very clearly laid out to them that of course 

we‟re open for business; we‟re selling uranium to them. And, 

Mr. Speaker, and that we have always examined all the options, 

Mr. Speaker, but we‟ve done it in an open, democratic process, 

not allowing an individual company come in and say that 

they‟re going to operate in the province without considering all 

the options. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Given that the motion 

reads, “. . . [supporting] the consideration of the further 

value-added development of Saskatchewan‟s energy industry 

including energy conservation, nuclear, solar, wind, hydro, 

geothermal and other alternative power generation . . .” and 

given that the member for Regina Qu‟Appelle responded to the 

motion — she touched on all the sources except for nuclear — 

my question is to that member. 

 

Is she personally in favour of proceeding with nuclear power 

generation with Bruce Power without a public tendering process 

or request for proposals or public consultation and with a 

government-appointed uranium development panel that is 

biased in favour of nuclear power generation and has been 

mandated by the minister to advise how to proceed with nuclear 

power generation rather than if to proceed? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu‟Appelle Valley. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, you know, I 

am so pleased that our minister had put forward today in the 

House the public consultation program that will be rolled out 

shortly, and so in fact we are very pleased with the public 

consultation that we are going to be undertaking. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose. 

 

Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, when the 

NDP were in government, they had only one plan for clean 

coal. They also had SaskPower printing up fridge magnets 

promoting clean coal. When they abandoned that one and only 

plan they had, they had no plan B. This in spite of the fact that 

SaskPower committed $20 million in 2005 for design studies on 

a clean coal power plant. 

 

My question is for the member from Regina Coronation Park: 

why is clean coal excluded from the motion? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And as I mentioned in 

my speech — we had 10 minutes, period — I said, we have an 

obligation to look at all, all, all the options that there are for 

power generation, including nuclear conservation. But in my 

notes — that I didn‟t get to — I also had something on clean 

coal. 

 

What is interesting, Mr. Speaker, is that the Sask Party is asking 

about clean coal when they‟re talking we should have 

consultation around nuclear. And I can‟t figure out why they‟re 

so determined to go on one tack. Their report has more black 

than anything else. Why is it that the public should believe they 

are interested in a realistic consultation process when so far it‟s 

just been dark? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. A question 

to the member from Meadow Lake who heard the Minister of 

Enterprise Saskatchewan today say that there‟s going to be a 

consultation process announced tomorrow. Mr. Speaker, earlier 

he said, that consultation process, the minister, would be six 

weeks, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I ask the member from Meadow Lake if he believes six weeks 

is enough, or will he ask the Minister of Enterprise and 

Innovation to expand and extend the consultation period at least 

to the end of the year? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Meadow Lake. 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m glad 

that the member for Battlefords brought up the issue of 

consultation. I‟d like to read a quote: 

 

Bruce Power or any other company that wants to come in 

and invest tens of billions of dollars is not going to want 

to step into a hornet‟s nest of political or public debate. 

They want that sorted out and they want a commitment 

. . . 

 

Do you know who said that, Mr. Speaker? Dwain Lingenfelter, 



April 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2667 

his next leader. So my question for him is whether he agrees 

with his next leader that there should be no consultation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Time has elapsed on the 75-minute debate. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

Motion No. 1 — Saskatchewan’s Uranium Industry 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by Mr. Harrison.] 

 

The Speaker: — Before I recognize the member, it‟s my duty, 

pursuant to rule 26, to advise the Assembly that this item of 

business has been previously adjourned three times and cannot be 

further adjourned. Therefore at the conclusion of the debate or at 

the normal time of adjournment, whichever is reached first, every 

question necessary to dispose of this motion shall be put. I 

recognize the member from Wood River. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I‟m once 

again pleased to enter the debate on the motion put forward by the 

member from Meadow Lake. And I think it‟s only appropriate at 

this time, Mr. Speaker, that we read the motion back into the 

record, and we do a little bit of a review of what we‟ve talked 

about up to this point in our debate on the nuclear file. And the 

motion put forward by the member from Meadow Lake is: 

 

That the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan supports the 

consideration of further value-added development of 

Saskatchewan‟s uranium industry including nuclear power 

generation and recognizes the potential benefits to the 

growth and prosperity of the people of our province. 

 

I think that‟s a very, very straightforward motion, Mr. Speaker. 

And there‟s so much to be gained by advancing the nuclear cycle 

in this province. And I know we have spoke about it to some 

extent, but again for review purposes, I would like to go over 

some of the predominant benefits to this province by expanding 

the nuclear cycle. 

 

And we know — and I‟ll get back to it — but we know that 

members opposite have been against this nuclear cycle for some 

time. And I‟ll get into the more specifics a little bit later on. But 

here we‟re in a province where we had a governing party for a 

number of years that was totally against any enhancements of 

uranium in this province. 

 

So by the fearmongering that was put forward, they actually had 

people in this province that sided with them to some extent just 

because of the fear factor. There‟s some issues that I think the 

people of this province may not be aware of, and I think maybe 

there‟s members on the opposite side that may not be aware of 

also. 

 

[12:15] 

 

For an example, they know that there is a nuclear reactor in the 

city of Saskatoon. And here they are so afraid of the nuclear 

cycle, and yet there‟s a nuclear reactor sitting in Saskatoon. 

And are they going around Saskatoon and telling people that, oh 

don‟t go near that building because there‟s a nuclear reactor; 

you‟ll glow in the dark. Everything is so bad about it. But in 

fact, we have one in the city of Saskatoon, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is so much to be gained by 

advancing the nuclear industry in this province. We have 

companies here, uranium companies — Areva and Cameco — 

who have the experience and hands-on involvement in the chain 

of expanding the nuclear industry. And unfortunately in the 

past, when these companies were looking at doing an 

enhancement of uranium in the province of Saskatchewan, they 

were basically chased out by members opposite. And there‟s 

members opposite that are sitting there today that were part of a 

group of fearmongers that actually chased the uranium 

enhancement industry out of this province. 

 

So we have to have a look at the realistic side of this, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. We have all of this natural advantage for us to 

be leaders in the uranium industry, to make sure we‟re 

sustainably and responsibly pursuing the next reactor 

technology so we can have a new vision. Our vision for 

Saskatchewan is growth, and in order for growth, we would 

definitely be looking at the value chain — refining, enrichment, 

and potentially the power side of the uranium cycle. 

 

We have some of the largest deposits of uranium in the world, 

some of the richest deposits of uranium in the world. We have 

in the neighbourhood of 27 per cent of the world‟s supply of 

uranium, and I would point out that I believe it‟s the richest 

supply of uranium in the world. Having visited one of the mines 

in northern Saskatchewan, I know that the uranium is so rich 

they have to mix it with sand in order to work with it. 

 

Now we have to look at some of the reasons why we want to 

develop nuclear power and help grow the Saskatchewan 

economy. One, it would create billions of dollars. I don‟t know 

how members opposite could be against something in this 

province that would actually create billions of dollars. 

 

And also, jobs. We know that members opposite aren‟t very 

keen on enhancing jobs in this province. I mean they spent 

years chasing them out of the province, so I understand why 

they are sitting there on the negative side of the issue when you 

talk about creating jobs in the province. I mean we had people 

even on the other side today speaking against our Premier going 

to Toronto to a job fair. What are they against? So expanding 

this industry would create a lot of jobs. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, if we do not have a presence in the nuclear 

industry, once again we‟ll be left outside watching. Very, very 

typical of the NDP when they were in government — have 

people on the outside looking in. We want to keep this a wee 

province. And that was their philosophy. That was their policy. 

I mean they developed policies that would literally chase people 

out of the province.  

 

The nuclear industry was one of them. And members opposite 



2668 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2009 

can‟t say that there weren‟t people out there with placards when 

they were going to put the plant in Warman, and they were 

totally, totally against it. And so what did the uranium industry 

do? They moved out of the province. We can‟t move the mines 

out of the province because we do have the resources here. We 

have been left behind so many times by the NDP because of 

their ideology. Well we on this side of the House, we‟re 

actually looking forward. 

 

And it‟s interesting. There‟s a number of them on the other side 

of the House that do not even want to discuss the development 

of nuclear power in this province. We find it very, very odd 

why they can‟t have an open dialogue about it and be upfront 

with the people of the province of where they stand. And I‟m 

going to get into a little bit more of where they stand, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, because I don‟t know where they stand. I don‟t 

believe they know where they stand. They‟re firmly divided on 

this. 

 

Now there‟s many, many reasons when I say creating jobs in 

the province, creating money for the province. And it‟d be very 

interesting to see how some of the members on the other side 

vote. Look at the jobs it would create in the North. It can be 

estimated that to properly operate a reactor, 150 highly trained 

nuclear engineers, scientists, and physicists would be required. 

It requires a minimum of a university degree in a nuclear field 

and, in some cases, postgraduate degrees. A further 720 reactor 

operators, mechanical and electrical maintenance workers, 

chemists, and chemical technicians, physics and radiation 

technicians, and other managers would be needed. 

 

Now if you look at this, these are well-trained people. They‟d 

be high-paying jobs. And why wouldn‟t we want them in this 

province? Members opposite may not, but we do. We want to 

attract people, to train people, and have these high-paying jobs 

 

I‟d like to quote a little bit from Bruce Power‟s feasibility study 

because I think this is very important for the record: 

 

The construction and 60 year operation of a nuclear 

facility in Saskatchewan would have a significant and 

stabilizing impact on the province‟s economy for decades 

to come. 

 

. . . [it] has conducted an assessment to determine 

economic impacts on Saskatchewan of a two unit nuclear 

[facility] build in the province, assuming operation in 

2018. 

 

Now I think some of these figures are very, very important even 

to members opposite that are on the nay side of it. I think that 

they should be listening to these figures because they‟re quite 

important. “During site preparation and construction the project 

would contribute about $4 billion to the provincial economy 

. . .” Four billion dollars. And here we are, here we are now 

debating budget, debating issues in committees. And we have 

the members from the North going on about roads and promises 

the NDP made years ago. And I wonder how they would vote 

for this, for a $4 billion influx of money into this province and a 

lot of it in the North. 

 

So it‟s going to be very, very interesting to see how the 

members from Cumberland and Athabasca vote. Would they be 

in favour of more jobs in the North for their people? Would 

they be in favour of expansion of the nuclear industry in the 

North, in uranium mines? So it‟ll be very, very interesting to 

see how they vote on this, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

“The project would generate a total of 20,000 direct, indirect 

and induced jobs during construction.” Twenty thousand. Now I 

know we have a shortage of workers right now, so this is all the 

more reason for people to be moving back to Saskatchewan, all 

the more reason we‟re attending job fairs in places that aren‟t as 

fortunate as we are in the economic times of this province. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Does that bring you back to 35,000 the 

NDP exported? 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Yes, all we really want for starters is to 

get the 35,000 people back that were exported by the NDP over 

their 16-year reign. That‟s our starting line, is to get those 

people back. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, let‟s just look at the annual operating 

impacts that this would generate: approximately 1,000 full-time 

jobs, in addition to 900 indirect jobs, and get this — for 60 

years, 60 years. On an annual basis a project would contribute 

almost 240 million to the provincial economy. In fact the 

construction of a nuclear power station in Saskatchewan would 

be the largest single infrastructure project ever undertaken in 

our province. 

 

Now let‟s look at some of the revenues that this would create. 

Throughout the construction phase of the project, total tax 

revenues generated would be 1.8 billion, $1.8 billion. During 60 

years of operation, the project would contribute over ten billion, 

two thousand and eighteen dollars in government revenues. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we start looking at all of the 

positives about the nuclear industry. And when I talk about the 

jobs, look at the spinoff jobs that would be available for young 

entrepreneurs to start businesses. I know I mentioned it when I 

spoke last time about it — a couple of young ladies in the 

North, in the mine, that when we were up there, we were 

briefed on it. These two ladies actually worked in the food 

services department of the mine. And the company manager, 

company manager said to them one day, why don‟t you form a 

company and start a business for feeding the mine crew? And 

they said, well we don‟t have much knowledge about running a 

business. So he said, well we‟ll give you all of the support you 

need. So these two ladies started up a business and took over. 

Now they provide all of the food services to this particular 

mine. 

 

There‟s another company that‟s formed. They‟re employing 

people. They‟re entrepreneurs now. They‟re away from that 

ideology of the other side of the House. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do want to get into some discussion 

about where the NDP are on this. And I really wish I knew 

where they were. They‟re all over the map; they‟re all over the 

place on the nuclear file. 

 

I think today‟s paper probably, probably identifies it as well as 

anything and I just want to quote from The StarPhoenix today. 

And I think it puts it in perspective of what the other side is 



April 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2669 

going through right now. And I‟m going to read from this 

article, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 

 

After three decades of grappling with the issue of uranium 

development and nuclear power, the inability of many 

New Democrats to get beyond fearmongering and 

pandering to ignorance continues to threaten the progress 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

That‟s how they operate — fearmongering. That‟s their modus 

operandi — fearmongering. Is there any other way that they 

enter into a debate on this other than the fear? Fear and smear. 

 

The attempt this week in the legislature by departing NDP 

Leader [I‟m quoting] Lorne Calvert to suggest untoward 

government meddling in a $2.5 million consultant‟s report 

to be released on Friday by the Uranium Development 

Partnership only underlines the silliness that pervades the 

party‟s ranks on matters nuclear. 

 

I wish I would have said that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but in fact it 

was the editorial part of the paper: 

 

What‟s nearly incomprehensible about Mr. Calvert‟s 

theatrics in the house is that they come from a man who, 

as premier, said his government might consider a proposal 

to build a small reactor if there was a business case for it 

— a prospect made all the slimmer by his NDP 

predecessor‟s decision to send packing AECL from 

Saskatoon, where it was researching the development of 

such a reactor. 

 

Again as I‟ve said, they chased something else out of the 

province. I guess that‟s why they look in the rear-view mirror 

so much as they‟re chasing stuff out of the province. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to go further with what the paper 

says, and I‟ll just quote: 

 

. . . the NDP leader seemingly sees the need to retrench 

from adopting a technology that‟s been safely delivering 

electricity to Ontario, many U.S. jurisdictions, China, 

India, Japan, and several European nations for decades. 

 

Apparently, the NDP out of office has reverted to form, 

with the agitators and fear-mongers seeking to crowd out 

party members who dare to consider a pragmatic approach 

to nuclear power and uranium development in a province 

that for 50 years has profited from the sale of the 

commodity and used the cash to fund its progressive 

social programs. 

 

[12:30] 

 

That again is very, very typical. It‟s the ostrich theory — put 

your head in the sand and it‟s not a problem. You reap the 

money from selling the uranium, the yellowcake, but you have 

your head in the sand and say, it‟s really not us. And again I‟m 

kind of bewildered by their take on this whole nuclear file, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

Despite the anti-nuclear sentiments that seem pervasive 

enough in the NDP‟s ranks that Mr. Lingenfelter appears 

somewhat cowed, he remains the preferred candidate by 

far among members of the general public who stated a 

choice. 

 

Well we know what Mr. Lingenfelter‟s position is on the 

nuclear file. We also know what the two other members of the 

leadership race, we know their positions. They‟re absolutely 

not, there‟s no way they want any part of the nuclear facility. 

 

The member from Moose Jaw Wakamow, I‟m really not sure 

what her position is. I gather that she‟s one that‟s got her feet 

planted firmly on both sides of the fence on this issue. Maybe 

yes, maybe no, maybe flip, maybe flop. Whoever she‟s talking 

to at a given time, maybe that‟s the way she‟s going to go on 

this file. It‟ll be interesting to note the vote. 

 

Now when I talk about the NDP‟s position, or lack thereof a 

position, I‟d like to go back to some of the quotes that have 

been used in the past and what some of the members opposite 

have said. Now we all, or most of us I guess, know Peter 

Prebble and how anti-nuke he was. And anti-everything is kind 

of the pervasive word from people on that side of the House. 

But here‟s what Peter Prebble had said, that “The Government 

of Saskatchewan should phase out uranium mining in the 

province . . .” 

 

Can you imagine phasing out uranium mining in the province? 

That‟s pretty much like a golden goose, and you want to give it 

away to somebody. He said, “. . . as long as I am in this 

legislature, I will continue to oppose that practice [of uranium 

mining] . . .” 

 

And he did. Maybe that‟s why he‟s not here any more. But he 

opposed uranium mining. So can you imagine members on that 

side of the House sitting . . . Here you got somebody opposing, 

somebody may be for it, others again on both sides of the fence. 

 

Peter Prebble also is stated as saying, “We don‟t need a nuclear 

reactor in the province . . .” He also said, “. . . uranium mining 

in the province of Saskatchewan should be phased out until 

such time as there are proper international safeguards in place to 

prevent uranium being diverted for military purposes.” 

 

Well again the fear. And this is what, this is what members 

opposite, they get into the fearmongering on the uranium cycle 

— oh, they‟re going to make bombs out of that. Well, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, how many years have we had uranium reactors 

or nuclear reactors in this world that have been providing 

services for the people of the world? And I would suggest it‟s 

50-plus years that we‟ve had reactors in this world that have 

been providing power, and I‟m going to get to nuclear medicine 

a little later. 

 

Now I do want to, I do want to get on to some comments by the 

Leader of the Opposition. And when he was premier, when he 

was premier of this province he said, and I quote, “Calvert said 

the province would consider any business case to establish a 

reactor or nuclear waste storage facility in the province . . .” 

And I want to emphasize those words “. . . consider any 

business case to establish a reactor or nuclear waste storage 

facility in the province . . .” That was on November 2, 2005. 

 

Now let me read a quote from November 3, 2005 — and I hope 



2670 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2009 

the members opposite are listening because that was 24 hours 

later — keeping in mind what he said, that we “. . . would 

consider any business case to establish a reactor or nuclear 

waste storage facility in the province . . .” on November 2. On 

November 3, he said: 

 

Let me say today . . . [definitely], the answer is no. Under 

my leadership in this province there will not be in 

Saskatchewan a nuclear waste disposal . . . 

 

I‟m wondering. In 24 hours, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 24 hours 

went from yes to no. Is that what is referred to as a flip-flop? Is 

that a flip? Or is that a flop? I think, I think it was a total flop, 

but I guess you could call it a flip-flop. 

 

Now we all know, we all know the position of Lingenfelter. 

And there are a couple more quotes that I‟d like to get on the 

record from the current Leader of the Opposition. In 2003 the 

then premier had stated, and I‟m quoting: 

 

The notion that you could build a reactor that‟s economic 

is a very, very questionable assumption. And this isn‟t a 

clean source of power. It‟s probably the dirtiest, given 

what comes out of the tailpipe . . . 

 

The dirtiest form of power. Now, is he going to be for our 

motion of expanding the industry or against it? And it‟s hard to 

say because he flips one day and flops the next day, so it‟s very, 

very difficult to understand what his position is. 

 

This is in 2005 also, and it talks about the NDP platform called 

for the phase-out of uranium mining. I‟ve already discussed 

that. 

 

I want to get to another one here that I really think people of the 

province need to hear. And this was again the Leader of the 

Opposition when he was premier, said: 

 

Asked recently about the notion of building a nuclear 

reactor in northern Saskatchewan to power Alberta‟s oil 

sands development, Premier Lorne Calvert called it a 

“horrendous” proposal. 

 

Horrendous proposal. Now for the uninitiated, I just want to 

again — and I mentioned this when I spoke last time — if you 

look up in the dictionary what horrendous is, it means 

horrifying. So he is saying that the idea of a reactor is 

horrifying. Is that to scare people? Is this part of their 

fearmonger plan again? 

 

It‟s horrifying. It‟s horrifying to think that a nuclear reactor 

should be built in the province of Saskatchewan. How many 

members on that side of the House agree with the Leader of the 

Opposition today — that it‟s a horrifying thought to build a 

nuclear reactor in this province? Horrifying. I think that is 

absolutely disgusting. 

 

And then, get this. He‟s talking about it‟s a horrifying idea to 

build a reactor. It‟s scary. It‟s scary. And I want to quote from 

the Star Phoenix, and it says . . . This was in 2006. Premier 

Calvert was in France to promote greater Saskatchewan 

development of the uranium industry. 

 

Calvert should be lauded for his European vacation. After 

decades of destructive fence-sitting — allowing primary 

nuclear development but acting as if the product is 

morally tainted when it comes to milling, refining, using it 

to make energy and ultimately disposing of its waste back 

from where it came — the NDP government seems to 

finally be recognizing that Saskatchewan has a role to 

play in cleaning up energy production. 

 

Well, it‟s a horrifying thought to build a reactor, but it‟s okay to 

go on a little trip to France to discuss building a reactor in the 

province. I guess that would be what‟s called a fun trip. A little 

European vacation, a little red wine in France, to discuss 

expanding the nuclear industry. How could one sit there in their 

own conscience and say, we‟re going over there to expand this 

horrifying industry. I imagine if they sat at the boardroom table 

they probably didn‟t quite use those words: we want to expand 

this horrifying industry in our province. I wonder if that‟s what 

he actually said. He probably didn‟t take along the quote from 

the Saskatoon paper. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to touch base just a little bit on a 

couple of other issues. We know — I think all of us on this side 

of the House know — the value of expanding the uranium 

industry. What it would do for the province, what it does for the 

coffers of the province, what it does for jobs. I don‟t know if we 

have to go much further with discussing the value it would be, 

but I do want to touch base on the perception at least of what 

people think of what the NDP‟s position is. And it is a 

perception, because nobody really knows for sure. 

 

When the NDP were in government, there were some studies 

done on the nuclear file, but you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

they were never released. They were never released, not even in 

the legislature they weren‟t released. What were they hiding? 

What were they hiding? They talked today, and there‟s been 

chirping back and forth about documents that have been 

blacked out. Well they know, they know that the rules . . . Some 

of them know the rules over there. Some of them obviously do 

not. But when you don‟t even get to see a report . . . They 

refused to publish or to make public the report of their study on 

the nuclear industry. 

 

Now I get kind of a kick out of it the last couple of days with 

some of the line of questioning from the other side. I sit back 

and I chuckle at how poorly thought out the questions are. And 

I don‟t know if they have a new question writer or not, but it‟s 

quite laughable on a number of occasions. But here we have 

people talking about . . . from the other side, oh you blacked out 

this little line in this contract. How many, how many, how 

many lines did we see blacked out on the SPUDCO document? 

You know, I have been looking all over for the consultation on 

SPUDCO, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I can‟t find it. So I‟m 

wondering how many lines on the SPUDCO document were 

blacked out. I wonder how many lines were blacked out. 

 

And here it was, $35 million. And member opposite chirping, 

so what? That‟s what they think of $35 million. And the 

member from Athabasca can sit in the committee and ask for a 

road to be fixed and there‟s lots of money, but it‟s okay to 

squander $35 million without even showing anybody the 

document. 

 



April 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2671 

Now I‟m wondering, I‟m wondering if there was a consultation 

done into Navigata? Where is the document on Navigata? And 

how much is blacked out on Navigata? I would ask members 

opposite, because here we‟re talking about them saying a line is 

blocked out on something. I want to know what was blacked 

out on the Navigata document. That‟s another one I‟ve been 

unable to track of late. 

 

But it cost taxpayers, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about $70 million 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . seven zero million dollars. And 

again the member from Athabasca talks about, he wants money 

for roads, but $70 million is okay to lose. We didn‟t mind 

losing $70 million because we in the NDP are business people. 

We know how to operate a business. That only lost . . . Well we 

had one that lost $35 million on spuds, so it had to be outdone 

by losing $70 million on another failed venture. 

 

But that‟s not all, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Leave to make an introduction to the 

House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member has asked for leave to 

introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the member from 

Regina South. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well it‟s a 

great pleasure . . . And I know this will be well received on both 

sides of the House. We have in the Speaker‟s east gallery Mr. 

Yens Pedersen, NDP leadership candidate here to watch the 

debate. 

 

And I know that members particularly on the other side of the 

floor, in opposition, regardless of where they are on this 

particular debate — for or against — will welcome his 

participation. Welcome from the members to Mr. Pedersen. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood 

River. 

 

[12:45] 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

Motion No. 1 — Saskatchewan’s Uranium Industry 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I also 

would welcome the member to the Assembly. I think it‟s 

probably very important for the leadership candidate to hear 

some of this debate and hear some of the failed NDP dealings 

of the past. 

 

And, where was I? Did I mentioned Navigata? I‟ll just mention 

Navigata again because here they lost $70 million, and we don‟t 

know if there‟s more than that, Mr. Speaker, or not because it 

got hid after that. Was it blacked out? It was hid. That‟s kind of 

hideous, isn‟t it? 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, how about some of their ventures 

into the dot-coms? There is more money lost in dot-coms 

because the business-minded people of the NDP figure that they 

are better at it than industry. And I can‟t get on my feet, Mr. 

Speaker, without mentioning my favourite one, and that‟s when 

they wanted to take over the bingo industry in this province. 

 

Eight million dollars they lost by trying to take over the bingo 

industry, if you could believe it. These giants of business on the 

other side that wanted to run bingo in the province. My 

goodness. 

 

And now, I haven‟t even touched on some of the larger ones 

like, like . . . Do anybody on this side remember when they 

were looking at digitizing the land titles? You could have 

bought it off the shelf for $5 million, but guess what the giants 

of business did. They said, we can do better. We know how we 

can do it better than anybody else in the world. And for $100 

million, they got close. It‟s not there yet, but they were getting 

close with $100 million. This is unbelievable. These giants of 

industry and these giants of business on the far side of the 

House — $100 million that they could have spent $5 million 

buying. No, they knew best. 

 

And how about the Meadow Lake pulp mill? Eight hundred 

million dollars they blew on the Meadow Lake pulp mill. Giants 

of industry again — $800 million. Now we also know, Mr. 

Speaker, that the then government wanted to put $100 million 

more into the Prince Albert forestry Bill. That would‟ve been 

gone by now. It would‟ve been money under the bridge . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Under the bus. 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Money under the bus — $100 million. 

Well let‟s look at the reality of the $100 million. It was trying 

to, it was trying to purchase votes. We‟ll just put $100 million 

in . . . Why do you think $800 million went into Meadow Lake? 

And I‟ve stated this before, that they could‟ve paid every 

member that worked there, and I think the figures — and I‟m 

going to extrapolate a little bit — but I think the figures were, 

they could pay every member that worked at the pulp mill 

$250,000 and buy them a $100,000 home, and the taxpayers 

would‟ve saved money. 

 

So why, why would they put $800 million into it? Well they 

had a member from up there that did get elected a couple times. 

He got elected and so that was there to buy votes. It was for 

vote-getting. Yes, they went out there and they put $800 million 

. . . 

 

Now they talked about consultation this morning and yesterday 

in question period. They want to talk about consultation. How 

much consultation do you suppose was done on the Belle Plaine 

ethanol plant? I kind of remember. Some of us on this side of 

the House would remember that Belle Plaine ethanol plant. I 



2672 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2009 

think, yes maybe the consultation and what size of a tent they 

should have. How many school kids were they going to bribe 

with pizza and Pepsi to come out there and watch somebody put 

a shovel in the ground? 

 

And you talk about another business venture, and I would 

suggest, I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the whole Broe 

industries Belle Plaine plant was exactly the same as SPUDCO. 

Again the consultation process, and talk about the blackout 

portion of it. And where did that project go? Because I think 

once when SPUDCO was revealed and we found out, Mr. 

Speaker, we found out that in SPUDCO itself that there was no 

private money put in. None. Well I think somebody did quote 

one day and said it was $49. But here it was all funded by the 

NDP government, every bit. 

 

So I believe, Mr. Speaker, that when the whole Broe industries 

Belle Plaine ethanol . . . When it came to light, I believe that 

was the same thing. In my view it was a 50/50 partnership 

where the taxpayers were putting in 50 per cent and then the 

taxpayers were going to put in the other 50 per cent. So I guess 

you could say it was a 50/50 partnership, but 100 per cent 

funded by the taxpayers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it‟s kind of hypocritical when they talk 

about consultations, because I could go on with a lot of their 

business dealings and how little consultation there was— or no 

consultation. And how do you black out something when you 

haven‟t even produced a document, haven‟t even done any 

consultation on it? And I‟m very, very shocked at the former 

premier when he‟s sitting there and talking about the blackout 

on documents. And he knows very, very well what the process 

is, what the procedures are. And some of the other members 

may not know it, but he certainly should. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do want to just talk a little bit about what the 

members opposite are going to do. I wonder if the member from 

Cumberland, if he‟s going to vote for this motion or not, Mr. 

Speaker. I mentioned all of the jobs that would be created in the 

North, all of the jobs, and he‟s looking for funding for roads. 

 

And it‟s very, very odd of the NDP because when they were in 

power, they wouldn‟t touch any of this stuff. But now in 16 

months they want us to clean up 16 years worth of mess. Well 

we‟re getting close but there‟s still a ways to go, Mr. Speaker, 

and we all know that. But I‟m just wondering what position he 

will take, if he will actually stand up and vote against the people 

of the North for jobs. 

 

And we have the member from Saskatoon Eastview that‟s 

chirping. And I wonder how she will vote. I wonder how she 

will vote because if she votes against it, if she votes against our 

motion, she‟s voting against who she‟s supporting in the 

leadership. If she votes for it, then she would be voting for the 

health side of it because I didn‟t even get to touch base on the 

health side of the nuclear industry. 

 

We have unlimited potential, but again we have members 

opposite that will say, oh we don‟t want any part of the nuclear 

industry. But oh by the way, we‟ll take the isotopes for cancer 

work. Well where do you suppose isotopes come from? And 

well there‟s members opposite that don‟t even know, and so 

part of the nuclear industry and the generation of isotopes 

comes from the nuclear industry. 

 

And I wonder how many members opposite have been touched 

by somebody with cancer. And the cancer treatment comes 

from radiation. So that‟s part of the nuclear industry. And 

would they vote against this? Would they vote against 

medicine, nuclear medicine? How about the member from 

Athabasca? Will he be voting against his people in the North for 

jobs? 

 

How about Regina Northeast? It‟s going to be interesting to see 

how the member from Regina Northeast votes because he‟s 

supporting, he‟s supporting openly, supporting Lingenfelter, 

and we all know Link‟s position on this. 

 

How about the member from Regina Coronation Park? Will he 

be voting for this motion, because he openly is supporting 

Lingenfelter also. And so will he be voting for who he is 

supporting or will he be voting for the NDP ideology? Boy 

that‟s going to be a tough one. 

 

How about from Regina Rosemont? I wonder how he‟ll vote on 

this because he‟s openly supporting Lingenfelter also. He‟s 

supporting Link and Link is very pro-nuke even to the point of 

disposing waste, so I wonder if the member from Rosemont will 

be supporting. 

 

The member from P.A. [Prince Albert]-Northcote is also 

supporting Lingenfelter. I wonder what his position will be on 

the vote, whether he will vote in favour or against. 

 

How about the member from Douglas Park? I wonder how he 

would vote on this because he again is openly supporting 

Lingenfelter. So very interesting to see how members opposite 

will be voting. 

 

How about the member from Saskatoon Fairview? Because he 

is also supporting Lingenfelter. Now will he support the 

ideology of the Left or will he be supporting the person he‟s 

supporting for leadership? 

 

And well the member from Regina Dewdney, he‟s openly 

supporting Lingenfelter also, but I really think he‟s going to 

support the motion on the nuclear side too. I really thing he‟s 

going to. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it‟s going to be very interesting to see how 

members opposite respond to this, to this very, very important 

motion. And, Mr. Speaker, there is so much positive, so much 

positive to come out of this whole nuclear industry in the 

province. We talk about jobs; we talk about the finances it 

would bring in. Well members opposite want to hear some 

more. Obviously they want to hear about, they want to hear 

about some of the business ventures again. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — I can‟t help but go into some more of the 

NDP . . . The member from Regina Northeast is using the same 

piece of paper I am so he obviously wants some more. So how 

about Channel Lake? How about Channel Lake? Do members, 

anybody remember Channel Lake? Yes it‟s kind of really 

difficult to forget about Channel Lake, but it‟s kind of off their 



April 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2673 

radar screen, Mr. Speaker, because they only lost 15 million on 

that one. That wasn‟t a very big deal; they only lost 15 million. 

 

But I‟m glad, I‟m glad we got time to put this in because I have 

never seen the consultation work and the study on the power 

project in Guyana. We don‟t even know if that was nuclear or 

not. We‟ve never see it. How much of that document was 

blacked out? Or was there even a document produced on 

Guyana? We‟re not sure. But, you know, that again is off the 

radar screen, Mr. Speaker, because it only lost $2 million. 

 

Now let‟s look at some of the dot-coms, again going back into 

. . . And I wonder what the consultation process and any process 

that went through on some of the dot-coms, like 

tappedinto.com. I think they got into that one just because it has 

a catchy name, tappedinto.com. And it cost $6.7 million to the 

taxpayers of this province — 6.7 million. 

 

How about Persona? Another dot-com to a tune of $9.4 million. 

I really, I really wonder what the giants of business and industry 

and the NDP were thinking of when they got into this 

particular, this particular . . . these ventures. How about Craig 

Wireless? That was a $10 million loss, Mr. Speaker — $10 

million. 

 

And so the credibility of members opposite when they want to 

talk about consultation . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Being near the hour of adjournment, it is my 

duty pursuant to rule 26 to advise the Assembly that this item of 

business has been previously adjourned three times and that 

every question necessary to dispose of the motion will now be 

put. It has been moved by the member from Meadow Lake that 

it being resolved: 

 

That the Legislative Assembly supports the consideration 

of further value-added development of Saskatchewan‟s 

uranium industry including nuclear power generation and 

recognizes the potential benefits to the growth and 

prosperity of the people of our province. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion carries. Call in the members. 

 

[The division bells rang from 12:59 until 13:00.] 

 

The Speaker: — Those in favour of the motion please rise. 

Order. I would ask the members to allow the motion to proceed 

quietly. 

 

[Yeas — 53] 

 

Stewart Elhard Bjornerud 

Draude Krawetz Boyd 

Eagles McMorris D‟Autremont 

Hickie Cheveldayoff Heppner 

Tell Gantefoer Harpauer 

Norris Hutchinson Huyghebaert 

Brkich Kirsch Schriemer 

Allchurch Weekes Chisholm 

Wilson Duncan Michelson 

LeClerc Ottenbreit Ross 

Reiter Bradshaw Harrison 

McMillan Calvert Harper 

Junor Trew Van Mulligen 

Atkinson Nilson Yates 

Belanger Furber Iwanchuk 

Forbes Morin Taylor 

Quennell Broten McCall 

Wotherspoon Vermette  

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed please rise. 

 

[Nays — Nil] 

 

Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 53; those 

opposed . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The motion carries. Being past the hour of 

adjournment this Assembly stands adjourned until Monday at 

1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 13:01.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2645 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2645 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2645 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2646 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2646 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2646 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2646 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 2671 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2646 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2646 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2647 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2647 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2647 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2647 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 World Autism Awareness Day 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2647 

 Regina Multicultural Council Public Speaking Competition  

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2648 

 Saskatchewan Hosts 2010 Sporting Events  

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2648 

 Poverty and Human Rights 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2648 

 St. Paul’s Hospital Fundraising Campaign 

  LeClerc .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2649 

 Canadian Cancer Society Daffodil Month  

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2649 

 New Branding Initiative for Moose Jaw  

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2649 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Cancellation of Keewatin Country 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2650 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2650 

 Funding for Fond-du-Lac Arena 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2650 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 2650 

 Forestry Industry 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2651 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2651 

 Feasibility Study and Consultation Regarding Nuclear Development 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2651 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2652 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2653 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

PRIVATE BILLS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 902 — The Stephen and Michelene Worobetz Foundation Amendment Act 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2654 

 Bill No. 903 — The Ancient Order of Melchizedeq, Inc. Act 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2655 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Saskatchewan Energy Industry  

  Taylor ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2655, 2665 

  Harrison ......................................................................................................................................................................... 2657, 2665 

  Yates ............................................................................................................................................................................... 2659, 2665 

  Ross ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2661, 2666 

  Trew ............................................................................................................................................................................... 2662, 2666 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2663 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2665 

  Chisholm .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2665 



 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2665 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2666 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2666 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 Motion No. 1 — Saskatchewan’s Uranium Industry 

  Huyghebaert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2667 

 Recorded Division....................................................................................................................................................................... 2673 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 


