




















































Hansard: March 03, 2009


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 26B  TUESDAY, MARCH 3, 2009, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2099 

 March 3, 2009 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 60 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 60 — The Senate 

Nominee Election Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — It now being 7 

o’clock, we’ll now resume debate on Bill No. 60, The Senate 

Nominee Election Act. I recognize the member for Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 

very pleased to stand and enter into debate on this particular 

piece of legislation, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This particular piece 

of legislation, well it may have been well intended when it was 

put forward, Mr. Speaker, I think that the activities in Ottawa 

over the last two or three months have made a mockery of what 

may well have been a well-intended legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a Bill before us talking about electing our 

representatives, electing individuals who would then be 

appointed as a representative to the Senate, Mr. Speaker, and 

we had a Prime Minister saying that he would appoint those 

individuals. And then just a very short period of time ago, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that same Prime Minister went and, Mr. 

Speaker, that same Prime Minister went and appointed 18 

individuals to the Senate — doing exactly what he said he 

wouldn’t do, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And I hear the members opposite are so excited to talk about 

this legislation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I can understand them 

being upset because they put forward a piece of legislation only 

to have somebody make them look like they didn’t know what 

they were doing. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have today a non-elected Senate in 

Canada. We had a Prime Minister talk repeatedly about wanting 

to elect senators or have elections to elect senators in each 

province and then he would look to appoint those, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And then what did we have? We had the Prime 

Minister have some worry about he may not be there the next 

week, Mr. Deputy Speaker. What did he do? He went and did 

what he said he wouldn’t do. He appointed 18 members to the 

Senate, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Were any of those elected? 

Absolutely not, absolutely not. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, did he ask the provinces who they wanted 

appointed? No, he didn’t even go as far to ask the elected 

government in Saskatchewan or the legislature of Saskatchewan 

if they had any preference. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, he went one step further. He appointed 

people that don’t currently live in those provinces as well. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that is a Prime Minister, that is a Prime 

Minister who isn’t living up to what he told Canadians was 

important to him. Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a Prime Minister 

that didn’t live up to what he said was important to himself, to 

his party, and to Canadians, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So why 

should Saskatchewan people, why should Saskatchewan people 

believe that this Prime Minister would appoint anybody that 

was elected when he did just contrary to what he said he would 

do? 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, why would the 

Prime Minister not do what he said he wanted to do and have 

senators elected? Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will tell you why. First 

off because he can’t do it in the method he was trying to do it. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the only way that you can in fact have an 

elected Senate in Canada would be to take forward reform in 

the Constitution of Canada, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he could have done it the right way. He could 

have worked with Canadian provinces to actually put forward a 

constitutional change so that we could have a truly elected 

Senate in Canada but, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we didn’t see that. 

We saw this Prime Minister try to persuade governments in 

Canada and premiers across the country to put forward 

legislation to elect people in their own provinces, then he would 

appoint them. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, he didn’t do that. He didn’t do that. 

When he thought he might lose power himself, he did what he 

said he would never do; what he said should never be done, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. He did exactly opposite of what he said he 

believed in. What he tried to tell Canadians was important. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, he did exactly opposite of what he said he 

believed in — in fact, he appointed 18 unelected senators to the 

Senate of Canada, something he said he would not do. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, many, many, many Canadians in this 

country are looking for some form of Senate reform. And yes, I 

think many Canadians believe there should be Senate reform. 

But maybe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we should take a page out of 

our own democratic system and ask Canadians what that 

democratic reform should be. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we haven’t even had the opportunity as 

Canadians to have a national debate on what type of reform the 

Senate should actually undertake. Mr. Speaker, the House of 

Commons has not had the ability to have a comprehensive 

debate on the type of reform that maybe the Senate should 

undertake, Mr. Speaker. The provinces of Canada haven’t been 

able to have a comprehensive debate on the type of reform that 

perhaps Canadians would like to see. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we had a Prime Minister who was going 

to do it his way. He told us he wanted an elected Senate. He 

asked Canadian provinces to put forward legislation to elect 

senators. And then, Mr. Speaker, what did he do? What did the 

Prime Minister of Canada do? He did exactly what he said he 

wouldn’t do. He appointed 18 unelected senators less than two 

months ago, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, that leaves 

this Prime Minister with very little credibility on this issue in 

the country of Canada. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we have legislation before us that would in 



2100 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2009 

fact allow us to elect in some sort of popularity contest because 

we don’t have an ability to actually elect a senator. We have an 

ability to find out who Saskatchewan people would like to be 

there, and then the Prime Minister can or cannot appoint that 

person as he so chooses. So we don’t ever have the ability to 

actually elect a senator. What we have the ability to do is tell 

them who the people of Saskatchewan would like, and then he 

can either appoint that person or not. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this legislation doesn’t meet the needs of 

Saskatchewan people. It doesn’t meet the needs of actual 

electoral reform in the Senate, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And as a 

result of the Prime Minister’s actions, Mr. Deputy Speaker, just 

a few months ago, we don’t know that he would even carry 

through with his own word. We don’t know. We don’t know 

what his intentions would be, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because 

when his first opportunity came along — or when his first 

problem came along, pardon me — what did he do? He did 

what he said he would never do. He appointed 18 unelected 

senators to the Senate of Canada. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Bill talks about putting in place 

something that is now a mockery in our Canadian system, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. Because you can’t on one hand say you want 

this and you won’t do something, and then do exactly what you 

say you wouldn’t do, and then expect others to believe that you 

really wanted to do it and that you were committed to it, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

And we’ve seen other examples of that in this over the last 

couple of years, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We saw the government 

pass legislation on fixed election dates in Ottawa, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And then when the first . . . when this Prime Minister 

saw it as an opportune time, what did he do? He called an 

election outside his own legislation, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we need to consider what has gone on, as 

far as any form of electoral reform in Ottawa which is including 

the concept of fixed election dates and the government of 

Canada having to live up to them. The Prime Minister didn’t 

live up to his own mandate there. He didn’t live up to his own 

mandate and his own beliefs — his own position, his own stated 

beliefs, Mr. Deputy Speaker — that we should have an elected 

Senate in Canada. 

 

When he thought he might lose power, Mr. Deputy Speaker, he 

did what he said he would never do. He appointed 18 members 

to the Senate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and he did it in a very 

partisan way, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So we, as Canadians, didn’t have a say. The province of 

Saskatchewan had no method or input into that decision, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. The Prime Minister did what he said should 

not happen. 

 

So why would we then proceed with passing legislation in this 

province to tell him who we might want to be elected to the 

Senate, who we’d want appointed to the Senate, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker? Not elected, because he would never be elected, but 

who we’d want appointed to the Senate through any type of 

election process when (a) he doesn’t have to follow it; and (b) 

he’s shown he wouldn’t anyway. He wouldn’t follow his own 

direction anyway because he has proven to us when the going 

got tough, Mr. Deputy Speaker, he did what he said he would 

never do. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I could speak for hours on this 

particular piece of legislation, but I think the members of the 

government understand that we have significant concerns about 

continuing with a piece of legislation that in the last two months 

has been significantly undermined by the very actions of the 

person who says it was necessary, the very actions of the person 

who says they wanted it. When he said he would not appoint 

senators — he wanted to have provinces elect individuals that 

he would appoint — and then he goes and does what he says he 

didn’t want to do. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, he showed very clearly that he won’t 

necessarily listen to the people even if we do elect individuals. 

And Mr. Deputy Speaker, members opposite in the government 

may be concerned — and they should be concerned — that this 

legislation that they put forward doesn’t mean anything 

anymore because of the actions of the Prime Minister. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they should just withdraw this 

legislation. They should withdraw this legislation today and not 

continue this mockery when the Prime Minister has clearly 

indicated that he doesn’t believe in it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. He 

asked this government to put forward the legislation. They do 

and then he undermines their own position. He undermines their 

own position to proceed with this legislation in a meaningful 

way, even if the people of Saskatchewan wanted it, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. But the people of Saskatchewan never had a vote on it. 

They never had a chance to discuss it. But even before they 

might have had that chance, the Prime Minister has undermined 

it. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I said I could speak for hours 

about this particular legislation. I don’t intend to do that, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. What I would like to do at this point, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, after clearly indicating to the people of 

Saskatchewan and to the members opposite, that this legislation 

should be withdrawn. It should simply be withdrawn after the 

Prime Minister has appointed 18 unelected senators, saying he 

wouldn’t do it. 

 

This government should take the initiative to tell the Prime 

Minister, we don’t like to be told, we don’t like to be told that 

you want us to do something. We don’t like to be told that we 

need to elect individuals to indicate who should be appointed to 

the Senate and then not do it. We don’t want to be the puppets 

of Ottawa, that we need to tell the Prime Minister that we don’t 

want to be their puppets. 

 

And the best way to do that is to withdraw this legislation, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, withdraw this legislation and not continue to 

make a fool of all those who sit in this Saskatchewan 

legislature, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with that I would move that we 

adjourn debate. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — The member for 

Regina Dewdney has made a motion to adjourn debate. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 



March 3, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2101 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 65 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 65 — The 

Seizure of Criminal Property Act, 2008 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s interesting, as 

much as a pleasure, to speak to this Bill, The Seizure of 

Criminal Property Act. And I’ll come to why it’s more 

interesting than some legislation of its type, even, although all 

legislation of its type’s interesting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To give some context or background to this Bill and legislation 

like this, I’m sure all members will appreciate and many 

members of the public watching us or reading Hansard — as I 

know so many are fond of doing — will appreciate that within 

the Canadian Constitution, responsibility for criminal law, both 

substantially and much of it procedurally, falls with the national 

government, but the administration of crime falls to the 

provincial government. 

 

There are a lot of ways, we have come to learn through 

experience, of suppressing crime other than through the 

procedures and the substantive criminal law as set out in the 

Criminal Code and falling within federal responsibility. There’s 

ways of being tough on crime that happen to fall within 

provincial responsibility. As a matter of fact, quite a few of 

them fall within that broad range of property and civil rights, 

and there are things that the national government can’t do. 

 

I think sometimes ministers of Justice at the provincial level 

envy their federal counterparts’ ability to change rules about 

sentencing or to increase sentences or to add new ways, new 

methods of homicide to the Criminal Code and do all those 

things. At least it seems to me that ministers of Justice often 

envy their federal counterparts because they’re always calling 

upon their federal counterparts to do what they can’t do, and 

trying to ride a bandwagon that they just don’t have the reins 

on, or sometimes they’re just joining the chorus, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But there are things that can be done provincially and, as a 

matter of fact, they can only be done provincially because they 

fall within provincial powers. The effect of them is to suppress, 

prevent crime. And it is entirely of course constitutional 

because of the type of tools that they are, and they’re civil tools. 

 

We’ll use a few examples, Mr. Speaker, from recent legislative 

experience. The last NDP [New Democratic Party] government 

brought in a number of measures that had that effect. 

 

When I was minister of Justice, I noticed a gap between 

municipal bylaws — the ability of municipalities to close down 

buildings that were fire traps or health hazards — and the 

Criminal Code that required proof that an individual was 

carrying on a criminal activity beyond a reasonable doubt. And 

within this gap operated somewhat formal, in some cases, or 

informal criminal enterprises in neighbourhoods for years, Mr. 

Speaker, and maybe somebody would be convicted of a crime 

arising from the activity in that building. But at the end of the 

day, that building and the activities in that building carried on. 

 

[19:15] 

 

And though we began to work better, and I’m sure the current 

government is maintaining this policy, working better with the 

cities in dovetailing what the province can do, what the police 

can do under their criminal powers, and what the municipalities 

can do with their bylaws, there remained a gap. And that gap 

was filled by the safer communities and neighbourhoods 

program. And I know that at the time, I wouldn’t say that the 

members opposite, when they were in opposition, were opposed 

to the initiative, but at least they were skeptical, Mr. Speaker. 

But I think the program has proved itself, and I don’t expect 

that it will receive anything but full support from the 

government. 

 

Another civil tool that the previous NDP government had 

implemented was under The Criminal Enterprise Suppression 

Act. Now this the members opposite had a bit more difficulty 

with. The current Minister of Justice, when he was Justice 

critic, called it a chainsaw swatting a fly. Now put aside the 

crime against the English language there, Mr. Speaker, put 

aside that crime, I think it was wrong-headed in other ways, Mr. 

Speaker. It expressed a concern about property rights over 

above the safety and security of Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

And I believe that the member from Saskatoon Southeast who 

is now the Minister of Justice has seen the error of his ways. I 

note that he has had a couple of opportunities to repeal the Bill 

that he was so opposed to, that he so condemned in this 

Chamber, and he hasn’t taken them, and I trust he won’t take 

them. I think he appreciates the value of that Bill and of this 

type of legislation. As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, he so 

appreciates the value of this type of legislation that he is 

bringing in another one of the Bills that was passed when I was 

minister of Justice — again, Mr. Speaker, with a change, with a 

change that I will come to. 

 

Now the value of these tools that we were so proactive in using 

when we were in government, Mr. Speaker, I think proved 

itself. And combined with crime reduction strategies in 

partnership with municipalities — Regina, Saskatoon on break 

and enter, Regina on auto theft, Prince Albert, North Battleford, 

and spreading throughout the province — I think we had a 

considerable effect. And during the four years that I was 

minister of Justice the crime rate in Saskatchewan dropped 

every single year of those four years. 

 

Now I don’t take sole credit for that. I was building on the work 

of my predecessors but I think it shows the province is not 

helpless because it doesn’t have strict constitutional control 

over the criminal law, that in fact a lot of things can be done to 

fight crime that fall within the jurisdiction of the province. 

 

I think the NDP government proved that, and they proved it 

with a couple pieces of legislation I’ve already mentioned — 

The Safer Communities and Neighbourhoods Act, which I think 

is sort of the flagship of the crime suppression program of the 



2102 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2009 

previous government, and The Criminal Enterprise Suppression 

Act. 

 

But another Bill was The Seizure of Criminal Property Act and 

that legislation was passed. And I will tell the House what that 

legislation did, although many members here were there at the 

time the NDP government proposed this legislation and it was 

passed and brought into effect. 

 

And what the Act allowed to happen was that property that was 

either the proceeds of crime or used in a crime could be seized 

and sold, upon application to a court. And that was the 

procedural safeguard. No question about its constitutionality, at 

least not in my mind, Mr. Speaker. I’m not aware of where 

similar legislation in Canada has been successfully challenged. I 

don’t believe this legislation was challenged, and I don’t think 

if it was challenged, that it would fail to withstand that 

challenge, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The application in the case of the NDP legislation could either 

be made by the office of the Minister of Justice and Attorney 

General or by local police chiefs and RCMP [Royal Canadian 

Mounted Police] commanders. Either could make the 

application, Mr. Speaker, and if the courts thought that there 

was evidence — sufficient evidence, Mr. Speaker — that the 

property was the proceeds of a crime or had been used in a 

crime, the court could order it to be seized and then when 

appropriate sold. That was not the decision of the Minister of 

Justice nor was it the decision of the police chief. It was only 

their decision to make the application if they thought they had 

sufficient evidence to make the argument. 

 

Now I know that the Minister of Justice, then when he was the 

Justice critic — the member from Saskatoon Southeast — for 

some reason which I have yet to understand but maybe will get 

explained to me in committee, did not believe that police chiefs 

should have the power to make the application, Mr. Speaker. I 

didn’t understand the argument then. And it wasn’t really made 

as an argument. It was made as questions. Why would you 

allow police chiefs to have this ability to make these 

applications? And I answered the questions the best I could, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So I could understand if the minister wanted to amend the Bill, 

amend the legislation that didn’t pass by the previous 

legislature, brought in by the previous NDP government, 

wanted to amend it to remove this ability from police chiefs and 

RCMP commanders to make these applications. I don’t 

understand the reasoning behind that, but I understand that he 

felt that that was an appropriate thing to do — that all the power 

to make this application should rest in his office and that police 

chiefs cannot be trusted, not with seizing and selling property, 

but making an application to the court to seize and sell property. 

That that power should be removed from police chiefs and 

RCMP commanders on the ground, aware of all the facts 

around the property, the use of the property, or where the 

property came from, Mr. Speaker. 

 

He could have just brought in an amendment to the Bill if he 

wanted to create an office within the Ministry of Justice, could 

have made that part of the amendment as well, Mr. Speaker. 

But that’s not what he did. Instead, bringing in an amendment 

that would highlight that he didn’t trust police chiefs and didn’t 

want them to have this ability to make these court applications, 

he brings in a whole new seizure of criminal property Bill 

which leaves that out, Mr. Speaker. And I have to admit, when 

this was announced with great fanfare and lights downstairs in 

this building, I thought of Yogi Berra and his saying that this is 

déjà vu all over again. Why are we bringing a seizure of 

criminal property Act when we already have a seizure of 

criminal property Act? 

 

When I looked at the Bill, well the only effect of it really is, the 

only substantive effect of this Bill is to take this power to make 

an application to the court away from police chiefs and RCMP 

commanders. That’s the only reason to replace this Bill with 

this Bill. 

 

There’s actually more happening here than in some cases. I 

mean we have right now vital statistics legislation — enormous 

pieces of legislation, Mr. Speaker — two Bills which repeal the 

previous legislation brought in by the NDP government but are 

substantially the same except little minor details, Mr. Speaker. 

Things that could have clearly been put in by amendment, but 

for some reason the government doesn’t want to draw attention 

to them. I don’t know why. So they’re bringing in the whole 

legislation all over again, Mr. Speaker, with almost no changes. 

 

An Hon. Member: — It’s called rebranding. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Yes, yes. And I think the Minister of Justice 

is being somewhat candid here, maybe more than somewhat 

candid. He just called it rebranding. So we bring in essentially 

the same Bill so we can say, as the Minister of Justice — I think 

he’s a little embarrassed that he blurted that out — but that we 

could just rebrand. 

 

And I’ll come to this, Mr. Speaker, because I’ll be talking about 

witness protection legislation, and that is a classic case of 

rebranding because that was also a program brought in by the 

NDP government, unfunded for the first year of this 

government, unfunded for the first year of this government and 

now, now, rebranded as the Minister of Justice would call it — 

rebranded witness protection Act. 

 

But to return to this Bill, Mr. Speaker, I think there’s a little bit 

more than just rebranding here. I think there is rebranding, Mr. 

Speaker . . . And you know, Mr. Speaker, the Premier called 

this Legislative Assembly a zoo, and I think there’s members of 

the government who are trying to prove him right. And I 

appreciate that they’d like to prove their leader right, Mr. 

Speaker, but, you know, I don’t think they should go to that 

extent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a little bit more than rebranding because it 

does make a significant change, and the way to have made that 

significant change was to have been honest about making it. We 

have a seizure of criminal property Act. We don’t want police 

chiefs to have this power. We don’t want them to have the 

ability to make this application, so we’re going to amend the 

Act so that they no longer have that power. That would have 

been the straightforward, candid thing to do. 

 

If the government wanted to be as candid as the minister was 

when he said, well we’re just bringing in almost identical or 

similar legislation for the point of rebranding, if they had been 



March 3, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2103 

as honest as he was in that comment, then they would have just 

made the amendments to the legislation that was already in 

place, Mr. Speaker. Because they didn’t add any ability of the 

Minister of Justice’s office to make the application. That was 

already in the previous legislation. This is an Act that looks like 

an addition but in fact, Mr. Speaker, is a subtraction. 

 

Now I suppose there might be an explanation for why this is 

taking place other than the minister’s admission or 

announcement that it’s just rebranding. But that said, Mr. 

Speaker, I do look forward to the opportunity to have some of 

these questions asked in committee and answered, Mr. Speaker. 

I’m still curious about some of the Minister of Justice’s 

concerns about our province’s police chiefs. And to allow this 

Bill to go to committee where we can ask those questions and 

get maybe some better answers than rebranding, Mr. Speaker, I 

will suggest that this Bill now move to committee. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — The question before 

the Assembly is a motion by the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin that Bill No. 65, The Seizure of Criminal Property 

Act, 2008 be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — To which committee 

shall this Bill be referred? 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — This Bill stands 

committed to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 66 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Hickie that Bill No. 66 — The Witness 

Protection Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Like The Seizure of 

Criminal Property Act, The Witness Protection Act is again as 

Yogi Berra said, déjà vu all over again. The NDP government 

brought in a program in 2007 called the high-risk witness 

protection program. And the reason for it, Mr. Speaker, was that 

in consultation with law enforcement in the province of 

Saskatchewan, it became clear that there was another gap, and 

that was in respect to witnesses who didn’t fall under the federal 

witness protection program. 

 

Now the minister responsible for this legislation, the Minister of 

Corrections and Public Safety, may, I suppose, in one way be 

forgiven for not realizing the necessity for a program like this 

for the first year that he was minister because apparently the 

minister did not read his mandate letter in respect to doing 

something about gangs in correctional facilities. Apparently the 

minister did not read the election program of his party in respect 

to these matters as well, and so I guess the minister could be 

excused for being somewhat oblivious of the issue of gang 

intimidation of witnesses. 

 

[19:30] 

 

However the previous government, the NDP government, was 

not and brought in a program to provide funding for the 

protection of witnesses prior to when they testify. There was in 

fact $80,000 put aside for the balance of the 2007-2008 fiscal 

year and $320,000 budgeted for the program annually after that. 

So in the last year, the fiscal year that we just went through, was 

the first year of a Sask Party government budget. There was a 

funding provided for, or forecast, for this program. 

 

Now the program did not survive the election of the Sask Party 

government. Now I don’t really believe that the minister did not 

see the value of the program, Mr. Speaker. I tend to believe, Mr. 

Speaker — although I guess we’ll never know, or those of us on 

this side of the House will never know — that it just didn’t 

make the cut, Mr. Speaker, that the minister did not have the 

clout or the influence in cabinet to ensure the funding that was 

already in place for this program. 

 

And it’s sort of like the revisionist history on Station 20 a little 

bit, Mr. Speaker. Well it hadn’t been spent yet, so it really 

wasn’t there, so we didn’t really grab it away. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, everybody knows better. And in this case the program 

had been established. The money was there. It was a matter for 

this government of making sure that a budget that was very 

much like a continuation of the previous government’s budget, 

that that budget carried on with this program as well. But it did 

not, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Before, the Minister of Justice said from his seat, in response to 

some of my remarks on a previous Bill, that this is a matter of 

rebranding. I would not have so ascribed that motive of actually 

not bringing this program in, not funding it for a year, just so 

that you could rebrand it as a Sask Party government program. I 

wouldn’t have suggested that. I would have just thought that it 

was a bit of negligence, it was oversight, and that it was maybe 

a lack of the minister responsible’s clout within cabinet and 

when speaking to Treasury Board — if in fact this government 

has much of a Treasury Board. 

 

But there’s no question, Mr. Speaker, that the program is 

valuable. It’s necessary. Probably more can be done as 

resources become available to do that. It probably does not need 

a lot of Justice spending, and Corrections and Public Safety 

spending does not need its own legislation. This probably does 

not need its own legislation, but the government wants to 

rebrand programs as their programs, and if one way of doing it, 

I guess, is to bring in the legislation, I’m not sure that, Mr. 

Speaker, that it actually does any harm. 

 

It’s not necessary, and we shouldn’t be passing unnecessary 

legislation because we find ourselves — as I will be speaking to 

later — just repealing it later. And I don’t know if The Witness 

Protection Act will ever be repealed. But with programming 



2104 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2009 

like this that could probably . . . should change, should get 

better, should improve, I’m not sure if it really belongs within 

the strictures of an Act. 

 

But the government wants to rebrand and try to pretend that this 

program was theirs, that they had brought it in, and for a year, 

for a year, that the minister responsible didn’t seem to recognize 

that it was necessary because it’s not in last year’s budget, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s not. Although the previous government had clearly 

made it a priority, this government decided not to put it in the 

last year’s budget. 

 

So now they’re going to put it in this year’s budget and make up 

for last year, all the unprotected witnesses last year, by giving 

them an Act, Mr. Speaker. Well that’s not entirely appropriate. 

But, Mr. Speaker, as they say, better late than never. Let’s move 

this to committee. Let’s deal with the details, and let’s get the 

program up and running again. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — The question before 

the Assembly is a motion by the member for Meewasin, Bill 

No. 66, The Witness Protection Act be now read a second time. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — To which committee 

shall this Bill be referred? 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the Standing 

Committee on Human Services. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — This Bill now stands 

committed  to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 

 

Bill No. 74 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 74 — The 

Miscellaneous Statutes (English) Amendment and Repeal Act, 

2008 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Now this Bill is the 

reason why the legislature shouldn’t be passing legislation just 

for show, Mr. Speaker. And I’m not suggesting that any of the 

Bills being repealed were passed, were just for show . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . The Minister of Health thinks I’m 

doing all the heavy lifting tonight, but I’m not tired yet. And I 

think I’m going to be picking up speed, Mr. Speaker, if he will 

allow me to. None of the Bills being repealed, Mr. Speaker, I 

think, were passed just for show. And I think some of them all 

had, they all had good purposes. But circumstances have 

changed and they are, arguably at least, no longer required. We 

can have a greater investigation of that in committee. 

 

So I’m not suggesting that there’s legislation that’s being 

repealed in this Bill that should never have been passed in the 

first place. But, Mr. Speaker, it does, I think, make worthy of 

note — and this might be as good a time to note it as any — 

when we’re repealing legislation that has now become 

superfluous and irrelevant, that we pass legislation here to 

improve the situation for the people in the province of 

Saskatchewan. We pass legislation, in theory at least, to remedy 

evils. We pass legislation, at least in principle, to affect  

changes to the better, to the common good, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we should not be passing legislation primarily — and I 

don’t mean to be naïve, but the shadow of democracy is politics 

— but we shouldn’t be passing legislation primarily for the 

purpose of politics. Legislation should have a real effect. And 

good government is good politics; good politics is good 

government. So legislation that has a good effect should be 

good politics. 

 

We shouldn’t have to pass legislation just for show, which I 

suggest The Witness Protection Act, if it isn’t that, is very close 

to that, Mr. Speaker. And we don’t need to be doing that in this 

legislature. We don’t need to be dealing with popularity 

contests that have been made irrelevant by the Prime Minister 

in the case of the so-called Senate election nominee Bill 

because, Mr. Speaker, we find ourselves with Bills that actually 

had some purpose, some real purpose beyond politics, that now 

are no longer necessary and need to be repealed. And surely 

that’s enough, Mr. Speaker. We don’t need to add Bills for 

political purposes alone as well. 

 

In any case, Mr. Speaker, I don’t intend to speak at length in 

defence of any of the Bills being repealed here. We’ll want to 

make sure that in fact they all have outlived their usefulness, 

but we can best do that in committee, Mr. Speaker. And that’s 

what I propose that we do. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — The question before 

the Assembly is a motion by the member from Meewasin that 

Bill No. 74, The Miscellaneous Statutes (English) Amendment 

and Repeal Act, 2008 now be read a second time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — To which committee 

shall it be referred? 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — To the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — This Bill stands 

committed to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 75 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 



March 3, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2105 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 75 — The 

Miscellaneous Statutes (Bilingual) Amendment and Repeal 

Act, 2008/Loi corrective (lois bilingues) de 2008 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member from Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Like the previous 

Bill that has just moved on from this Chamber into committee, 

this is another amendment and repeal Bill, Mr. Speaker, 

removing provisions from legislation that were never 

proclaimed — and that perhaps now should not be proclaimed, 

Mr. Speaker — and making some changes to correct spelling 

and grammatical errors which I assume, Mr. Speaker, predates 

spell-check. 

 

I suspect we may not be doing quite as much of that in the 

future, Mr. Speaker. We’re still doing some of it, and as I’ve 

learnt myself, spell-check does not correct all sins. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are probably relatively few questions, even 

in committee, on this Bill, but there will be some. And it’s 

necessary to move it on with its sister legislation, the previous 

Bill that I just commented on, and I would propose to do that, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — The question before 

the Assembly is a motion by the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin that Bill No. 75, The Miscellaneous Statutes 

(Bilingual) Amendment and Repeal Act, 2008 now be read a 

second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — To which committee 

shall this Bill be referred? 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Bill as well 

to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — This Bill stands 

committed to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 50 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 50 — The 

Missing Persons and Presumption of Death Act be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This legislation 

deals with an aspect of great human tragedy which most of us 

are aware of. When we watch the news, we see a family or a 

group of families asking the question as to where their loved 

one is, what’s happened to them, and why can’t there be an 

answer. 

 

The NDP government were very concerned about the issues 

arising from missing persons in our province, took a number of 

steps but we didn’t do them all without talking to the people 

affected, Mr. Speaker. We did increase, funded by the province 

of Saskatchewan, dramatically increase the number of historical 

crimes officers, with the belief that there should be no cold 

cases in the case of a missing person in the province of 

Saskatchewan. There should be no cold cases; there should be 

no closed cases, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We also dramatically increased provincial funding for violent 

crime analysts, Mr. Speaker. I think that history has shown the 

value of those investments. Crimes, long-standing issues — and 

it turns out, unfortunately, violent crimes, Mr. Speaker — have 

been resolved, have been solved since these added resources 

were brought in. We all hope, I know, that there would have 

been a happier conclusion to some of those investigations, but 

some of the unanswered questions have been answered in some 

cases for some families, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As I said, the action that we took on the addition of the 

specialized police resources was quick and decisive, but not all 

the steps were done without consultation with organizations that 

work very hard, very committed — in some cases long-standing 

commitments — to the issue of missing persons, Mr. Speaker, 

and without consultations with the families of missing persons. 

 

[19:45] 

 

And a number of recommendations, changes to police policy 

were made. A number of other recommendations were made to 

the government, Mr. Speaker, and so other changes have been 

made other than the important addition to police resources. And 

we are pleased, Mr. Speaker, that some of the issues that arise, 

unfortunately, from this tragedy are still being addressed. 

 

And this issue of management of estates and how one deals 

with the estate of someone who might be presumed to be dead 

and may or may not in fact be dead, Mr. Speaker, is an 

important issue. It’s not the most important issue, but it’s an 

important issue. And in principle we are supportive of the 

government’s work. We’ll want to make sure that details are 

well taken care of, well handled. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure I can think of a more serious matter 

that’s before us this evening, as a matter of fact, than these 

matters surrounding the issues of a missing person, perhaps 

dead, perhaps presumed to be dead under the effect of this 

legislation — that they be handled correctly, Mr. Speaker, that 

they be handled soberly and with some thought. And if I 

hesitate, it’s only because I want to make sure that I give some 

thought to my words because I think the issue requires some, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The opposition has given it some thought here, and I’ve wanted 

to reflect that in my remarks. I trust that the Ministry of Justice 

gave it some considerable thought in drafting, that due 



2106 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2009 

consideration was given to any recommendations made by the 

committee struck by the previous government in respect to the 

issues surrounding missing persons when the legislation was 

drafted, Mr. Speaker. We will want to determine that all that is 

the case when the matter proceeds to committee, which I 

propose that it now do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — The question before 

the Assembly is a motion by the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin that Bill No. 50, The Missing Persons and 

Presumption of Death Act now be read a second time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — To which committee 

shall it be referred? 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — The Bill now stands 

committed to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 44 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 44 — The 

Agreements of Sale Cancellation Amendment Act, 2008 be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 

stand tonight and have the opportunity to comment and provide 

some thoughts on Bill 44, The Agreements of Sale Cancellation 

Amendment Act, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Over the course of Saskatchewan history of course there’s a 

great deal of legislation that has been passed through the 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, and this piece of 

legislation that we’re looking at this evening now, Mr. Speaker, 

in Bill 44, goes back to legislation that was originally passed in 

1917 — a considerable time ago, Mr. Speaker. It’s a Bill that of 

course has guided and influenced a lot of the transactions and 

development that has occurred in the province over the years. 

 

But it’s only natural, Mr. Speaker, when looking at a piece of 

legislation that was passed so many decades ago that over the 

course of time, as with anything, over the course of time there’s 

the need to review legislation, to examine legislation, to take a 

look and see if there are perhaps ways the legislation could be 

improved in order to gain efficiency or streamline the process in 

order to make sure that the original intent of the legislation is in 

fact continuing to serve the people of Saskatchewan. And from 

my reading of this Bill, Mr. Speaker, it would appear that this 

amendment Act is in fact an attempt to do much of that — to 

modernize and to improve the way that this legislation 

influences and determines land sales here in the province. 

 

When purchasing land or when there is transaction, there are of 

course a number of ways that that can occur. The sale can 

happen all at once, Mr. Speaker, or in other situations it’s 

possible that the payments for land can be delivered over a 

period of months or years even, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so with the legislation that was originally passed way back 

in 1917, a result of the process that we’ve seen with the way the 

legislation has been working to date, is that one can come 

across a situation where there has been an agreement to 

purchase land over an extended period of time, but for whatever 

reason, Mr. Speaker, that sale has not been completed and 

problems have come up for the two parties involved in the sale 

of land. 

 

And when that has occurred, Mr. Speaker, in the past, over the 

past years, it can bring the situation present where the person 

who was not able to make the payments on the land over a 

course of more than six months, that person holds up the 

process and it can slow down the sale of the land and cause 

problems for all the parties involved to bring a resolution to the 

settlement. So in a sense it can bring a strange bargaining power 

to the person that is unable to live up to the commitment that 

was made for the purchase of the land. 

 

So this amendment Act is a response to that situation that can 

come up from time to time. It’s an attempt to provide clarity 

and a better definition of what the contract or agreement for the 

sale of land would be in a given situation, so that when this 

situation does become a reality for a party, there’s a faster 

resolution that serves the interests of the parties that are 

involved, as well as the province as a whole, Mr. Speaker, as of 

course land sales are a reality and an important part of the 

commerce and the transactions that go on in our province. 

 

So in the past, Mr. Speaker, before . . . If this legislation does 

go through and take effect, in the past the resolution has been 

sought through the court system, so that the individual not 

receiving payment would be required to go through the courts 

in order to find a resolution and complete the process. This will 

end that, so from the perspective of increasing the efficiency of 

the legal system as well and for everyone involved having a 

faster and more efficient way of handling the matter, from the 

perspective of the opposition, we see this as a positive move 

and a way of modernizing the existence of this Act — an Act 

that does go back, as I mentioned, to 1917. 

 

However, whenever looking at this type of legislation that does 

have a fairly significant effect for parties that are involved in 

the sale of a piece of land, it’s important to get it right. And I 

know there have been a few members from this side of the 

House that have had the opportunity so far to comment on Bill 

44, and I do believe that there will be others who would like to 

share some thoughts and some reflections and some of the ideas 

around this legislation before in fact it is sent to committee. So 

having stated some of my thoughts on this, how the 

modernization process of legislation is a positive thing, I would 

at this time move that we adjourn debate on Bill 44, Mr. 

Speaker. 



March 3, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2107 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — It has been moved 

that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 44. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 73 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Norris that Bill No. 73 — The 

University of Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 2008 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

It’s a pleasure to engage in this debate on Bill 73, The 

University of Saskatchewan Amendment Act. It’s an honour to 

be part of this. 

 

I went to school at the University of Saskatchewan and got my 

masters in education there, and I feel a real connection with it. 

My daughter also got her law degree there and my brother an 

engineering degree, one of the last mining engineering degrees 

from the University of Saskatchewan. In fact another brother 

got his voc ag papers there as well. So we have a strong 

connection with . . . 

 

The University of Saskatchewan has a real history in this 

province and in fact in this country. And people look to it as a 

real institution that shows educational leadership, both in the 

community and also academically, in the work that it does in 

helping young people understand the world that we find 

ourselves in, but also how we can be innovative in that world. 

And so we truly do value the U of S [University of 

Saskatchewan] and we look with strong listening to the points 

that they make about how they want to become a modern 

university. 

 

What are some of the challenges that face them? And we look at 

some of the amendments here, and I have some questions about 

this. I know that we are looking forward to the discussion in 

committee about this, and I do hope that the minister has taken 

the time to do some consultations, to talk to some of the people 

that are involved, that are connected to the university. I’m 

interested in hearing what the teaching staff, the research staff 

have to say about these amendments. 

 

I’m very interested in hearing what the students have to say 

about these amendments. I mean they are the future of the 

province. They’re the future of the university. 

 

And when we look back at the universities we’ve graduated 

from or spent some time at, we feel a real connection with that 

institution. We feel that it’s really helped shaped who we are 

and what this province is all about. It’s an important part of our 

identity. And we know when we talk about the different ways 

the U of S represents itself, whether it’s through its research or 

through even its sporting teams, we all connect very much, take 

a lot of pride in the work that the U of S does. 

And so when we look at these amendments, I do have some 

questions. First of all — and I know I’ve heard some of the 

speeches on this — I talk about the change in the way that the 

method of selection for the chancellor will go, from being an 

election to a nomination by joint senate or board search 

committee, followed by an appointment by the senate. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have to tell you tonight that we’ve 

had some very interesting debates and speeches about elections, 

about the senates, about the appointments, and about 

participation, engagement. And I wonder, this government here 

seems to be a little disconnected here. On one hand, they want 

to . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . A little disconnected. A little 

bit disconnected. 

 

And they don’t know what one hand is doing in terms of the 

other hand. Here you have a government that’s putting forward 

a Bill that, and I’ll use their words, calls for an election to the 

Senate — I know my colleague from Meewasin put a good 

argument here — calls about, talked about an election to a 

Senate. They’re not happy about appointments, not happy about 

appointments, and then in this Bill they want to move from an 

election to an appointment. 

 

What is it? Do they like elections? Do they like appointments? 

What is it? One day they want elections; the next day they’re all 

for appointments. I really do think the cabinet over there really 

needs to get their act together on this. What is it that they really 

want? 

 

Both institutions . . . I understand that there’s some low 

participation rate in terms of the voting for chancellor, you 

know. And so what do you do? You take away the opportunity 

to become fully engaged in the process and say, no, we just give 

up. What we want to do is have an appointment process. We 

really don’t believe that the people have an opinion on this. We 

believe in the appointment process for the University of 

Saskatchewan. That’s what they say. They believe in the 

appointment process. 

 

But for the Senate of Canada right now, that’s an appointment 

process which the current Prime Minister took full advantage of 

— on one hand said he liked to do elections, but when the 

moment came, he appointed people. All these inconsistencies, 

all these inconsistencies really speak to what the problem is 

with so much of the legislation that’s coming out from this 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[20:00] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the other problem I have and I have some 

questions about is around the visitor, the elimination of the 

position of visitor. And this is what the minister said when he 

introduced this back on November 19, 2008, and I’ll quote, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker: “And it explained that the traditional position 

of visitor as an avenue of appeal was a holdover from the 

earliest days of university governance in the United Kingdom.” 

Quite correct. That is true. That’s the history. 

 

He goes on to say, and I quote, “Today the university’s robust 

internal mechanisms are balanced by a number of external 

avenues of appeal . . .” The question I have is, what are those 

external avenues of appeal? We really don’t know. He’s not 



2108 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2009 

clear. The notes that come along to explain the Bill don’t 

outline that. 

 

And we see, and I’ve done a little bit of research — the library 

was very helpful today — because I wanted to know a little bit 

more about what is a visitor. What is the role of a visitor? And 

we can see, we can see that this may be a change that we 

haven’t quite fully thought out. This is a challenge. We have 

unintended consequences. We see there’s been examples — and 

I’ll talk a little bit about this — at other universities where they 

don’t have a visitor. And quite clearly the courts have seen if 

there’s not a visitor, then the courts can be involved. If there is a 

visitor, a formal visitor, then the courts won’t be involved. So 

does the University of Saskatchewan fully understand the 

implications of removing this? 

 

So I’ll go through this a little bit. Here is the legal definition 

that was provided to me from the New Oxford Companion to 

Law, 2008. It talks about the visitor is “a domestic forum 

appointed by the founder for the purpose of regulating the 

foundation’s domestic affairs in accordance with its statutes, 

including the determination of the domestic disputes.”  

 

And so clearly the founder in this case would be, I think, the 

province of Saskatchewan that established the University of 

Saskatchewan and is the prime benefactor, the main source of 

funding for the University of Saskatchewan. And so we have an 

interest to make sure that the original foundation, the original 

principles the U of S was founded on, are adhered to and that 

the domestic disputes can be resolved in a fair and equitable 

way, and there is a process. And clearly there is a process. 

 

It goes on to talk about legal status of higher educational 

institutions. And it talks about that there really are seven 

specific areas that need to be concerned or considered. And 

what are some of those areas that really need to be considered 

when you’re talking about higher educational institutions? Well 

the first is the legal status. Okay, we’ll . . . that’s not about this 

tonight; that’s fair enough. 

 

Another one is fair access to higher education. That’s a major 

concern for all of us; we all talk about that. In fact, just 

yesterday we had questions about tuition fees and how tuitions 

were going to go up, and the minister assured us that they 

would be affordable. We have some real concerns about that. 

But one of the concerns, Deputy Speaker, that I did not realize 

that was a major concern when you come to higher educational 

institutions is the visitorial jurisdiction. 

 

What is the jurisdiction of the visitor? And it goes on to talk 

about that. It talks about how it’s so important to have a fair 

system of dispute resolution. Whether it’s contract of 

employment for the teachers and the support staff or for the 

students, somehow you have to make sure things can be 

resolved at the university level. 

 

What’s interesting, this has been talked about in Australia. And 

we often think . . . We look at Australia for comparisons, and 

they talked about how they’ve moved away from that. In fact in 

Australia the visitorial jurisdiction was, and I’ll quote here, was 

rarely invoked prior to 1979. But since that time, there have 

been about 200 attempts to invoke the powers of the visitor. 

 

And although there’s only been 10 petitioners that have been 

successful or partially successful, we know that in University of 

Saskatchewan, I know of one case where the visitor has been 

petitioned, and that case was successful. And I’d hope that that 

was okay, that this is not a little bit of resolving that issue. But 

we need to make sure that there is a fair process involved. 

 

I found this piece very interesting. Now many people would 

know or heard of Trent University in Ontario. They had some 

major dispute in 2000; I don’t want to go into the whole case. 

This article here is entitled the “Judicial Review in the 

Community of Scholars: A Short History of Kulchyski v. Trent 

University.” And I understand it was about closing some of the 

colleges and the process that was engaged in terms of closing 

two of the colleges, and there was a dispute about who had the 

power or authority to make some of those decisions. 

 

And so it ended up going to court. In fact it ended up going all 

the way up to the Supreme Court of Canada. And the writer of 

this article talked about what might have happened if this could 

have been taken on in a different way. And I’ll quote here from 

page 391: 

 

This battle was not so much about bricks and mortar as it 

was about the very philosophical underpinnings of Trent 

University. At stake was power; whoever won the battle 

would have the power to impose their vision for the 

University. 

 

And again we’re talking about the foundational principles: 

 

The majority’s analysis missed the point: who had power 

to decide? Broad powers were granted to each, which were 

meant to be as definitive and conclusive as possible but, 

like Canada’s own federal-provincial division of powers, 

conclusiveness was not possible. New and unforeseen 

challenges emerge and must be accommodated within the 

existing constitutional rubric; this is rarely an easy fit. The 

incorporating statute no process to resolve the dispute and 

no University Visitor existed to resolve it. 

 

Now when they go on to talk about the university visitor, in the 

footnote it talks about “The New Brunswick Court of Queens 

Bench held that the court would not interfere in the University 

of New Brunswick’s internal affairs because it was the 

jurisdiction of the University’s Visitor.” 

 

So it was clear and it seems to be the tradition for the court not 

to be involved in internal processes of the university if it has a 

visitor. If it has no visitor, then it’s open game. Are we going 

down that back road? I’m not sure. I’m not a lawyer, but I have 

some concerns, and that’s what I want to raise tonight. And I 

hope that can be addressed in committee. 

 

This is an interesting . . . just a little piece here I want to close 

on, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And this is from the Higher Learning 

education magazine or Times Higher Education and it is from 

April 6, 2001. And it talks about, and I’ll quote from this: 

 

From the leading lights of British higher education, there 

is talk of ambitious change throughout the sector. Mergers, 

e-universities, foundation degrees, new approaches to 

credit accumulation and transfers are all under discussion. 



March 3, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2109 

But what price action? The apparent impossibility of 

removing the medieval barnacle of the visitor system, 

established originally to check heresy in Oxbridge 

colleges, suggests that higher education’s reforming zeal 

may be sound and fury signifying little. What is proposed 

is a feeble compromise whereby university visitors would 

be asked to refer student complaints to an ombudsman 

paid by universities, or preferably by the government. 

 

But they’re unclear about what to do with the staff. Now it goes 

on to talk about . . . 

 

[There are] . . . sound reasons to do with protecting 

autonomous institutions from political interference, 

changing universities’ constitutions is difficult. But that is 

not a good reason for keeping this . . . [visitor]. 

 

If the visitors remain, they will either be reduced to 

postboxes for the ombudsman, or they will carry on 

considering complaints with resulting confusion, delay, 

duplication of effort and possible legal challenge. Neither 

is satisfactory. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have some questions. I don’t know 

which is better. I do think though there needs to be a good 

discussion about this because clearly around the world, whether 

it’s Australia, whether it’s . . . I have questions, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I have questions. And the questions are for the 

minister in committee, that when we go down this road, we 

need to make sure the university knows what they’re doing, 

okay? That’s what’s really important. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this has been talked about around the 

world. Australia’s states have looked at it. United Kingdom has 

taken a look at it. We see what’s happened at Trent University. 

Are there lessons from Trent University? This side over here 

that can’t make up its mind whether it wants to be appointments 

or whether it wants elections. They want to get rid of a visitor, 

but they don’t know what a visitor is. They just want an answer 

right away, yes or no. 

 

I tell you what you got to do, and this is what you do at 

university. You learn all about it. You study it, and you get the 

minister in for some good questions in committee. Therefore, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate. Thank 

you. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Motion is to adjourn 

debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 43 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 43 — The 

Trespass to Property Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 

rise and to speak on Bill No. 43, The Trespass to Property Act. 

There’s a number of questions that I need addressed and I think 

the people expect to be addressed before this Act should pass. 

 

First of all, I want to start out with consultation of our First 

Nations and Métis people. I’m hoping that the Minister of First 

Nations and Métis Relations will make sure that they are 

consulted. It is important that the input and what they have to 

say and how they feel . . . This Act may affect them, and I think 

it’s important that they have an opportunity to express what 

they’re feeling. And if this Act is going to do them any good or 

if this Act is going to cause them problems with their traditions 

that they’re used to — their fishing, their hunting — we don’t 

know if this Act will affect them. We hope it will not, but we 

know there’s a lot of questions that have to be addressed, and 

I’m hoping that the government and all the ministers 

responsible, that anybody in their area would bring their 

concerns to them and share with them and that people truly feel 

like they’re consulted, and not just in a way. There’s so many 

different things that could impact them. 

 

Mayors and councils also should have an opportunity to share 

how this will affect them. Could this Act affect them in 

different ways? Is it going to improve . . . What protection is it 

going to give? I think there’s a lot of people that are looking at 

the government and looking at the individuals that will pass this 

Act to make sure that they’re looking out for the best interests 

of the community members. 

 

I think it’s important that we allow community members to 

have their voice heard. And there’s different ways. There’s 

different ministers that are responsible, and there’s people that 

actually care about some of the legislation that goes on. We 

know that. There’s people that truly care about listening to it 

when it impacts people in Saskatchewan. It’s important, Mr. 

Speaker, the people’s views, when we come here and represent 

them, that they’re heard. It’s vital. It’s the law. This House, and 

I guess this Assembly, has a lot of power to do the right thing 

for the people that it’s supposed to represent. And the people 

ask us to come here and represent them to be truly an effective 

body that’s supposed to work for what’s best for Saskatchewan 

people, whether they be First Nations, Métis, whether 

non-Aboriginal. They have a right to have us address their 

needs and their concerns. 

 

[20:15] 

 

And I’m not sure how this Act will impact on them. But I think 

it’s important before we pass this Act that the questions and all 

the questions that community members have of this province 

are answered before we rush out and just say, let’s do it. I’m not 

sure how this is going to impact the Métis. I don’t know if 

they’ve been consulted. There’s many locals. There’s many 

individuals that might have some input that they would like to 

share with all the ministers that are affecting them. 

 

I think the First Nations, they’re a large organization. They 

want to be heard, and they want to make sure that they’re 

consulted. They’re not feeling that way,  so I think it’s time that 

somebody allow them to share what they’re feeling and how 

this will impact them. And I’m hoping that we care enough 

about our First Nations people and our Métis people to hear 



2110 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2009 

them and listen to their concerns. It’s fine to say you’ve 

consulted, but I don’t know how this Act will impact on them. 

 

It’s definitely alarming to a lot of them how they’re feeling. 

And when you talk to them, they’re not feeling heard. So I 

guess this is my opportunity for the people I represent, Lac La 

Ronge Indian Band, Peter Ball, Cumberland House First 

Nation, Montreal Lake First Nation, Wollaston Lake. 

 

I guess all of the First Nations people and the Dene people feel 

like they have to be heard and should be heard. And they’re 

asking this Assembly before we pass certain legislations that we 

make sure they’re consulted and their views and talk to their 

elders, talk to the trappers, the people fishing. How will this 

impact them? I don’t know. That’s why I think we must consult 

and we must make sure that they’re given the opportunities to 

talk. 

 

We have large Métis locals in Regina, Saskatoon, Prince Albert. 

We have small Métis locals as well. Have they been talked to? 

The northern Métis communities, have they had a chance to 

talk? 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, it’s important that we make sure the 

people are truly consulted, that we spend the time and we move 

very slowly to make sure that this is what’s good for the people 

of our province. We’re supposed to be leading the way, making 

sure that the people we represent, we truly care about and want 

to do what’s best for their interest. I hope we can accomplish 

that. 

 

I’m not sure how this will impact some of our farmers. I know 

there’s areas of concern. I hear on, you know, ATVs [all-terrain 

vehicles], snowmobilers going in on their areas and causing 

them grief. If that’s what this is about, there’s parts of it that 

might be good. 

 

I’m not sure what it’s going to all deal with in the end. But I 

think we better make sure that we consult with everyone, and 

there’s a lot of people that have to be consulted. I think this is 

going to be a very slow process. 

 

And maybe other provinces have trespass Acts that are really 

good. I don’t know. I think there’s got to be a lot of research 

before we just go out and go ahead and, you know, pass this. 

But I also want to express how important it is to have 

Saskatchewan people views, how it’s going to impact them. 

 

You know I think about people who want to demonstrate in a 

peaceful way. Is this going to impact them in any way? We see 

some of the things happening in our province now, you know. 

When you look at some of the legislation that’s been passed, 

essential services, it eliminates a lot of people. Maybe there’s 

only another 25 per cent that could actually protest; well now it 

eliminates them. Who knows where this thing’s going? 

 

It’s going to be interesting to see . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Well that’s good. I’m glad that you’re listening to the people, 

First Nations and Métis people and Saskatchewan citizens. It’s 

important. And as long as you guys are hearing their concerns 

and we’re hearing them, we’ll move in a way that we need to 

move, and we’ll bring up the concerns and it’s a nice debate. 

And we can talk about this, and I’m glad you guys are listening, 

and I hope you hear what the people are saying. 

 

I think it’s very important, Mr. Speaker, that we are their voice 

and it’s important. And I take that very serious. I’m here to do a 

job, and it’s a learning process, but I’m going to do my best to 

represent the people that have asked me to be here. And I ask all 

of you to do the same — to hear the voices of our community 

members and to act very slowly on this Act and to make sure 

we know what’s all in it before we go ahead and pass an Act 

like this. 

 

There’s a lot of concerns out there right now. Some people feel 

like troubled times, and they’re not sure how this Act is going 

to impact them. So, Mr. Speaker, I think we make sure at the 

end of the day that we do all we can to make sure we are 

hearing people’s concern because I’m telling you . . . You talk 

about a trespass Act. What exactly does that mean? You know, 

there’s different ways to look at this thing. Is it hunting? Is it 

hunting? Is it going to eliminate people’s opportunities to go 

hunting? Is that what this is about? 

 

So there’s a lot of different things. I’m just hoping that, Mr. 

Speaker, we can make sure that we cover a lot of the areas that 

maybe people feel like are not being covered. So I encourage 

us, and I think it’s an obligation on all of us to make sure in this 

House that we have a serious look at this Bill. We make sure 

everybody who’s going to be impacted has a chance to be 

heard, that we go out and deal with the communities, make sure 

that we have done that. And I think we have to do that. It’s so 

important. 

 

I don’t know if fishing is going to be an issue, if the people that 

are fishing are going to be impacted by this. I’m not sure if it’s 

going to happen. It may; it may not. I don’t know. There may 

be situations where it’ll interfere with people’s hunting rights, 

fishing rights, but I’m not sure. It could. I’m not sure. Oh it says 

that, but who knows what’s going to happen? Things change. 

How’s it used? 

 

We’ll keep going away at it. And I’ll keep going at it as long as 

I can to bring up the concerns of the people I represent, the First 

Nations, the Métis, Saskatchewan residents. Like I said, I’m 

hoping at the end of the day that I will hear that the First 

Nations and the Métis were consulted by the different 

departments to make sure, before this Act is passed, that they 

had an opportunity to talk to you. 

 

So at this point I’m not sure what all it’s going to impact  the 

communities that I represent or all the communities in 

Saskatchewan. But I’m here to say I’m counting on the 

government, and before we pass this Act, that those 

opportunities are given to the community members. 

 

So at this time, Mr. Speaker, I know there’s other opportunities 

for my colleagues that would like to speak to this. Mr. Speaker, 

at this point I am ready to adjourn debate on this Bill No. 43. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has 

adjourned debate on Bill No. 43, The Trespass to Property Act. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 



March 3, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2111 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 71 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 71 — The 

Innovation Saskatchewan Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Douglas Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

The Bill that I am speaking to proposes to take a number of 

existing programs, entities, and also funding within government 

— various places within government and some from outside of 

government at this point at least — and to combine these into a 

single agency called Innovation Saskatchewan. In the main, 

these are activities that are now centred in government 

departments, activities that are currently controlled by 

government through government departments, but will all be 

combined in a separate Crown corporation. 

 

The purpose of the agency in question is to facilitate the 

coordination and strategic direction of the government’s support 

for research and development in science and technology with 

the objective of fostering development of new ideas, products, 

and processes to ensure the long-term sustainable growth of 

Saskatchewan’s economy; also to provide advice and guidance 

— these are two objectives that are now being performed by 

government, advice and guidance — to the government 

respecting science and technology policy, to coordinate and 

support the establishment and maintenance of science research 

and development infrastructure in Saskatchewan, and as we 

shall see, we have significant infrastructure; provide 

recommendations and advice to the Government of 

Saskatchewan respecting research, development, demonstration 

and commercialization, and any other program or activities that 

might be called upon by the government, I guess, to provide. 

 

The agency can accept any funds that are granted to the agency 

by the minister or appropriated by the legislature; can enter into 

agreements; operate any facility, program, or undertaking; 

accept contributions or receive money from any source; and 

incorporate as a body corporate. There are some checks and 

balances on this, of course. In terms of real property, any 

transaction exceeding $250,000 needs the approval of the 

cabinet before the agency can acquire or dispose of real 

property. 

 

The membership of the board of the agency will be the minister 

as defined — and currently the Minister for Enterprise and 

Innovation, I assume — and six other people. And then of 

course there’s stipulation as to how long people will serve on 

the board and so on. So the board is not a board representative 

in any way of other interests in Saskatchewan as we might see 

with other agencies where it’s desirous to stipulate who might 

provide the control or the direction for that agency. 

 

But in this particular case, it’s very clear that the board will be 

comprised of the minister and six other persons appointed by 

the government. And there’s nothing to say who those six 

people might be or what particular strengths they have to bear 

or what interests, if any, in the area of science, research, and 

development those people might in fact represent. 

 

When I talked about existing interests, I would refer the public 

to agencies such as the Saskatchewan Research Council, the 

Canadian Light Source synchrotron in Saskatoon, the Petroleum 

Technology Research Centre in Regina, and the Prairie 

Agricultural Machinery Institute, which I believe is located in 

Humboldt — PAMI, so-called. 

 

And this new entity would be created, and its creation would 

coincide with the winding down of an agency called Investment 

Saskatchewan — an investment portfolio created by the 

previous NDP government in 2003. And I suppose they’ll take 

over some of the assets and some of the liabilities of Investment 

Saskatchewan. 

 

That’s a brief rundown of the Bill as it’s constructed. So in the 

main, it’s to take existing departmental officials from within 

government who are responsible for science and technology and 

the innovation agenda — the activities of the Saskatchewan 

Research Council, the synchrotron, the Petroleum Technology 

Research Centre, and the Prairie Agricultural Machinery 

Institute — and to combine these into one entity coupled with, I 

suppose, some assets and funding that will come its way from 

Investment Saskatchewan, and all to be controlled by a board 

exclusively appointed by the government — no qualifications 

on that board, none at all. 

 

[20:30] 

 

Now my impressions of this, first of all, is political. And I 

suppose that’s a surprise that I would have a political reaction to 

something. But I think the name is a bit of a misnomer to call it 

Innovation Saskatchewan when all this agency is doing in terms 

of how it’s structured. 

 

And I might say the same for another agency constructed by the 

government, called Enterprise Saskatchewan. Both of these are 

agencies that follow on the footsteps of innovation that we saw 

some years ago, in that particular case engineered by Dwain 

Lingenfelter, who was then a minister for Economic 

Development and who set about to work with interests in the 

one case, interests in the areas of export in Saskatchewan, 

worked with the export industry and brought together the 

interests in the export industry and private industry with 

existing knowledge and resources and support within 

government to form something called the Saskatchewan Trade 

and Export Partnership. 

 

Similarly he worked with interests in the tourism industry to 

bring together the various interests in that industry, including 

people in the hotel business, people in the retail business, 

people in tourism promotion business, and brought those 

interests together with, again, the resources and the 

competencies within government and the funding within 

government, to bring those together into a separate agency 

called Tourism Saskatchewan. 

 

And so if the government is calling this Innovation 

Saskatchewan and is patting themselves on the back for this, 

and as the case will be with Enterprise Saskatchewan, patting 

themselves on the back for being innovative in terms of their 

approach to delivery of services that meet the needs of 



2112 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2009 

Saskatchewan people, again I would just point out then this is a 

government that is in fact following in the footsteps of Dwain 

Lingenfelter who pioneered this type of activity in the 1990s. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’ll leave that. I might say though that here the 

government is following, not leading, and they may soon have 

an opportunity to again see the innovation brought by Mr. 

Lingenfelter and follow in his footsteps again, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, speaking of innovation, I’m hard pressed to think of 

any example of a successful innovation by a right wing 

government when it comes to research and development, 

science and technology. And I wonder if anyone can provide 

me an example of such a successful innovation. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, Hansard doesn’t record silences. It doesn’t 

show them. But let the record show that there was a pause and 

that there was a silence because there is no answer to that 

question, obviously because there hasn’t been any real record of 

innovation by right wing governments in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I mentioned earlier these other two agencies that 

Mr. Lingenfelter played a crucial role in developing — that is to 

say, the Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership and 

Tourism Saskatchewan. And I wouldn’t want, I wouldn’t want 

people to think that there’s a direct comparison that can be 

made with the two agencies that have been — in the case of the 

Enterprise Saskatchewan, has been set up by the government 

and now Innovation Saskatchewan proposed to be set up by the 

government — that there is a direct correlation in terms of these 

agencies. There’s a hugely important difference between the 

agencies he set up and these agencies and a difference that then 

plays out in a small area of something called accountability. 

 

In the case of the Trade and Export Partnership and of Tourism 

Saskatchewan, in each case there was a question of marrying — 

how shall I say? — public resources and competencies and 

funds with those of private agencies and businesses in 

Saskatchewan so that you brought the two together. And there 

was a clear — how shall I say? — a clear group of people who 

had an interest and contributed to that and therefore had very 

specific interest and clear interest in terms of scrutiny as to how 

those organizations worked, and also accounting as to what 

funds were given to those agencies and how those were 

expended because there’s more than government. It was their 

own funds that were being expended. So in those particular 

cases, we see a great interest of accountability on the part of 

those organizations as opposed to this particular organization 

where they’re all appointed by government. 

 

And as near as I can tell, most of the funding, if not all of the 

funding initially — maybe down the line that’ll change — but it 

would appear that all of the funding for this agency will in fact 

come from the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. And herein lies one 

little change that the government won’t talk about very much. 

Now we see these expenditures. And I talked about existing 

agencies and services and so on being thrown into this new mix. 

We have existing lines in the budget that we can look at, and we 

can ask questions about in the Legislative Assembly. We can 

ask questions about, in the Public Accounts Committee, about 

the activities of the agency on a line-by-line basis, so we get a 

greater — how shall I say? — reporting of what is taking place 

in those activity areas. But now we take all of that, and we 

reduce it to one line in the budget and say here’s a bunch of 

money for the minister for that particular agency. So what we 

have here is less of a clear view, less of a clear view as people 

of Saskatchewan as to what is taking place with respect to that 

particular agency. 

 

So as opposed to these other agencies that I mentioned, STEP 

[Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership] and Tourism 

Saskatchewan, at least you have partners in those organizations 

who form a significant part of those boards, who have a real 

interest in scrutiny and performance and what takes place there. 

And I’m not so sure that that is particularly the case with this 

particular agency and Enterprise Saskatchewan which, as I said, 

has already been established. 

 

But then questions of accountability might seem largely 

unimportant to the people. But you know, I’ve just got to draw 

back a little bit in history to say that whenever a right wing 

government in Saskatchewan proposes to alter matters of 

accountability and matters of scrutiny and reporting, that the 

public should be at least somewhat concerned, given their 

history in Saskatchewan during the 1980s in Saskatchewan 

under the then Devine government. And I know the members 

on the other side, but you know, we’re a different party and 

different . . . but you know, some of the same characters, some 

of the same actors, and so on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So they do have a history, and it does give it some cause for 

concern, a couple of other things giving some cause for concern 

in that vein. Oh I hear they’re kind of dragging their feet on 

freedom of information requests these days. Is that such an 

accountable thing that we really want to see, Mr. Speaker? We 

know that some members of the Public Accounts Committee, of 

which I am a member, of course have had questions for the 

Provincial Auditor, the likes of which we’ve not seen for some 

time. 

 

But again I just make the point that we should always be 

concerned about accountability when it comes to members of 

that party and their antecedents, and their intrusion into 

governing structures in our province in a way to reduce 

accountability reporting and scrutiny, Mr. Speaker. That is a 

concern that I have and I think one that is shared by people, 

especially those that understand our history going back the last 

20 years or so. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I guess it’s refreshing to see the government 

embracing innovation after so many years of being in 

opposition and just absolutely trashing the NDP at times for 

some of the innovations that we introduced in areas of research 

and development and science and technology — just absolutely 

trashing the NDP. You know, they couldn’t say enough bad 

things about all the bad things that the NDP were doing when it 

comes to research and development. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we have a record of course. We did help to 

build the Canadian Light Source synchrotron in Saskatoon, one 

of the largest scientific infrastructure programs in Canadian 

history. We provided funding for the Petroleum Technology 

Research Centre and the International Centre for CO2 Capture 

at the University of Regina — both agencies which figure 

largely in the public’s plans and the plans of government and 



March 3, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2113 

corporations in terms of significant issues like carbon capture 

on our planet. 

 

We provided funding to expand the Innovation Place research 

parks. The Innovation Place was initially put into place by the 

then Blakeney government back in the 1970s. And I dare say — 

and I stand to be corrected — but I dare say that if we looked at 

the legislative record for that period of time, I would not be 

surprised to find that that, too, that they had some critical 

comments to make about Innovation Place which is a facility or 

a development that figures very large in the eyes of Canadians 

in terms of a successful research and development park in this 

country. 

 

So again we created an Innovation and Science Fund at 

Saskatchewan universities. We provided funding for the 

Saskatchewan Research Council. We fostered 

commercialization of new technologies such as the enhanced oil 

recovery project at Weyburn and Midale. So we as a New 

Democratic Party have, I think, a good solid record when it 

comes to research and development, science and technology, 

but I’m sure the public will remember all of the negative 

criticisms that that government or that particular party has had 

to make over the years. 

 

Other aspects of innovation by the provincial government or the 

previous provincial government, the NDP, when it comes to at 

least the area of organizing technology so it can impact your 

society in a positive way, would be the efforts by the previous 

government to bring together SaskTel on the one hand, the 

needs of government departments to extend technology on the 

other hand, to bring those together in an effort to expand 

broadband service, so-called high-speed Internet service, to 

great sections of Saskatchewan and did that in a way and more 

rapidly than is certainly the case in many jurisdictions in the 

world. 

 

I’m always reminded that some years ago I was in New York 

and was attending a meeting, I think in this case a luncheon 

with the Consul General in New York, Pamela Wallin. That has 

been referred to, I think, in debate. I’m not sure but . . . And we 

talked about Saskatchewan. I said that Saskatchewan at the end 

of that year, and this is a few years ago now, would have an 86 

per cent reach of population being able to access high-speed 

Internet and that was in a largely rural jurisdiction — rural at 

least compared to New York and many places in the world. 

 

And one federal official was incredulous that we would have an 

86 per cent reach because he pointed out that there were 

suburbs of New York that had not yet achieved high-speed 

Internet service, but that we were able to provide that in 

Saskatchewan. And that was and reflected an ability by 

government to organize itself in a way to take interest within 

government to speed up the development in an area of 

technology for the benefit of all the people of Saskatchewan. 

And in this particular case too, I think, set Saskatchewan apart 

from all of the rest of the world. 

 

Now I think some can make an argument that there are 

jurisdictions in the world that have a slightly higher reach of 

high-speed Internet, but those would be city states like 

Singapore. But in terms of comparable jurisdictions, large rural 

areas and so on, nothing in the world compared to 

Saskatchewan when it came to the reach of broadband and 

high-speed services. And that was achieved, achieved as a result 

in innovation in organizing and administration of research and 

technology. And that’s part of the NDP record, Mr. Speaker. 

And I believe that if you check the Hansard, there’s probably 

some sour criticisms from the Saskatchewan Party at that point 

too about the government efforts and how fast they were doing 

things and not fast enough and so on. 

 

[20:45] 

 

As a person who was interested in Saskatchewan politics before 

I was elected to this Chamber, there’s a particular issue that 

stood out for me in public debate in Saskatchewan as a matter 

of public discourse and not something that . . . Well I think 

again it reflected innovation by a NDP government — in that 

case it was the Blakeney government — and nothing but 

scathing criticism from the right wing at that time. 

 

Now I know that they’re going to say, we’re Saskatchewan 

Party; we weren’t around. But I tell you, Mr. Speaker, there are 

members there, at one time they were part of the Conservative 

PCs [Progressive Conservative] and then they joined the 

Haverstock Liberals, then they joined the Saskatchewan Party. 

So it’s hard to define them. We know that there’s a NDP in 

Saskatchewan and we know that there is an 

anybody-but-the-NDP and those are people that are part of the 

anybody-but-the-NDP. 

 

Well the anybody-but-the-NDP in the 1970s was just hugely, 

scathingly critical of the NDP government of Allan Blakeney 

for daring, for daring to invest public funds and then extending 

fibre optic cables throughout Saskatchewan, for the government 

to become involved in laying down that kind of high-tech 

infrastructure in Saskatchewan. 

 

I think, review the record. They’ll all be lambasting the NDP 

for wasting money on that, not knowing where they’re going. 

No end of scathing criticism of the government of the day for 

daring to venture and to provide leadership in an area of 

innovation, in the area of research and development, science 

and technology. Nothing but criticism from those people on that 

side of the Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well the NDP persevered, notwithstanding criticism from the 

then anybody-but-the-NDP opposition, persevered to lay down 

fibre optics which is an important part of the infrastructure that 

has supported the expansion of high-speed Internet throughout 

Saskatchewan because that was done years ago. And all I can 

say it’s a good thing that the NDP didn’t listen to the right wing 

at that point because they had absolutely zip ideas when it came 

to innovation. 

 

So that’s a long ways of getting around back to my point: it’s 

refreshing to see a right wing government, the Saskatchewan 

Party government embracing innovation after so many years of 

just trashing the NDP, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have some other concerns with this Bill. I’m 

concerned about a shift in control over what I would call 

significant public funds. As I mentioned at the outset, part of 

this Bill is proposed to facilitate the transfer of assets from an 

agency called Investment Saskatchewan to this new 



2114 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2009 

organization. 

 

Investment Saskatchewan was set up to limit — limit — the 

amount of government or political influence when it came to 

investment decisions, and especially in significant areas such as 

technology and so on. So here’s an area where the NDP worked 

for a number of years to try to limit, limit the amount of 

political influence that we would see in these kinds of 

investment decisions; and now here’s a Sask Party government 

that says, well we might have criticized that while we were in 

opposition, but we really don’t believe that. 

 

And in fact what we’re doing with this Bill is that we are taking 

back political control, and I would say probably, in the future, 

political interference in how investment decisions are made 

with significant large sums of public dollars, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that is a source of concern that I have and one of the 

sources of concern that is also shared by the media in 

Saskatchewan who took the Premier to task for, in opposition, 

again saying that: oh no, we don’t want any kind of political 

interference; we’re going to have hands off and all of that. But 

one of its first acts is in fact to create an agency where they’ve 

admitted that there’s potential for — not only potential for, but 

where there will be — political influence. 

 

So, you know, that is again one of these flip-flops that the 

Saskatchewan Party is known for, and one of the reasons that a 

lot of people say, you can’t trust what they say, you know. 

That’s what people are beginning to say because again it’s not, 

as we’re finding out, uncommon, uncommon to find instances 

of where this particular party . . . and I can’t think of them off 

the top, but I’m sure there’s lots of examples of where they said 

things in opposition but, now as a government, they propose to 

do it differently. 

 

I know that in the area of finances that I’m familiar with, that 

they said, oh, we won’t have a fiscalization reserve or Fiscal 

Stabilization Fund. And then the first thing they did after 

getting elected, they said, oh, you know, we are going to have 

one now after all. But that’s not what you said when you were 

trying to get elected. Then it fitted your purposes or suited your 

purposes to say something else; but once you get into 

government, the reality sinks in and you do things differently. 

 

So again that’s another example of a massive flip-flop between 

what they said in opposition and the way that they’re now 

acting as a government, Mr. Speaker. And that’s the kind of 

thing that catches up with you after a while, you know, that you 

can’t continue to go on and have people believe in something 

and then dash those beliefs and those hopes by performing in a 

completely different manner. 

 

So that again is something that’s troubling, that here we have 

the development of something that they clearly disavowed, 

disavowed when they were in opposition, but now that they’re 

in government they’re saying, we’re going to go ahead with that 

because now we control the levers of power. Now we control 

the money. Now we want to have that control, that ability to 

make political decisions and politically influence major 

investment decisions in Saskatchewan. That’s what this is all 

about. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, given the history in Saskatchewan, 

given their history in their antecedents in the Progressive 

Conservative administration in this province, we should all be 

very, very worried by a government, a right wing government 

that proposes to take this kind of control over a major 

investment decision — as opposed to following this trend of 

eliminating, reducing the amount of political interference that 

we see in these kinds of investments, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I have many concerns about this Bill. Applaud 

the notion that we would have an innovation agency, but again 

had many concerns about what the government’s real agenda is 

here. Real concerns about issues of accountability. And as I 

indicated, real concerns about issues of political influence and 

what that will cost the people of Saskatchewan at the end of the 

day. Because again, in some way, we are still paying for many 

of the bad decisions that were made by those members when 

they previously served in government in the . . . [inaudible] . . . 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I don’t have much more to say on this 

particular Bill. I think it’s a Bill that will see a great deal of 

scrutiny. I think there will be a great deal of interest in this Bill. 

Certainly we’ll continue to consult with the people of 

Saskatchewan that would have an interest and might be affected 

by this to get their reaction to what is in the Bill. I think other 

colleagues in this Legislative Assembly will want to express 

their concerns and, Mr. Speaker, having said that, at this point I 

move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Douglas 

Park has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 71, The 

Innovation Saskatchewan Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 45 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion of the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 45 — The Credit 

Union Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I just 

wanted to first of all begin my comments by saying hello to my 

two grandchildren that are in Saskatoon watching the 

proceedings tonight. I told them I had a little surprise for them 

so they turned off Treehouse, I hope, and put on their version of 

Treehouse. 

 

So I want to say hello to both Brodey and to Meika, who are 

watching for the first time I think in their history, watching their 

papa on TV talking about some of the issues facing the banking 

sector in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I looked at the Act to amend The Credit Union 

Act, as presented by the Saskatchewan Party. And what I tell a 

lot of folks out there is you’ve got to be certainly aware of 



March 3, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2115 

what’s happening with some of the debate and some of the Bills 

that are proceeding forward in this House, and to also pay a lot 

of scrutiny to what the Saskatchewan Party is up to. 

 

Some of the amendments, albeit minor in detail — and certainly 

I think these amendments are minor in their intent — we always 

have to as an opposition make sure that these folks aren’t up to 

anything greater or grander according to their political 

philosophies. 

 

So one of the things we want to point out is that anything that 

the credit union wants to proceed with . . . In general terms, we 

are very proud of the movement that the credit union has 

certainly undertaken in Saskatchewan. And they’ve also pointed 

out on numerous occasions the success of the credit union 

movement. 

 

And that’s the kind of skill, expertise, and dynamic vision that 

many people in Saskatchewan have. We embrace the 

co-operative effort, we’ve embraced the notion of helping each 

other out. 

 

And certainly the one organization that does that in the banking 

perspective, Mr. Speaker, is of course the credit union system in 

Saskatchewan. We’re very proud to have the credit union 

system around in the province for a number of years. And some 

of the changes that are being presented today, as I mentioned at 

the outset, that they may be minor in nature — they may be 

certainly not really mind-blowing in terms of their intent — but 

we want to make sure that we have ample opportunity to look at 

the Bill and to consult with people to make sure that there isn’t 

any kind of negative effect. And that’s certainly what a political 

opposition party does. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to again point out that the intent is to 

shift a bit of the board responsibilities and the board 

appointments somewhat from a five-member board to a 

seven-member board, if my notes are correct. And of that, 

there’s going to be three independent people as part of the credit 

union movement as well as two from Credit Union Central and 

two from the province, according to my calculations here. 

 

And so in general terms, having more people participate in the 

credit union movement gives us a bit more confidence as we 

look at what’s across the way here, at the selection that they 

would have. So having some independent parties such as the 

proud credit union movement, having five members appointed 

from Credit Union Central and their affiliates, and only having 

two appointed from those guys, well in general terms we kind 

of think that’s a good idea, Mr. Speaker, because the less of 

them around, the better Saskatchewan is in the long term. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we look at the Act itself, we want to make sure 

that we learn from our neighbours to the south. The American 

economy of course, as we all know, is in significant troubles. 

And I think one of the things that somebody mentioned, in fact, 

that they’re $1 trillion in debt. And that’s just a certainly 

insurmountable debt that many people look at and say, wow, 

you know, how much is that? And it’s quite a significant 

amount. 

 

And I think one of the analogies I heard on TV last night is if 

you piled all the dollar bills on the $1 trillion budget, it’d get 

you a quarter way to the moon. So I don’t know why you’d 

want to go a quarter of the way to the moon, but that’s kind of 

what $1 trillion represents in terms of distance. So it gives you a 

sense of just exactly how much money that the American 

people are facing in terms of their debt. 

 

And they can certainly attribute some of that debt and some of 

the problems and the stumbling economy to how the banking 

system I think works in the States. And we in Canada, and 

certainly in Saskatchewan, through some of the efforts of the 

credit union folks and The Credit Union Act itself and the credit 

union movement itself, that we have really have a stronger 

position that banks and the credit union have taken in 

Saskatchewan, in terms of monitoring how loans are given and 

so on and so forth. 

 

And that’s one of the reasons why, Mr. Speaker, that any type, 

any hint of deregulation in general that that party might want to 

propose or even suggest, that we want to make sure there’s no 

hint of that. And that’s one of the reasons why we’re looking at 

the Bill very carefully. 

 

[21:00] 

 

And more importantly is, we’re consulting with people in the 

know. Because obviously we, as any good party would do is 

you consult with people to get advice and direction and make 

sure that what you intend to do is the intended action. Because 

many times if we don’t consult, you can have all the good 

intentions in the world, and sometimes it just doesn’t work out 

to what you want to have occur. 

 

So in that sense, I think it’s important for us to continue 

monitoring what is being done to The Credit Union Act — not 

to stifle the growth of the credit union; nor to question the 

integrity of the credit union executives, people who work at 

Credit Union Central or the affiliates — but really, to really 

watch that all their good work and all their good intentions and 

all their history and all the progress that they’ve made thus far, 

and all the progress that they could make as a result of this 

minor change, that it’s not compromised by a hidden agenda 

from that party opposite when it comes to deregulation. 

Because we really don’t need that kind of advice from that 

particular party, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think what’s important is people ought to know is that as you 

embark on some of these legislative Acts and some of these 

Bills that they want to present, is you can’t, for the life of me 

. . . I always tell people that you’ve got to be very careful when 

you get into bed with a party that doesn’t really have your best 

interest. You’ve got to be very careful. You’ve got to monitor 

things. You have to really manage this issue right from stump to 

dump, as the phrase goes, to make sure that what you want is 

actually what is done and it’s not used for a larger hidden 

political purpose such as deregulation of the banks. 

 

And some of the people I talk to, I always mention to them, if 

you look at what they are trying to do — the credit union 

movement itself — it’s honourable, it’s well-intentioned, and 

it’s probably going to be very effective because they have a 

proven track record and they know their business quite well. 

 

But when you ask those guys to be part of a solution, be very, 



2116 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2009 

very careful because what you might be doing is ushering in a 

new era under their hidden agenda. And it might be 

deregulation of the banking industry. And we all know that 

possibility is there. Why? Because of their recent history.  

 

It’s a very short history I might add, but it’s recent because, Mr. 

Speaker, when we left office and they assumed office, the 

Roughriders won the Grey Cup. Well they’ve lost the Grey 

Cup. They had Kerry Joseph. Well they lost Kerry Joseph. And 

most recently, they lost a couple key marquee players. And you 

know, that’s a credit to them because when we were in 

government, you used to always blame us when the 

Roughriders lost. And we say to them, well they lost under your 

watch. Certainly it wasn’t under our watch. 

 

Secondly, we had a booming economy, Mr. Speaker. And 

somehow they messed that up as well. So that’s one of the 

things that people out there are saying, is that, geez, you guys 

inherited a booming economy. The Roughriders won the cup. 

So, so far they’ve lost the cup. They’ve lost marquee players. 

And now they’re starting to lose jobs in Saskatchewan. 

 

And the message was, we’re going to trust you guys for one 

term to do one simple thing. And you can’t do it. And the 

problem is, the problem is, Mr. Speaker, is a lot of people are 

watching. And what happens is, if you take good intentions and 

you turn them on, and you try and achieve your own right wing 

agenda, then a lot more people are going to be worried about 

what you do. 

 

So you look at the Roughriders losing the cup. You look at the 

booming economy that’s starting to drop. And you look at the 

billions in the bank that was left to that particular government 

by this former government, Mr. Speaker. And what they’ve 

done is if they keep this up, they’ll make millionaires out of us. 

And certainly from our perspective, when I say millionaires, is 

we are now considered billionaires. And if you want to listen to 

those guys’ advice, then obviously we’re going backwards. 

 

So you look at all these factors. They assumed a winning Grey 

Cup team. They assumed a booming economy. They assumed 

billions in the bank. And, Mr. Speaker, they ran against a tough 

government that had four terms. And the people decided to give 

this great government a break. And we’ll be back within two 

and a half years. 

 

And I can point out in the meantime, whether it’s a simple Bill 

such as this, Mr. Speaker, please don’t mess things up. Because 

when we come back, when we come back we want to be able to 

have a brand new start as the government and a brand new start 

as a party, and finally not have the fifteen and a half billion 

dollar debt hanging over our heads so that we can become very 

innovative and we can become very dynamic and build this 

province as we originally thought it should be built. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, they know across the way, if you’re talking 

about simple Bills like this, please don’t deregulate the banking 

industry or don’t try and do harm to the Credit Union Central. 

Please ensure that the people that know what they’re doing — 

namely the credit union people — they are the ones, they are 

the ones that have done a significant amount of great work for 

our province. So respect their institution, respect their input, 

respect their participation, and don’t try and sneak in your 

hidden agenda in the dark of night to try and deregulate the 

banking industry that many of your right wing counterparts 

support. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the member 

from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And one of 

the reasons why the opposition is really scrutinizing what these 

guys are doing and talking about the Saskatchewan Party, even 

on simple Bills, is because we know there are a number of areas 

that are hidden. They’re hidden agendas. 

 

And if you look at some of the most recent issues associated 

with some of their activity, we have seen no discussion on their 

nuclear partner, Bruce Power — no discussion. We’ve had a lot 

of issues in terms of what they plan to do with the banking 

industry. As the Bill indicates, they’re minor changes, Mr. 

Speaker, minor changes. But is their plan to deregulate the 

banking industry? Well we ought to have those questions. 

 

And some people might be saying we’re crying wolf, but 

there’s been no discussion on the economic cloud on the 

horizon of Saskatchewan. We’ll just try and do what we can 

and spend the money you guys left us, and hopefully, Mr. 

Speaker, that come four years from now the people of 

Saskatchewan will realize the real agenda that this government 

so far has shown, nothing but incompetence. They have shown 

nothing in terms of commitment to the real issues of 

Saskatchewan. They have shown no discipline, no leadership, 

and no vision, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s why I say on some of the issues affecting us, like 

these minor Bills, that this opposition will keep a close watch 

on what they do, Mr. Speaker. And they’ll keep in close contact 

with the parties that are being affected, and they’ll keep close 

contact with the institution, with the credit unions that are going 

to be impacted.  

 

And we warn them, give us the necessary information as an 

opposition. We will support your initiative, and we’ll make sure 

that that party opposite doesn’t take your good intentions, your 

good word, your history, and your potential for our province, 

and try and somehow devise a strategy to move their hidden 

agenda along your life raft of good intentions. That’s exactly 

what is happening, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think, certainly from our perspective, we’re going to watch 

carefully what they propose in their upcoming budget as how it 

affects the credit union. We’re going to watch every Bill that 

comes through this Assembly. We’re going to debate every Bill. 

We’re going to look and scrutinize every line department that 

they have in their respective departments to ensure that areas 

are not forgotten, that issues are not ignored, and that intentions 

are really fully respected by the various institutions that are 

reaching out to these guys. 

 

And there’s still a lot of trust issues, Mr. Speaker. There’s a lot 

of trust issues. So the message we have as an opposition is 

whether it’s a minor consequential amendment to The Credit 

Union Act, or the nuclear debate that they refuse to have, that 



March 3, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2117 

this opposition will not rest in terms of keeping that government 

accountable on many, many fronts, Mr. Speaker. And we intend 

to keep that promise. 

 

I think it’s important to note as well that the credit union 

movement itself certainly has gone where no others have gone. 

We see them in our communities. We see their presence in 

many of our business dealings in the business community. The 

consumers, the individual consumers, they’ve certainly have all 

been impacted on a positive note by the credit union movement. 

 

And the credit union movement has flourished as a result of the 

respect they afford people and the respect that people afford 

them. And they have added to the Saskatchewan community; 

they have added to the Saskatchewan people. And that’s really 

important to note because some of the examples I would use in 

terms of the credit union movement. 

 

And that’s why we have confidence in the fact that they’re 

adding more members to this governance structure, is that in 

order to ensure that they know that we as an opposition — an 

NDP opposition — that we mean them no harm. We mean them 

a lot of respect, and we want to ensure that their intentions are 

exactly what is accomplished by this particular Bill. 

 

You should note that the communities of Ile-a-la-Crosse and 

Beauval in my constituency, Mr. Speaker, got notices last week 

that the Bank of Montreal, who had small offices there, are 

intending to shut down those two branches, those two small 

branches. And they’re really just an office with the ability to 

open accounts and to transfer money back and forth. 

 

And the Bank of Montreal served notice last week that the Bank 

of Montreal was permanently closing down these two sites. And 

the official reason was given that there was no . . . potential for 

little or no growth. And that really set the communities back. 

Both Ile-a-la-Crosse and Beauval of course are unhappy to lose 

their banking services, but we’re undeterred. We know that the 

credit union system is nearby in Buffalo Narrows; we hope that 

discussions and negotiations with the credit union can result in 

a branch being opened up in Ile-a-la-Crosse and Beauval as 

well. 

 

And that’s the kind of commitment that we ought to have, Mr. 

Speaker. And this is where it begins to sink into people’s minds 

and to people’s psyches that perhaps the credit union system is 

a solid system because they, I don’t think, will certainly leave 

the community in the instance that the Bank of Montreal did. 

And we’re very, very disappointed with their decision. 

 

And I think one of the things we want to point out is that if the 

credit union centre needs an issue to look at and needs 

expansion plans and looking at expansion plans, then many 

northern communities look to them for leadership. And I would 

encourage the folks at Credit Union Central to continue 

thinking of that possibility because the northern people in our 

communities would certainly appreciate that kind of banking 

leadership. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned earlier, it is important that people 

know that the banking industries per se in Saskatchewan, in 

general terms, really have higher standards, certainly, I think, 

have good codes of conduct and ethics overall as a Canadian 

banking system. And they’re certainly a lot tougher, and they’re 

certainly more savvy in my opinion as compared to their 

southern counterparts in the States. 

 

So I think one of the reasons that they have flourished in this 

concept is that they know how to do banking and that they’re 

not allowing a whole bunch of fly-by-night banking institutions 

to flood the market under a deregulation process and begin to 

debase some of their hard work and to really begin to chip away 

at what we think is a solid financial foundation in Canada. And 

a solid part of that foundation of course is the credit union 

movement in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would point out again is that as a result of the 

transition, we’re pleased to see more intelligence being afforded 

to the process of this governing committee by increasing the 

amount of the people from the credit union central movement 

— I think it’s increasing from three to five. And it’s also 

expanding to members of the Credit Union Central, which are 

various communities that have branches. And various branches, 

they’re allowed to appoint three independent officers of the 

credit union movement, I believe. So that is also very much 

appreciated and applauded. And of course the Credit Union 

Central themselves appointing two and the government 

appointing two as well. 

 

So overall the Bill itself is well-intentioned in terms of the 

credit union requests. They probably have a bit of confidence as 

a result of this Bill and, you know, we certainly want to see 

that. And we want to point out that it is important that we 

respect what was their intention to begin with and not try and 

do a quick rope-a-dope here and sneak the deregulation process 

under their noses. 

 

So I would say, Mr. Speaker, that I thank you for the time. And 

I certainly want to encourage the credit union system to look at 

the northern communities that are currently being abandoned by 

the Bank of Montreal. I would encourage them to continue 

being very vigilant when it comes to dealing with this particular 

party to make sure that they don’t sneak something under their 

agenda, under your intention. And I’d also point out that, in 

general, that the respect and the relationship that they have with 

the Saskatchewan people is very much appreciated and certainly 

very much something that we want to build on and something 

that we want to protect. 

 

So overall I would want to point out that those are my thoughts 

on this particular debate and on this particular Bill, and we look 

forward to hearing more of this Bill as we progress in this 

session. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[21:15] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Did you adjourn debate? 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Yes, I did. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 

adjourned debate on Bill No. 45, The Credit Union Amendment 

Act, 2008. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



2118 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2009 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 9 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Gantefoer that Bill No. 9 — The 

Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 

2008 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Tonight 

we are debating the amendment to The Superannuation 

(Supplementary Provisions) Act or Bill 9. As members will 

know, that this was a Bill that was introduced last spring by the 

government. It was pulled by the government after the member 

from Dewdney spoke in this Assembly, and then lo and behold, 

this Bill reappears in the fall sitting of the legislature. 

 

This Bill is simply a wrong-headed Bill. The significant 

element in this Bill, I believe, is bad public policy, and I think 

it’s financially irresponsible. The point that I’m referring to is 

an amendment to the legislation that would allow people who 

have superannuated and are now collecting a public pension to 

not only collect their public pension but also re-enter the public 

service at a full salary, Mr. Speaker. This is called 

double-dipping and, Mr. Speaker, it is wrong, wrong, wrong. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let’s give you an example. You’re a deputy 

minister in the province of Saskatchewan. You’ve worked for 

35 years. You’re eligible under the old pension plan for 70 per 

cent of your best five years. You’re earning $200,000 a year. 

You’ve earned that, in excess of $200,000 a year, for the past 

five years. You’d be entitled to a pension under the defined 

benefit plan of $140,000 per annum. Now, Mr. Speaker, this 

legislation allows you to collect your pension and to re-enter the 

public service and continue to collect a salary. So technically 

we could have someone collecting a pension of $140,000 a year 

plus continuing their duties as a deputy minister at $200,000 a 

year, so in essence they would be receiving $340,000 from the 

public purse. Mr. Speaker, this is wrong public policy, 

particularly when we’re trying to encourage people to enter the 

public service. We’re trying to encourage people to move up in 

the public service, to take over new positions, and this does 

little, Mr. Speaker, to continue that kind of movement by people 

in the public service. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there will be people that will argue that a 

pension really is a deferred income. And that’s true. You 

contribute. You work in the public service. You contribute into 

your pension plan. Your employer, the government, contributes 

into the pension plan. And at the end of the day you’re entitled 

to a income or a pension. With the changes that the government 

is proposing, what they’re basically doing is saying that you can 

retire and start working for the government the next day in your 

old job and not only receive your pension, which is deferred 

income, but you can also continue to receive a salary from the 

people of the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we believe that this amendment in particular, is 

very problematic, and we also believe it’s financially 

irresponsible. Now some members will argue that there will be 

few people that will be interested in returning to the public 

service after they retire. Well we do know that when we 

changed the legislation that allowed people to work beyond the 

age of 65, that there are what we consider people who are 

healthy and productive and they’re well past the age of 65. 

They’re working into their 70s. And we have no difficulty with 

that, Mr. Speaker. What we have difficulty with is someone 

who continues to collect a pension and then works in the public 

service. What we think really is that this double-dipping 

provides an incentive for individuals at the end of their careers 

to remain in a position, which really does slow the rise of 

younger individuals in the organization. We don’t think that this 

is something that we want to encourage. 

 

In addition I think that this piece of legislation has financial 

ramifications for the taxpayers of this province and deserves 

very close scrutiny. And so when we go before the committee, 

we will be asking what this means in terms of the provinces’ 

finances. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the legislation has ramifications. I think those 

ramifications aren’t immediately apparent on first blush, but I 

think in the long term the ramifications are significant. For all 

of these reasons we think that it’s important that this Bill go 

through a wide consultation and careful consideration before 

any final decision is made by this Legislative Assembly. We 

think it’s wrong public policy, it’s bad public policy, and we 

think in the long term it’s financially irresponsible. 

 

And with that, Mr. Speaker, I’d move adjournment of the 

debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 9, The Superannuation 

(Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 2008. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 49 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 49 — The 

Ambulance Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 

very pleased tonight to enter into debate on Bill No. 49, The 

Ambulance Amendment Act. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, many may look at this legislation as 

simply housekeeping, but it’s significant legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, and gives us the opportunity to acknowledge those 

who work in the emergency medical field in our province, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. This Act removes references to what were 

known formerly as ambulance districts and makes new 

reference to health regions, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That in itself 

is more or less housekeeping in nature. It brings the references 

up to the terminology used today in our health care system. 



March 3, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2119 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it also removes the provisions that 

regulate emergency medical technicians and paramedics in the 

province of Saskatchewan, and that was done as the result of 

legislation, professional legislation that was brought forward. 

And now they are a self-regulating organization and industry, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in which the professionals regulate 

themselves in the same manner that nurses do, the same manner 

that engineers do, and other professionals in our province, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

And this gives us an opportunity to take some time to talk about 

and honour in some ways and identify for the public the great 

work that those professionals do within the province of 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 24 hours a day, 7 days a 

week, those individuals provide services to our communities 

throughout the province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And it’s their 

professional organization that now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

ensures that those services are delivered in the appropriate 

manner. It’s no longer done by the government. We now 

recognize their professional association and let them 

self-regulate their industry. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, those professionals in our province 

provide services from small towns in the Southwest to the 

villages of the North to our major urban areas of Regina and 

Saskatoon. Mr. Deputy Speaker, they do it each and every day 

very professionally. They care for people; they provide quality 

medical services, emergency services to people. And they 

ensure, they ensure that our citizens have the best opportunity to 

that emergency service in the shortest interval, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, in the most opportune way in each of our 

communities. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that isn’t always easy to do because 

Saskatchewan is a province that has vast territory spread out 

with great distances sometimes between communities, 

particularly in the North. But these individuals work throughout 

our communities in both the South and North providing service 

on a daily basis, a very important service to the people of our 

province, and they do so with a great deal of professionalism, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So recognizing, as was done through professional legislation, 

that they could be and should be a self-regulatory profession, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, was important. And this legislation 

reflects those changes by in fact removing the regulatory 

control that was once in this legislation, from the Act, because 

it’s now covered off in their own professional legislation. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, those professionals provide services in 

sometimes very trying and dangerous situations, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. They provide life-saving services sometimes, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, having to crawl into a badly damaged vehicle, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, and apply life-saving techniques, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, until that individual can be extricated from 

that vehicle and taken to hospital. They crawl into very tight 

and very difficult spaces sometimes. They have to perform, 

under very difficult situations, emergency medical procedures, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. And those make a difference to the people 

of the province of Saskatchewan. It saves lives, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and these people do this on a daily basis. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, prior to my being elected to the 

legislature, one of the things that I did on a part-time basis is I 

worked for what was known as RAMRAD then, the Regina 

Area Municipal Road Ambulance District. I worked with these 

gentlemen that are doing this job. I was trained and worked for 

many years part-time for the Regina ambulance service. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know first-hand how difficult this work 

is. You see very tragic situations. You have to work under very 

difficult situations, and you have to perform professionally, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, in a manner that is often difficult to do 

because you will see some horrific sights. You will have to deal 

with very serious trauma, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and you may 

have to make very difficult decisions if you’re some distance 

from a hospital facility. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, these people do this. And they do it under 

those very difficult circumstances, and they do it very 

professionally every day. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 24 hours a 

day, 7 days a week these professionals across our province 

deliver this service. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, they do it from a variety of delivery 

models as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We have in this province 

a range from municipal-run or shall I say health-district-run 

ambulance services — run by the Regina Qu’Appelle Health 

Region would be a good example — to private operators who 

operate in both large districts, the Saskatoon Health District, but 

also the very small districts, to volunteers, volunteers who 

operate in other areas of the province where there is a distance 

between the closest paid ambulance service, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And those individuals provide that service, that quality 

service throughout the province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And because of their self-regulating professional legislation, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it doesn’t matter if it’s in a private 

organization, Mr. Speaker, a public organization or, for that 

matter, volunteers — they’re trained to the same standards. 

They deliver the same service, and they care in the same way 

about the quality and delivery of that service, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

And that’s an asset to our province. It’s an asset to the people of 

this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and at this time I think 

when we’re talking about this legislation, it gives me an 

opportunity to talk about just how good that service is and how 

caring the people are who are delivering that service, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And I’ve had the opportunity to know many, 

both in the public and private delivery services in the province 

and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they’re quality people. They care 

about what they’re doing. They deliver that service with 

compassion every single day. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they 

do that, as I indicated earlier, under very difficult and trying 

circumstances sometimes. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they do it and they’ve done it for a 

number of years in the province of Saskatchewan. They will 

continue to do it. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, now today they are 

paid far more than they were a number of years ago. Just 10 

years ago, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this profession in many 

locations paid hardly more than minimum wage, but yet 

dedicated individuals for that low of salary did this each and 

every day throughout our province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 



2120 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2009 

Today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with the recognition and advanced 

education and skills that individuals have, it’s a much better 

paying profession, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Still not what they’re 

worth, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because these are the people who 

provide for us life-saving services around the province. And, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we all owe them a debt of gratitude. We 

all should understand that these people go above and beyond 

each day. 

 

[21:30] 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I indicated before, for several 

years I worked with these individuals on a part-time basis. I 

worked at least once a week for many years. I enjoyed it 

greatly. There’s nothing more satisfying than being able to help 

somebody who truly needs your help and to make a difference 

in whether somebody in fact lives or dies, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

to make a difference for people, for families, to children. 

 

There is nothing more uplifting than being helpful to others. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, these people get to experience that every 

day, but they do it under very difficult and trying circumstances 

in many cases. And I think this gives us an opportunity to 

recognize that, to show that we care and we understand, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and we know the hard work, the hard work 

that they put forward on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, sometimes the most difficult type of job is 

one that you have to wait for something to happen. Because 

you’re always ready to go, but you’re sitting there waiting. And 

that waiting, that waiting becomes frustrating, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And you have to be ready to go on a moment’s notice 

because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that first hour in a trauma 

situation determines whether a person lives or dies. Every one 

of those individuals knows that. So they need to be able to 

respond in the shortest possible period of time in order to reach 

that emergency, to reach that situation in the very quickest 

possible time. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, these are jobs that, when you arrive 

at the scene, you often have very difficult decisions to be made. 

You have to quickly analyze the situation and look for potential 

hazards and dangers before you begin treating individuals, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

And there are times, yes, there are times when you can do your 

very best and you still will not, Mr. Deputy Speaker, be 

successful. And they have to deal with that. And you may have 

two or three or four occurrences in a 24-hour period or a 

12-hour period, if you’re working, where you do your very best 

and you still, you still cannot save everyone. And they have to 

live with that. They have to deal with that. They have to learn to 

deal with that very difficult situation. 

 

And that may be a young child or it may be somebody’s friend 

or it may be somebody they know. And it’s a very difficult job. 

And under very difficult circumstances these professionals 

continue to serve the province of Saskatchewan with dedication, 

with compassion, and with the expertise and professionalism 

that we would expect from them, and they’ve done this for 

many years in some cases. 

 

It’s a job that because of the nature you’re as likely to be called 

out at 2 o’clock in the morning as you are at 10 o’clock in the 

morning. So you have to be ready all the time. You have to be 

prepared to go on a moment’s notice. You have to travel in 

sometimes very difficult and treacherous situations to reach an 

accident. But regardless what the circumstances are, you have 

to do it. You have to go. You have to be there for others. And 

you have to believe, and you have to believe, that it’s important. 

It’s not something you do for the money. It’s not something you 

do for the glory. You do it because you believe that it needs to 

be done — that people need help, they deserve help. And, Mr. 

Speaker, they’re dedicated professionals. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I indicated earlier, it doesn’t matter 

whether they’re in the public sector or employed by health 

district or in the private sector, for that matter. In a volunteer 

ambulance service, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you’ll see the same 

level of care, the same level of professionalism, and the same 

desire to help others. And that desire to help others, it drives 

other medical professionals as well — nurses, doctors. They do 

it because they believe in it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Now doctors and nurses often get to do it in a nicer and more 

comfortable environment in the hospital, but EMTs [emergency 

medical technician] and paramedics may have to perform CPR 

[cardiopulmonary resuscitation] in a vehicle, a partially crushed 

vehicle, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where they can’t remove the 

individual. They may have to deal with very difficult problems 

under very difficult circumstances. It’s not in a hospital — 

emergencies occur all over. There are times that you have to 

extricate people from tanker containers, all different types of 

potential problems, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And they do it. And 

they do it every day. And they do it professionally. They do it 

proudly. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they do it in a way that 

truly — and I mean this in all sincerity — truly make others in 

our province honour them. They do it in a manner that few 

others can do. 

 

And there are people who, Mr. Deputy Speaker, enter 

professions knowing what the requirements are, who also play 

roles like that. We see that with police officers and firefighters 

and others. But it takes special people to do those types of jobs, 

knowing that you’re going into a dangerous situation potentially 

any time, and to have that ability to deal with those situations at 

the drop of a hat, Mr. Speaker, and deal with them. It takes 

special people. And I think it’s important that we recognize the 

special abilities of people who do that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And I think it’s important that we recognize and show support 

for these people, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And it think it’s very important in opportunities like this we talk 

about it. Because as we talk about it, it shows that we care. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, we, the leaders of our province, the legislators 

of our province, need to show that we care about what others 

do, we care about the service that these individuals deliver 

within our province. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s our 

opportunity to thank them in the small way that we can. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, many of us may never have the 

opportunity to need emergency medical intervention from 

EMTs or paramedics employed either in the private or public 

sector in our province or, for that matter, volunteer service. But, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, if we do need, rest assured that in 

Saskatchewan you will see quality professional service 



March 3, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2121 

delivered by caring, compassionate emergency medical 

technicians and paramedics, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re seeing an advancement of the 

quality of emergency medical delivery in our province. Just a 

few short years ago, you saw a huge, huge increase in the 

number of paramedics that are employed within the province of 

Saskatchewan. That occurred at a time when those paramedics 

still were not being paid well. They were being paid at about 10 

or $11 an hour, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But people entered that 

profession because they believed in it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And they did it because they care about others. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, they lobbied to see their salaries 

increased, and I’m proud to say today that they are paid 

considerably better today than they were a number of years ago. 

They’re recognized. The professionalism of their service is 

recognized by the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

And, Mr. Speaker, we appreciate it. We truly do appreciate the 

service that they provide for us. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Bill removes the reference of 

control of their conduct from The Ambulance Act, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and we support that. We support it for a number of 

reasons but most importantly because it’s now a profession that 

has reached its level of expertise and maturity in a way that we 

now have — they have the ability to be a self-regulating 

profession. Mr. Deputy Speaker, today there are hundreds of 

EMTs and paramedics in the province of Saskatchewan who 

provide those services. 

 

Now a decade ago, 15 years ago, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there 

was probably half that number. And what that reflects is the 

importance that we have put in providing quality emergency 

medical care throughout our province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

We, as a society and as a province, have taken steps to ensure 

that we’re providing better quality care and intervention, and 

emergency medical personnel across this province have stepped 

up to the plate to ensure that we are delivering that better 

quality emergency care in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s not possible to deliver the exact 

same level of service in every community of Saskatchewan 

because of our geographic differences, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

But we endeavour and those professionals endeavour, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, to provide the best possible care that they can. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it doesn’t matter if you are in 

Saskatoon, Saskatchewan; Regina, Saskatchewan; or Climax, 

Saskatchewan, those professionals try to deliver the very best 

possible care every single day. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they 

do deliver the very best possible care every single day. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this opportunity to recognize them is 

extremely important. As I have indicated earlier, we don’t get 

many opportunities to publicly recognize, as members of the 

legislature, those who are providing these quality services in 

our communities. Maybe other members of the legislature . . . 

and it wouldn’t surprise me at all if members of this legislature 

knew individuals who work and provide these services across 

the province because they’re your neighbours. They’re our 

neighbours. They’re our friends and relatives, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And we may even know some of the private operators. 

I have the opportunity to know many of the private operators 

personally. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I consider some of them 

friends. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, some of the pioneers of the 

emergency medical industry and the emergency medical care in 

our province are leaders in our country. They develop 

procedures and help advance our emergency medical services 

here in Saskatchewan. And many of them — there was a time in 

this province where all of the ambulance services were private 

— many may be able to think back to a time when the 

ambulance service in Regina was called Olson’s Ambulance 

and was run by the Olson family. And I can remember those 

days because I worked for a period of time for the Olson family 

as well when it was Olson’s Ambulance. And I can remember 

when every single ambulance service in this province was 

privately owned. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the advancements that have been made 

through these pioneers of our service here in Saskatchewan has 

resulted in the changes that we have and has resulted in the 

changes that we see in this legislation today. It has resulted in 

the now self-regulating professional industry. And, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I think that this Bill helps to finally acknowledge the 

great work that these emergency medical personnel do in our 

province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I think that it’s a step in the 

right direction. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to take a couple of minutes to 

talk about some of the other changes that are in this Bill. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, there are changes in this Bill that . . . most of 

the changes are simply reference of changes to bring the 

legislation up to date. As I indicated earlier, that the references 

were to ambulance districts before, and now we’re talking 

about, with the amalgamation and the formation of health 

districts, Mr. Deputy Speaker, those ambulance services are 

now run by the individual health districts. Now when I say run, 

it may be that there’s an individual or private operator who 

provides the actual service, but it’s the health district that 

determines what level of service is needed, that funds it through 

the health district, and in fact approves the individual plans, 

whether it’s run directly by the health district or through a series 

of private operators providing . . . 

 

I think it should be emphasized that in Saskatchewan we have, 

in two of our three largest cities, the ambulance services run by 

a family — the Dutchak family — who have been a long-time 

ambulance service delivery family in the province of 

Saskatchewan. I don’t know if they were the first, but I can tell 

you they are very, very strong proponents of high-quality 

service delivery in Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, they have made a significant difference to 

the quality of ambulance service in the province of 

Saskatchewan over many, many years. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the transformation from ambulance 

districts to health districts has been an opportunity to advance 

the quality of ambulance service delivery in Saskatchewan. It’s 

increased the ability to coordinate those services in a better way 

across the province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

But there are a few things that this Bill doesn’t do that I think it 



2122 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2009 

should do, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As an example, it’s up to the 

health districts to set the ambulance fee rates in the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and they don’t have to be 

the same, so that the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region could 

have one fee rate schedule and the Saskatoon Health Region 

could have another fee rate schedule, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 

what would be most appropriate is if we had a universal fee, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, for ambulance service delivery in the 

province of Saskatchewan so that all the citizens of this 

province were treated equitably and equally as far as the cost of 

delivering a service. Because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is a 

fee attached to utilization of an ambulance service unless it’s 

ordered by the health district — as an example, a transfer 

between hospitals — and it’s often paid by the district. But even 

that is determined, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by the health region 

and may not be consistent across the province. 

 

[21:45] 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Bill, although it may seem quite 

insignificant and primarily housekeeping, it’s a very important 

piece of legislation. I hope that the Health minister of the 

province of Saskatchewan realizes how important emergency 

medical personnel are to the overall health care delivery in our 

province. 

 

I hope that the Health minister will continue to support the 

advancement of our emergency medical services, continue to 

promote increased and advanced education and skilled training 

and development of our emergency medical personnel, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, because the greater, the greater the training, 

the greater the skills. And the better quality of service that can 

be delivered to those who are injured at the actual scene of that 

accident or that trauma, Mr. Deputy Speaker, makes a huge 

difference to the outcome for that individual, the outcome for 

that individual’s family. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it makes a 

difference to the province of Saskatchewan because, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, in this province, we care about one another. 

 

We’re a province of just over 1 million people. And, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, although we cover vast, vast area and territory, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are a province of caring people. We 

care about one another. It doesn’t matter where you live in this 

province — whether it’s in rural Saskatchewan or urban 

Saskatchewan — we care about one another. That’s the nature 

of our province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it’s the nature of the 

people who live in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this legislation may not seem to be 

earth-shattering. It may not seem to be the type of legislation 

that would actually demand the level of time I’m spending on it. 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s an opportunity to truly recognize 

those professionals, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And in doing so, this 

legislature acknowledges how important they are, how 

important they are to our province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, before I take my seat, I just want to 

formally say to the men and women who provide those 

emergency medical services in our province, those who man the 

ambulances across the province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, those 

who provide these very important services, we thank you. I 

simply want to say, we thank you. You’re special people. And, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, with that I would like to move that we 

adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Dewdney 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 49, The Ambulance 

Amendment Act, 2008. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 76 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Heppner that Bill No. 76 — The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It 

is a pleasure to enter into the debate on Bill 76, The Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Amendment Act. I think this is an important 

Act, and we get this pretty regular on almost an annual basis. 

It’s a very important piece of legislation, The Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act, and here we’re amending it. 

 

I think that I understand and appreciate the explanation that’s 

gone along. And I reviewed the minister’s speech and it’s very 

helpful. She does talk about there’s four amendments this time. 

I think last time it might have been in the 20’s. Four is much 

more manageable. She talks about two are administrative in 

nature. We understand when you’re managing the size of land 

that’s in protection — which is 1.4 million hectares — there 

may be the odd time where there’s a few administrative errors, 

and we understand two occasions arise in this case. 

 

The third involves the deregulation of 20 acres to expand a 

farmstead. That makes a lot of sense. And of course some land 

will be put into the Act, protected, to make up for this, to 

compensate for this withdrawal. 

 

The fourth amendment I think is also interesting and I think this 

is a good move. It talks about removing 160 acres from the 

registry to allow for land sale, but it’s sold on the condition of a 

conservation easement. And this is a very important, innovative 

approach to conservation. I think this is good to see right across 

Canada. In Saskatchewan we know many groups are involved 

in this, whether it’s Ducks Unlimited, the wildlife federation, 

the department itself, the ministry. At the federal level it’s very 

important. I think this shows some real leadership. 

 

So I think this is a very important piece of legislation. I can’t 

wait to see it in committee so we can ask a few questions. I’ve 

got to fully understand, research, understand this. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think there’s a lot of good work 

here. We do have some questions though. We do have some 

concerns. One is what is happening . . . The Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act forms a pretty integral part of the biodiversity 

action plan for this province. We know that one has just 

expired. We had five years. We’d like to know what is the 



March 3, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2123 

future for biodiversity here in this province. Where are we 

going to go in the next five years? But of course a key integral 

part, especially for a province like Saskatchewan with such vast 

amounts of land, and because of that the huge biodiversity we 

have. We’re very blessed with that. And so I’m looking forward 

to hearing more about the biodiversity plan, what’s happening. 

How does this Act, how does this amendment fit into that? 

 

Now it was interesting, we had set a goal — and this is based on 

the United Nations goal — of 12 per cent of land set aside in 

representative areas. It’s called the representative area network. 

We were at 9 per cent. We’re making some gains. I’m hoping to 

see that we’re going to make more gains than that. It’s tougher 

as we go along. I understand that. We’ve made some pretty 

huge gains at the beginning because we moved Crown lands 

into it. Now we know the North is protected, the Crown land’s 

protected through the Ministry of Environment. The South is 

protected through the Department of Agriculture. We know 

there has been some movement around land sales in agriculture. 

 

We hope though that particularly around fragile areas, the 

vulnerable areas, that they are being protected. And I’m 

thinking along the Saskatchewan River basin, particularly 

around the South Saskatchewan River basin. I know that that’s 

one people have talked to me about that, around where the river 

comes into Saskatchewan. It’s called the Chesterfield Flats, and 

the Saskatchewan breaks the land forms as we go into 

Diefenbaker Lake. I’d like to make sure that that land continues 

to be protected. 

 

I know — and I know this isn’t for the Ministry of 

Environment, the minister responsible for parks — we are still 

waiting on the promise around the wilderness parks. And I’m 

hoping that we will hear more about that in the future because 

as land is designated as parkland, obviously it’s protected and 

again is related in terms of biodiversity action plan. And we 

hope to hear more about that as we move forward. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I see that the land here is actually more in the 

Northwest. Many people are watching what’s happening with 

land in the Northwest, particularly in The Battlefords area. We 

see that’s where this land is located. But it all makes a lot of 

sense, and we don’t see a lot of problem with that. Again 

though we’ll have questions in committee, and I know the critic 

will have those questions. 

 

So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would move that we 

adjourn the debate at this moment. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 76, The Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2008. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 68 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Tell that Bill No. 68 — The Arts 

Professions Act/Loi sur les professions artistiques be now read 

a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well it’s 

a real pleasure to enter into this debate on this new piece of 

legislation which really in fact is replacing the status of the 

artist legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think for many people who’ve been engaged in 

the arts in the province of Saskatchewan over that last number 

of years, they are sincerely disappointed that this piece of 

legislation makes no reference to improving the financial status 

of artists living in our province.  

 

As people will know, status of the artists actually is a federal 

initiative. And artists across the country have been working 

very, very hard to have status of the artist Act  that in fact move 

forward with the provisions that artists will be able to 

collectively bargain for income and benefits. And, Mr. Speaker, 

the disappointment in this particular piece of legislation is that 

there are absolutely no provisions or references to the collective 

bargaining process for people who are engaged in the arts. Mr. 

Speaker, this is in fact very, very disappointing. 

 

The members opposite should know that, if they were to have 

read a recent article in The Globe and Mail dated January 7, 

’09, some very important research work has been done about 

the plight of Canadian artists in Canada. And what this research 

shows is that artists in Canada are hovering at poverty levels, 

and the situation is likely worsening as the worldwide recession 

deepens, according to the statistical profile of our country’s 

artists, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What’s really discouraging about this report is what’s 

happening to female artists, and in fact if you look at the 

research that’s been done, they show that it’s the female artisan 

or craftsperson, the female musician and singer, and female 

dancers that are the poorest paid Canadian artists in Canada, 

and in particularly so, also for female visual artists. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what artists have been talking about for the last 

decade is the need to have artists have access to the ability to 

bargain wages, and also bargain benefits. Mr. Speaker, I had a 

situation in my own constituency where a comedian was 

injured. He was a obviously a self-employed comedian, but he 

was injured in a hotel where he had been contracted to perform, 

and he had no access really to workers’ compensation, Mr. 

Speaker, because he was an independent artist. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other thing that this report shows, that was 

done by the Hill Strategies Research company is that Aboriginal 

artists are also poor earners. And in fact, if you compare 

Aboriginal artists to other First Nations and Métis people that 

are in the paid labour force, they in fact receive about 30 per 

cent lower than the average First Nation or Aboriginal person. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it’s clear that the research has been done. We 

know that people in this country have identified themselves as 

artists. According to the 2006 census, there were approximately 

140,000 Canadians who had identified themselves as artists and 

who in fact made their primary income from the performance of 



2124 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2009 

their art or their work of their art. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that certainly people who have worked on 

this file for the last several years understand that what was 

important for people, particularly those groups of people 

involved in the Arts Alliance, was the need to move the whole 

notion of collective bargaining forward. 

 

And when you look at the piece of legislation that the 

government has entered into this Assembly, there’s absolutely 

no reference at all to collective bargaining. And in fact 

members opposite have refused . . . I see they’re applauding. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, what a terrible thing to have people 

applauding on the government side of the House when we have 

some of the poorest people who work in this country and in this 

province not have access to the right to bargain collectively for 

wages and benefits. Mr. Speaker, they refuse to move those 

provisions into this piece of legislation, and that is indeed 

regrettable. 

 

[22:00] 

 

I think finally what I will say, Mr. Speaker, is that this 

legislation does only half of what needs to be done. This 

legislation does not move forward the incomes of artists in our 

province. It does not move forward the notion that artists would 

have access to benefits like other people do in the workplace. 

And we think that that is a shame. Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Well you can say no over there. But the reality 

is that if you are an artist in this province, you do not have the 

ability to bargain collectively for your work. And this Bill does 

not put that provision into the legislation. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, those members opposite participated in the 

committee hearings. We were on the verge of having this 

legislation passed by this Assembly. And what did they do? 

They stopped it in committee, Mr. Speaker. That’s what they 

did. Now they can say you never got it done, but the intent of 

the government was to have it done. 

 

And this government has come back in with a piece of 

legislation that only goes part way. It does not give people the 

right, who are involved in the arts community, to bargain 

collectively. The people who work for the symphony do not 

have the right to bargain collectively. The people who work for 

the symphony in Saskatoon and Regina do not have the right to 

form an employee association and bargain. It is voluntarily 

recognized by the two symphony boards of directors, it’s 

voluntarily recognized that the musicians’ union will represent 

them. Now they’ll say, get it done. They didn’t get it done. And 

they’ve only gone halfway. And they’ve stopped it. 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, these people over there don’t like 

working people. They don’t like working people. They bring in 

essential services legislation. They take away people’s right to 

go on strike, Mr. Speaker. And they have taken away, they will 

not give artists the rights to form a union. Now they can get all 

mad if they want to, but that is the reality. 

 

This legislation does not allow the poorest working people in 

this country, who are artists, the ability to form a union, and it’s 

because they would not put this provision in the legislation. 

And, Mr. Speaker, artists will continue to be low income. They 

will continue to not have access to benefits. They will continue 

to not have access to workers’ compensation because these 

mean-spirited people over there refuse to put this provision in 

this legislation. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I know I’ve got them upset over there, but 

that is the reality. And with that, Mr. Speaker, I will say this 

finally — that this legislation goes partway but it doesn’t go far 

enough to protect the interests of artists in our province. 

 

And I would adjourn this debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 68, The Arts 

Professions Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 51 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion of the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 51 — The 

Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 

tonight to make some comments to The Provincial Court 

Amendment Act. The minister moved the Act with two 

significant amendments: one about the judges . . . our ability to 

look at judges’ alleged misconduct after resignation, and one 

about the judges’ pension funds. 

 

The most interesting thing I want to comment on is that the 

public has expectations of the judiciary, and the public has been 

watching with some interest in some of the things that have 

happened in our judicial system. And basically they have lost 

some confidence in the judicial system and have raised some 

questions about the transparency and the accountability. And I 

think that being as our justice system is a key pillar in a strong 

democracy, that it is incumbent on us to make sure that people 

do have confidence in the system, that they do think the system 

will be fair, that they do think it’ll be transparent, and that there 

is accountability for the people in the system who deliver the 

services, and that includes the judges in particular. 

 

The judges of course are the most visible of people who work in 

the system, that deal with the criminal aspect and deal with the 

court system. And I think that the confidence issue, when the 

people are not confident in the system, it does weaken our 

democracy. And I think this, the two amendments that I see in 

this legislation, one of them in particular allowing the Judicial 

Council to have authority over judges who have resigned for 

after two years, they can still go back and carry on 

investigations into alleged misconduct, that is a big step 

forward. 

 

There is, however, a piece missing in that there is no further 



March 3, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2125 

punishment. I know the minister has said that the public will be 

able to see that the judge has been found guilty or has been 

found that there is misconduct, but there is nothing further in 

that, and I think that is something that would bear looking at. 

 

There is also the fact that we’re going to be looking at other 

professions who have similar legislation to this, that there is the 

ability to go back two years or to go ahead two years after 

resignation and still bring allegations and investigations. 

 

But there are still many other professions who don’t have this, 

so we’ll probably be looking at some similar legislation coming 

forward to cover many of those professions. I think the minister 

has said there’s 42 others that could have similar legislation. 

Legislation now that covers some professions that would be 

similar to what’s being proposed are The Legal Profession Act, 

The Medical Profession Act, The Pharmacy Act, and The 

Veterinarians Act. So there’s precedent to have this put into 

legislation and I think this is a good amendment that the 

minister is bringing forward. 

 

The second piece of this legislation is about pension 

amendments. And that of course is something that we are 

keenly interested in making sure that again people are treated 

fairly in a relationship breakdown. So I think that our Justice 

critic has made some comments that he’s certainly wanting to 

see and ask questions on this legislation. It is similar to 

legislation that we had brought forward last year — or the year 

before, I guess it was — but there are some things that are 

different and some clauses that we certainly want to look at and 

see if there’s things that we maybe have to change. 

 

And we definitely want to see clarity in the pension and the 

benefits because it certainly deals with a fairness of distribution 

of assets. We want to see that happen. And I think that the 

minister has explained pretty clearly what’s going to happen in 

these amendments, so I look forward to seeing it at committee 

and having some of the questions asked. 

 

I know that some of my colleagues still have questions about it 

and comments to make, but I, however, have nothing more to 

add to the debate, and will now adjourn debate on this Bill 

tonight. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 

Eastview has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 51, The 

Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2008. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 61 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Hutchinson that Bill No. 61 — The 

Local Government Election Amendment Act, 2008 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 

extremely pleased to stand and enter into debate on this very 

important Bill, Bill No. 61 which is The Local Government 

Election Amendment Act, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Now this particular piece of legislation reflects ongoing 

changes through consultation at the municipal level, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and over the years there has been consultation 

with municipal governments to improve The Election Act 

process within the province of Saskatchewan. It’s an ongoing 

dialogue that will continue for many years in the future because, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we can always continue to make 

improvements. We can always continue to enhance the ability 

of our provincial citizens to have say and impact on local 

government. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this has been worked on, as I 

indicated, for many years. There have been continual changes, 

recommendations made by SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association], Mr. Deputy Speaker, and by 

SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] 

wanting processes changed, updated. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

it’s a good thing to have an ongoing dialogue and to continue to 

improve and update local government election legislation, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

There was a desire, and always has been a desire, at the local 

level to have many of the rules in the local elections to be 

similar to those of provincial legislation or federal legislation, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, and we couldn’t disagree with that, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. To make a more uniform administration of 

local election laws across the province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

makes sense. And as a result, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there have 

been ongoing discussions and changes made at the discretion 

and the request of local governments. 

 

There are specific changes here though, however, that are going 

to take some time to examine and to . . . Some consultations 

with local government, with SUMA and SARM, and local 

government administrators to ensure that the changes are being 

made are firstly what they wanted; secondly, make common 

sense in their application to provide better response to the 

citizens of those municipalities, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And we 

want to make sure that we catch any particular nuisances or 

problems that may be within this legislation, so that at this time 

we can take the opportunity to ensure that what we’re doing 

benefits the citizens in the local . . . and the local government 

administrators, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

We have quite a number of people that have experience either at 

the local government level or being a minister responsible for 

local government within our caucus, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

We’re going to be looking carefully at these provisions to 

ensure that they in fact reflect what we have heard from those 

local government officials over the years. We may identify 

areas and make suggestions for even greater improvement, and 

how to fine tune the legislation and make it even more effective 

through things that we will observe in this legislation, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and through consultations with local 

government. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to talk about one change that isn’t 

in this legislation that has been lobbied for by municipal 



2126 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2009 

governments for some time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and that is 

municipal governments wanted a change from a three-year 

election period to a four-year election period, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, for a number of reasons, one of which is cost, of 

course. The more often you go to election, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

the more money it costs and that of course is expenses that are 

at the cost of local taxpayers, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because 

local governments raise their money through property tax, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

So this was one particular change that local governments 

wanted across the province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They wanted 

to move from a three-year term to a four-year term. We’re 

disappointed that it’s not there. We’re disappointed that local 

governments weren’t listened to, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

It would have been very helpful if local governments would 

have been listened to in this case, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Those 

local governments face the same challenges provincial and 

federal governments do, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with the cost of 

elections. It would have been nice if the government would 

have listened and moved on four-year election terms, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. Unfortunately they didn’t. Maybe the minister 

of Municipal Government will at some future date bring 

forward legislation that will in fact reflect the needs of local 

government, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

In our time in office, Mr. Deputy Speaker — we were the 

government for a number of years — we saw significant 

changes. We saw The Cities Act introduced which changed the 

entire onus in legislation, from one of being where the 

provincial government was more parental in their nature, to 

very permissive legislation allowing those governments to make 

their own decisions, Mr. Deputy Speaker, within parameters 

where they didn’t have to come to the provincial government 

for permission on many, many things. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a next step would have been a move 

from three-year election periods to four, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

but unfortunately this government failed to listen to municipal 

governments in the province of Saskatchewan and have failed 

to move to a four-year term. 

 

We hope in the future that they will, over the next couple of 

years as they continue to dialogue with municipal governments, 

they will consider it. Because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we see 

changes to this legislation on a regular basis. It’s often that over 

a four-year term, we’ll see two or three potential changes in this 

legislation. And we hope over the next couple of years, through 

continued dialogue, that those municipal governments will in 

fact achieve, achieve what they want very badly, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, which is to have a similar term to provincial and 

federal levels of government — a four-year term. 

 

They’ll go to the ballot box less often. Local ratepayers will pay 

less money as a result, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And of course, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, those ratepayers always have concerns about 

how their money is being spent. Because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

local governments don’t have money that don’t  belong to the 

citizens of those municipalities, just like provincial 

governments don’t have money that does not belong to the 

citizens of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

[22:15] 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, although we’re disappointed — we are 

disappointed in the failure to listen to that very specific point, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker — we will take time over the next several 

weeks to examine this legislation in greater detail, to have 

greater consultations with SUMA and SARM to ensure that the 

changes that are being put forward are in fact . . . reflect to their 

values and views. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is the responsibility of the opposition in 

any legislature or any parliament, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 

scrutinize legislation to ensure that it in fact improves the 

situation and doesn’t hinder or cause additional problems, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. So we’re going to take the time to analyze this 

very carefully, to review it very carefully, and to reflect upon 

what those municipalities want. Because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

we need to work with the municipalities, but we need to work 

co-operatively to advance the provisions of the electoral system 

for municipal governments in our province. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they’re not asking for things that 

don’t make sense. They’re very pragmatic, reasonable people, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. We want to work with them, and we hope 

in the future the government will listen to them in regards to 

their request for longer election terms, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, having said that, the members 

opposite seem rather quiet. They don’t seem to be paying much 

attention to the fact that we’re talking about very important 

legislation — important to municipal governments, important to 

the citizens of our province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and we would 

hope important to the government as well. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it seems that they’re paying very little 

attention and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I hope they’ll then take the 

time to read the Hansard after to consider, consider what are in 

the best interests of the people of the province of Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. Members opposite tend not to want to pay 

much attention to any suggestions that may be put forward by 

others, whether it’s municipal governments, the members of the 

opposition. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s our job. That’s our 

responsibility and we take it very seriously. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would just say to the government, 

please take the time to review my comments tomorrow if you 

don’t want to pay attention tonight. I hope the minister will at 

least take the time to read them. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 

always will take the time to make sure that we do due diligence 

on this legislation. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at this time, seeing the late hour that 

we’re experiencing, and we have other legislation that people 

would like to speak to, I move that we adjourn debate on this 

particular piece of legislation. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Dewdney 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 61, The Local 

Government Election Amendment Act, 2008. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 



March 3, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2127 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 59 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 59 — The 

Election Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 

thanks for keeping with us. I’m glad to be able to enter into 

debate tonight on Bill. No. 59, the Act to amend The Election 

Act, 1996. 

 

It’s largely a housekeeping Bill in most respects concerning the 

changes made to the fixing of the election dates — the next one 

being 2011, November 7. And you know, subsequent changes 

that need to be made in order to do all the things that 

accompany a general election, such as fixing the polling date; 

fixing the nomination date for candidates; fixing the date the 

Chief Electoral Officer issues the writ, the maximum of 17 clear 

days and the minimum of 11 clear days before nomination day; 

the fixing any five days before polling day on which the 

advance poll is to be held and those days. It must not include a 

holiday, of course. It must be neither more than seven clear 

days nor less than one clear day before polling day. Fixing the 

dates on which the returning officer shall hold the final count, 

and that being 12 days after polling day. Again, I can tell that 

I’m thrilling you with this, Mr. Speaker, so I guess I’ll cut to the 

chase. 

 

The housekeeping amendments are important. They are 

pursuant to, I believe, the review that takes place of The 

Election Act in general after each general election, a process 

which has served us well in recent history and which should 

continue to do so down the line. 

 

There’s some new sections, sections 277 to 277.2, and of course 

these pertain to expanding the restrictions around government 

advertising. We’ll be most interested to see how this works out, 

Mr. Speaker, whether or not there’s any manipulation of the 

process in advance, the year leading up. It sounds not bad, but 

again some of these things — especially when we’re dealing 

with this current government, Mr. Speaker — some of the 

things sound pretty good, but how they play out in reality is 

often something different altogether. So we’ll be watching that 

very closely. 

 

I can’t help but wonder, in terms of the manipulation that is 

possible under this, if we’ll see, you know, where are the 

penalties in the legislation in terms of enforcing compliance. 

And again, we’ve had a very recent example this past fall with 

the federal government. You know, Prime Minister Stephen 

Harper staked no small amount of his credibility on what a 

champion of democracy he was, and the fixed election dates 

legislation that they’d brought in — of course, turned out to be 

not worth the paper it was written on. 

 

And it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, that since then, of course, the 

way that things have gone in terms of the economy and, of 

course, the way that Flaherty and Harper talked about how first 

we’re in a . . . You know, there’s nothing to fear and there’s 

going to be lots of great buying opportunities out there in the 

economy, and that then we were in a technical deficit. And then 

it was, you know, straight into, well, we’re in big trouble now; 

what are we going to do? And it’s interesting to see the 

evolution that’s taken place there. 

 

But you can’t help but wonder, Mr. Speaker, in the timing of 

this, was the federal government looking at what was coming 

down the line and thinking, okay, how does this square with our 

fixed election date legislation? Why was it that that election 

came along earlier than needed to be the case? So, you know, 

on the one hand you’ve got looming economic hardship, on the 

other hand you’ve got this fixed election date legislation. So 

what’s the solution there, Mr. Speaker? Well of course you go 

against the fixed election date legislation. So the federal 

legislation wasn’t worth the paper it was written on. 

 

You know, time will tell the tale in terms of what happens with 

the provincial situation here and these fine words that have been 

spoken about the fixed election date legislation and the changes 

pursuant to it in terms of The Election Act. But I guess we’ll 

believe it when we see it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I can’t help but think as well that I’ll be interested to see what 

kind of work is done with the Office of the Chief Electoral 

Officer in terms of ensuring that there’s the work that needs to 

be done around enumerating of particularly difficult to 

enumerate ridings. I think of myself, my own situation in inner-

city Regina, what the approach of the electoral officer will be in 

terms of making sure that the people of Regina Elphinstone are 

enumerated as they need to be. In ridings that are more widely 

distributed, such as Arm River-Watrous, you know, is the 

enumeration job being done there? Are they being well served 

by the Chief Electoral Officer as he attempts or she attempts to 

carry out The Election Act? 

 

I think of my good colleague and friend from Cumberland, and 

the mighty challenge that exists in terms of ensuring that the 

enumeration is equal to the task, in terms of a riding like 

Cumberland, and the massive geographic expanse that has to be 

navigated in terms of making sure that the people are 

enumerated, so they can go and make their mark on a ballot and 

have their voice heard electorally, which of course they just 

recently did. And I’m very happy that they sent our fine 

colleague from Cumberland to join us here. 

 

So I wonder if this particular item of legislation is equal to 

those tasks, Mr. Speaker. I wonder if there isn’t, you know . . . 

In terms of updating the legislation generally, could there not 

have been a greater effort made to see what we can do in terms 

of modernizing our election system. Again, a lot of this is sort 

of pro forma in terms of the date as such, so you adjust the 

calendar and the requirements in the legislation accordingly. So 

there’s not a lot to be heard here on that. It’s largely 

housekeeping. But again, what is new in this is notable, and 

we’ll be watching very closely to see how this plays out in real 

time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And what is also noticeable and notable is what is not in this 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, is an undertaking to do what we can as 

this legislature to better serve the people as they go about 

exercising their franchise and casting their ballot in our 



2128 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2009 

democratic system. 

 

I guess that’s the main concerns that I would like to raise at this 

time, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad that this doesn’t veer into messing 

around with the boundary distribution process. Again, I come 

from a riding where, in the lead-up to the 1971 election, it was 

the first one on which the boundaries for Regina Centre were 

struck. And in that election, there was something on the order of 

19,500 electors in Regina Centre. And Allan Blakeney, of 

course, carried the day there in 1971, as compared to a riding 

that had been carved out of the south of Regina which had just 

over 4,000 electors. 

 

I’m glad to see that there’s nothing in this legislation that takes 

us back to those kind of abuses of the spirit of democracy and 

the electoral practice of this province. But again, Mr. Speaker, 

the price of freedom, as has been said, is vigilance. And we will 

be vigilant in regarding what comes down the line in terms of 

democratic practice. 

 

And I guess one other thing I’d reflect on, Mr. Speaker, is very 

recently I had my eighth anniversary as the MLA [Member of 

the Legislative Assembly] for Regina Elphinstone. February 26, 

2001 was the date of the by-election that brought me to this 

Chamber. And I will always remember the cold of that day, and 

the great effort that it took on the part of so many people to 

actually get out to the polls to fight the cold and to make their 

voices heard. 

 

And I will forever remember pulling up to Walker School 

which is now in the riding of Regina Rosemont, and again, a 

bitterly cold day, Mr. Speaker — I think something like minus 

50 with the wind chill — and seeing a senior citizen, you know, 

moving into the polling station with her walker because she was 

that earnest about casting her ballot. 

 

So as we said about changing The Election Act and making 

amendments to it, we should always remember how we can live 

up to the kind of commitment demonstrated by individuals like 

that — the kind of people that fought, that bore arms so that we 

might enjoy the freedom of a parliamentary democracy here in 

Canada. 

 

And as we said about changing the mechanics of the election 

systems that enable people to make their voices heard, I think 

we do that work very thoughtfully and seriously. And I’d like to 

see, you know, I’d . . . Again, this is fairly pro forma. We’ll see 

how the changes work. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The House now being adjourned, 

having reached the time of adjournment, now stands adjourned 

until 1:30 tomorrow afternoon. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 22:30.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 60 — The Senate Nominee Election Act 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2099 

 Bill No. 65 — The Seizure of Criminal Property Act, 2008 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2101 

  Gantefoer (referral to committee) ......................................................................................................................................... 2103 

 Bill No. 66 — The Witness Protection Act 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2103 

  Gantefoer (referral to committee) ......................................................................................................................................... 2104 

 Bill No. 74 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (English) Amendment and Repeal Act, 2008 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2104 

  Gantefoer (referral to committee) ......................................................................................................................................... 2104 

 Bill No. 75 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Bilingual) Amendment and Repeal Act, 2008/ 

 Loi corrective (lois bilingues) de 2008 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2105 

  Gantefoer (referral to committee) ......................................................................................................................................... 2105 

 Bill No. 50 — The Missing Persons and Presumption of Death Act 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2105 

  Gantefoer (referral to committee) ......................................................................................................................................... 2106 

 Bill No. 44 — The Agreements of Sale Cancellation Amendment Act, 2008 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2106 

 Bill No. 73 — The University of Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 2008 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2107 

 Bill No. 43 — The Trespass to Property Act 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2109 

 Bill No. 71 — The Innovation Saskatchewan Act 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2111 

 Bill No. 45 — The Credit Union Amendment Act, 2008 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2114 

 Bill No. 9 — The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 2008 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2118 

 Bill No. 49 — The Ambulance Amendment Act, 2008 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2118 

 Bill No. 76 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2122 

 Bill No. 68 — The Arts Professions Act/Loi sur les professions artistiques 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2123 

 Bill No. 51 — The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2008 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2124 

 Bill No. 61 — The Local Government Election Amendment Act, 2008 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2125 

 Bill No. 59 — The Election Amendment Act, 2008 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2127 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 


