




















































Hansard: March 23, 2009


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 37B  MONDAY, MARCH 23, 2009, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2431 

 March 23, 2009 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Gantefoer that the Assembly approves 

in general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 

proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. Van 

Mulligen.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — It being 7 o‟clock, this House is now 

back in session. Orders of the day, special order, debate will 

continue. I recognize the member from Carrot River Valley. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Good evening, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a pleasure 

to speak this evening. I hope I can keep a few of the people 

awake after a good dinner. 

 

Mr. Speaker, of course I support this budget. Let‟s face it, Mr. 

Speaker, this budget is not only a fantastic and historic budget 

for Saskatchewan but also the best budget in all of Canada and 

probably the best in North America. Oh heck, let‟s go a little 

further, Mr. Speaker. I think it‟s going to be the best in the 

whole world. 

 

Mind you, Mr. Speaker, as all of us here know, Saskatchewan is 

the best place in the world, especially, especially the Carrot 

River Valley constituency. And I have to say, Mr. Speaker, I 

want to thank all of the people from the Carrot River Valley 

constituency for supporting me. And I want to thank my CA 

[constituency assistant] especially for putting up with all my 

antics over the past 16 months. My seat member‟s laughing at 

that. I didn‟t think that was all that funny, really. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s hard to believe that just a short two years ago, 

we were just a wee province — a province that would be in and 

out of equalization perpetually, a province destined to be a 

continual have-not province. My, how things have changed in 

the last 16 months. The optimism, the enthusiasm, the we‟re 

going to get things done feeling, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now when we visit outside the province and tell people we are 

from Saskatchewan, where there used to be a snicker or sorry to 

hear that, people now look at you with envy — envy — with 

that one look in their eye, just wishing that they could be here 

also. 

 

You know what, Mr. Speaker? In this past year, 15,000 people 

have done just that. They have moved to Saskatchewan because 

they see opportunity here. They see optimism here. They see a 

great place to raise their families. They see a government that‟s 

looking forward, looking to the future, a government that is a 

positive government, a government that is strong and steady. 

 

Not, Mr. Speaker, like the old and tired former administration, 

whose largest export was people, mainly our youth. Yes, Mr. 

Speaker, Saskatchewan is a far different place now. And with 

budgets such as this and the previous one, with the forward 

thinking of this administration, Mr. Speaker, we may have to 

put up walls to keep people out. What a change. What a change. 

 

Let‟s just take a look at just a few of the things in this budget, 

Mr. Speaker. The largest education property tax cut in 

Saskatchewan history. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, how many eons have people 

been asking for this? Think of it. The former premier, Tommy 

Douglas, said on August 31, 1944, and I quote: 

 

We are pledged to do away with the education tax as soon 

as we get new sources of revenue to take the place of the 

revenue now realized from that tax. When we develop 

new sources of revenue sufficient to supplement the 

revenue now raised from the tax, we shall do away with 

the tax because we consider it regressive legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as you can see, the CCF [Co-operative 

Commonwealth Federation] actually thought of doing 

something on education tax. The NDP [New Democratic Party] 

actually thought about it also; they just didn‟t get around to it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, coming from Carrot River Valley, a mainly 

agricultural area, the education portion of tax on farm land has 

always been a sore point. Come to think of it, Mr. Speaker, 

there are not many things agriculture related that they did get 

around to, such as enhancing crop insurance, fully funding the 

CAIS [Canadian agricultural income stabilization] program. 

 

There is one thing the NDP did very well for rural 

Saskatchewan though; they cut back on basically any money 

going to the RMs [rural municipality] or anywhere else in rural 

Saskatchewan, for that matter. I give the RMs just a ton of 

credit for the monies they had to work with, Mr. Speaker. They 

have done an amazing job, considering what they had to work 

with. 

 

In this budget coming from the Saskatchewan Party we see — 

this is just on kind of the agriculture end of it — 25 million for 

the RMs, 25 million to provide cost matching for new federal 

infrastructure programs, 20.9 million for the final year of the 

Municipal Rural Infrastructure Fund, 20 million for the 

Building Canada fund. The list just goes on and on. This 

government and this budget will give the municipalities their 

just due, Mr. Speaker, something that they‟ve been sorely 

lacking for in the last 16 years. 

 

Now we know that this is not going to be an instant fix. But 

what it does, it allows these formerly cash-strapped 

municipalities a method to budget for their infrastructure 

projects in a timely and responsible way, something that just 

couldn‟t happen under the NDP . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Under the NDP. 

 

There is just another little-known thing in this budget that 

perhaps quite a few people overlooked because it‟s not that 



2432 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2009 

large. Mr. Speaker, coming from a small town, coming from a 

small town and belonging to the volunteer fire department for 

close to 25 years, I know how we as a fire department were 

always strapped for cash. When it came to upgrading 

equipment, one of them was emergency telecommunications, 

Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to see $1.8 million set aside for this 

equipment that addresses our volunteer fire departments‟ needs. 

 

I know, I know it‟s a small thing, and a lot of people would 

have missed that in the budget, but that‟s what this 

Saskatchewan Party does. We look after the small things as well 

as the large things. I know, I know, Mr. Speaker, that this 

means, this means a lot to our small towns, our small towns and 

our communities where we have volunteers doing the major 

portion of the work. 

 

Another thing of note, Mr. Speaker, for the Carrot River Valley 

is the monies being put forward for the Cumberland Regional 

College in Nipawin. This is a large project, a project that‟s 

desperately needed — $5.4 million for a new facility that has 

been needed for years, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, you just don‟t 

know, you just don‟t know how much this is appreciated. 

 

Cumberland Regional College is a fantastic academic centre for 

the northeast — a facility that offers advanced education to 

people who want to improve their life and make them more 

employable. This is also a facility that is used extensively by 

our First Nations, who we all know are the fastest growing 

segment of our population but also are the least educated. This 

is a tool, Mr. Speaker, to allow them to move forward, to 

improve their self-esteem, to bring them out of the poverty and 

depression that, unfortunately, they have been saddled with for 

years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I personally want to thank the Minister of 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour for this 

absolutely wonderful announcement that benefits not just the 

people and the First Nations of Carrot River Valley but the 

whole province of Saskatchewan as we move forward steady 

and strong, continuing to make Saskatchewan the place to be. 

 

And speaking of education, Mr. Speaker, in this budget another 

6.5 million for the most aggressive graduate retention program 

in all of Canada. This is personal to me as my children will be 

able to take advantage of this wonderful program. Actually one 

already is. This will help them stay in what is the best place in 

the world, Mr. Speaker — and I say it again — Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another facility that this budget addresses is a 

children‟s hospital in Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, I personally 

know how much this is so desperately needed as our first-born 

had cerebral palsy, and we spent a lot of time in the University 

Hospital in Saskatoon. I give the Saskatoon University Hospital 

credit for the excellent care that they gave our daughter. But 

that being said, a stand-alone children‟s hospital is something 

that is really, really needed. Mr. Speaker, the $100 million now 

and the $200 million committed in this budget for this hospital 

is a godsend for the parents and the children of this province. 

 

Speaking of health, Mr. Speaker, $23 million, $23 million is set 

aside to attract and retain nurses and other hard-to-recruit health 

professionals. Mr. Speaker, this is just another sign that this 

government doesn‟t just sit around on their hands waiting to get 

around to it. We go out, Mr. Speaker, and get her done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are so many good things in this budget, I just 

kind of wonder where to go next. Let‟s try highways. Let‟s try 

highways, Mr. Speaker. Our Minister of Highways is another 

person who has been very, very busy trying to fix up years of 

neglect. Just think of it, Mr. Speaker, we now have a plan, not 

just the hodgepodge of the former administration, but an actual 

plan — $630 million worth. Nineteen per cent higher than our 

first transportation budget which was in itself historic. 

Saskatchewan has been the laughingstock for years as to the 

condition of its highways. No more, Mr. Speaker. No more. 

 

The introduction of the five-year rolling plan is the, I believe, 

the first for this ministry. Within five years, within five years, 

this government will have increased the primary highway 

system by 65 per cent, 65 per cent, therefore enhancing and 

making the transportation of goods far more economical 

throughout the province — 1,580 kilometres of major highway 

and maintenance improvements this year alone. 

 

But wait, Mr. Speaker. There‟s more. Rather than being 

confrontational with the federal government and asking them to 

do everything, and if they didn‟t we would go pout in a corner, 

we partnered with them to speed up the twinning of Highway 

11, which now will be completed in 2012. You know 

sometimes you have to give a little to get a little. Mr. Speaker, 

we don‟t wait to get around to it. We just get her done. 

 

Another small thing coming out of the highways is the 1 million 

for the short-line railways sustainability program. Mr. Speaker, 

this is just another one of those small things that this party, that 

this party looks after. It may not sound like much, but Carrot 

River Valley has two short-lines within its boundaries. These 

lines enhance the movement of not just grain but also some 

manufactured goods. This takes a portion of the strain off of the 

highways‟ infrastructure and therefore is money well spent. I 

commend the people in the Carrot River Valley community 

who had the foresight and tenacity to purchase and operate 

these lines. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we could be going on and on here for a long time. 

But just think, Mr. Speaker, the last two budgets — $2.5 billion, 

$2.5 billion. And not only that, a 40 per cent cut in our debt. 

Now that, that, Mr. Speaker, is responsible government. We get 

her done. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, just another example, just another 

example of how we‟re getting her done is the police end of it. 

We were promised by the NDP for eight years, for eight years 

that they would give us 200 more police officers. 

 

[19:15] 

 

An Hon. Member: — What happened there? 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — What happened there? I think we got 

something like 83 — 83 officers in eight years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we already got $1.6 million put away to get 

another 30 additional police. We said in our platform that we 

were going to put in 120 police officers in four years. We‟re 

going to have them. There again we‟re going to get it done, not 



March 23, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2433 

just get around to it. 

 

Also we have 5.3 million set aside for the enterprise regions 

program. And another thing on that, there‟s an extra $300,000 

to implement the northern enterprise region. This is great. This 

is great for the North. I‟ll tell you, I‟m right next door to them 

because Carrot River Valley is right on the treeline. We‟re 

helping out the North as well as the South. Mr. Speaker, this 

government‟s looking after all of Saskatchewan, all of 

Saskatchewan in the best of ways. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I see my time is kind of coming up here, and I 

could go on and on about how great this budget is. I could even 

brag up our government, Mr. Speaker. But that being said, I 

won‟t. All I can say is, Mr. Speaker, just look at the numbers. A 

balanced budget, 424.5 million General Revenue Fund surplus, 

historic infrastructure spending to address the shortfall left by 

the NDP — all of this and still providing tax decreases for the 

great citizens of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is obvious that I support this budget and I do not 

support the amendment. With that, I will end. And thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I welcome 

this opportunity to enter this budget debate. And at the onset, 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m proud to support this budget and will be 

voting in favour of its adoption and voting against the motion 

put forward by the opposition. 

 

I welcome this opportunity to explain why I support this budget 

and support the continuing efforts of our government to grow 

this province to the benefit of all the residents of our province 

and to the benefit of those from other jurisdictions — 

individuals and business that are joining our province in our 

unprecedented growth and prosperity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government realizes that in order for this 

province to grow, we must provide a competitive environment, 

not only to retain but also to recruit. Mr. Speaker, in a period of 

16 months this government and this province has done more 

than the previous government was able to do in 16 long years. 

 

A competitive environment involves a multitude of factors but, 

Mr. Speaker, it is not rocket science. Individuals and businesses 

want a place where they can prosper, where they can grow. A 

good government will address the environment of their 

jurisdiction and assist and plan and promote and support that 

environment. 

 

Our government has accepted this challenge. And, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I would maintain that by endorsing this vision — a 

vision of growth, a vision of hope — that in 16 short months we 

have seen, we are continuing to see the benefits for all of our 

province: the shift from a philosophy of stagnation and fear to a 

philosophy of growth and hope. Mr. Speaker, our government‟s 

second budget propels the positive future of our province. 

 

We are all aware that we all face two inevitable realities: taxes 

and death. As a government, we also realize we have more 

control over the former reality — taxes — than of the latter, 

which we concede is in the realm of a higher power. However 

we are also committed through our initiatives in health care, in 

justice, in social services, and in our infrastructure initiatives to 

also address the quality and longevity of life. Taxes, in and of 

themselves, do not create wealth; they are a redistribution of 

existing wealth. Our government has in 16 months clearly 

shown to this province — to all of its residents — this 

realization. And this gets back to creating a competitive 

environment, an environment where growth isn‟t only possible 

but in fact becomes the driver of the economy. 

 

As we‟re all aware, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are a number of 

sources of taxation that are utilized by governments to generate 

the revenues that are required to provide those services that 

governments are expected to provide. However when taxation 

becomes a deterrent in the jurisdiction, be it in the rates of 

taxation or the fairness of the taxation or the reliance on 

taxation, we see the impediment to growth, the impediment to 

the creation of wealth. Quite frankly, we see what we saw in 16 

years of socialist government of this province — a failure to 

grow, a period of stagnation, a period in our history that was not 

only unacceptable to the residents of this province but was a 

period in time that we saw an out-migration of capital, both 

human and monetary, that was unprecedented. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget and the direction this government has 

taken will continue to turn this situation around. The 

infrastructure deficit left by the former government was 

staggering, and it has been addressed in an unprecedented 

program that is creating jobs and upgrades at a level never seen 

in this province. But also, Mr. Speaker, it is creating that 

environment for growth, the environment to retain and recruit, 

the environment to grow. Our government and this budget 

squarely tackles the issue related to taxation — the rates and 

economic impact on all the residents, the fairness of the taxation 

system, and the reliance on taxation itself to move our province 

ahead. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this past weekend, I have had the opportunity to 

discuss this budget and the performance of our government and 

that of the past government and of the vision for our province 

that we as a government have been advocating. I‟ve had the 

opportunity to not only meet with residents and leaders of my 

own riding, but on three occasions in the neighbouring riding of 

The Battlefords. Mr. Speaker, the reception to this budget and 

this government‟s performance was overwhelming. The 

reception received by our Minister of Crown Corporations on 

Friday morning as he announced the SaskPower initiatives and 

the reception of our Minister of Finance this morning endorsed 

for me the reasons why I am here in this Assembly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — The sentiment was clear. There is more 

progress for the entire province in 16 months than we have seen 

in 16 years. And there is a sense of optimism over the upcoming 

12 months as this year unfolds, and into the coming years, for 

our province. As this budget debate unfolds, I‟m certain my 

colleagues will have an opportunity to detail the positive 

benefits in their constituency and the performance of this 



2434 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2009 

government will generate. I would no doubt that we will not 

hear much of that from members opposite. 

 

As you are aware, Mr. Speaker, my constituency is a rural 

constituency that is largely agricultural, and it is also driven by 

a thriving oil and gas sector. What I was hearing in my area and 

in my venture into The Battlefords this weekend was regarding 

personal tax. 

 

Firstly, from those paying provincial tax, thanks for the relief 

that is now being realized. For many, in the form of 2008, 

substantial refunds that have already been received and as a 

result of unprecedented reduction in 2008 personal income tax. 

From those who are not paying provincial income tax, thanks 

for the first time in their adult lives as a result of the changes in 

our personal exemption for individuals and dependents. For 

those who have not been subject to provincial tax because of 

their income level, thanks for the substantial additional 

assistance. 

 

These changes that have been introduced have benefited all 

individuals of our province. If I have any advice for the 

residents of Saskatchewan, it would be, firstly file your 2000 

income tax return and secondly, file as soon as possible to take 

advantage of the benefits you will realize. 

 

Secondly on property tax, we remember the quotation “the 

status quo is not on.” A catchy enough phrase, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, in itself, but what was on under the previous 

government if it was not the status quo? Property taxpayers 

have funded a disproportionately high share of education tax in 

our province for far too long. That‟s why during the 2007 

campaign our Premier promised a long-term solution to this 

problem. This budget kept that promise. 

 

Let me address, Mr. Speaker, some of the initiatives that relate 

directly to agriculture. Saskatchewan Agriculture‟s budget for 

2009-10 is $483.4 million. This represents a 177.5 million — 

58 per cent — increase over 2008-2009. Most of this additional 

money will benefit farmers and ranchers directly through the 

AgriStability, AgriInvest, and crop insurance programs. 

 

Specifically there has been provided $20 million in additional 

funding to improve the crop insurance program. There is also 

funding in the budget to bring the administration of 

AgriStability back to Saskatchewan. We are also keeping our 

election promise to fully fund the provincial share of 

AgriStability and AgriInvest. This will help to provide certainty 

and security for our farmers and ranchers. 

 

This budget also includes $5 million in new provincial funding 

for the new federal-provincial Growing Forward agreement. 

This new agreement will include a province-wide water 

infrastructure program. Details of the Growing Forward 

agreement will be announced shortly. 

 

Another initiative in agriculture was the announcement recently 

that we are bringing home the administration of AgriStability, 

AgriInvest, to be melded with the administration of our crop 

insurance program. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have heard a lot from the other side 

about outsourcing. The previous government was content for 

years to have the administration of the programs — AIDA 

[agricultural income disaster assistance], NISA [Net Income 

Stabilization Account], CAIS 1, CAIS 2, etc., that have 

attracted the majority of their often meagre and often late 

commitment to agriculture — to be outsourced to Manitoba. 

This, Mr. Speaker, was an outsourcing of monumental 

proportions. 

 

We are in the process of correcting this injustice to the people 

of our province, and particularly to the agricultural producers of 

our province. Mr. Speaker, I know this initiative will not only 

benefit those Saskatchewan residents who will be engaged in 

the administration process of these programs, but it will also 

benefit our agricultural producers. 

 

As an adviser to a number of agriculture producers in 

Saskatchewan and Alberta for many years, I can tell this 

Assembly that our Saskatchewan producers, they will see 

immediate benefits as this shift from outsourcing of these 

services to a made-in-Saskatchewan alternative, in the 

assistance they will be provided, the turnaround times, and 

perhaps most importantly, in the knowledge and understanding 

of Saskatchewan agriculture that has not been evidenced in the 

past. 

 

These programs, Mr. Speaker, can work, but our producers 

should expect and will receive the assistance and guidance they 

need to make them effective for their operations. It is not 

enough for the government to say it is committing X number of 

dollars to a program and then abandoning their responsibility to 

an outsourced agency to hopefully perform the services that 

should be the responsibility of their government representing 

their producers. 

 

Our agricultural community welcomes this change of direction. 

Their expectations are high, and this government intends to 

produce the results that will meet those expectations. 

 

This budget provides for the continuing success that our 

province has seen and will continue to see. It brings to mind a 

quote I recently came across. The quotation is from a gentleman 

by the name of Paul Sweeney. And the quote is as follows: 

“True success is overcoming the fear of being unsuccessful.” 

 

[19:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are all learning, and part of this learning 

process, because we only have a limited time on this plane, is to 

prudently select the schools, the sources of our learning process. 

I would suggest that certainly I would enrol in our Minister of 

Finance‟s school of growth and creation of wealth and not the 

Larry Hubich school of economic fear and redistribution. 

 

Once again, Mr. Speaker, I proudly reiterate my support for this 

budget, will be supporting its passage, and will most certainly 

be voting against the motion put forth by the members opposite. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw Wakamow. 

 



March 23, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2435 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it‟s a pleasure to rise this evening to 

be able to make comments on the budget that was brought down 

last week. 

 

But first before I get started in my budget comments, I‟d really 

like to pass along a thank you to my staff in the constituency 

office in Moose Jaw. As MLAs [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly], we are very reliant on our staff. They keep us 

organized and represent us to our constituents when we‟re here 

in the House and busy with the duties that we have. Mr. 

Speaker, my Moose Jaw staff does a great job, and thanks to 

them; and thank them for all of the work they do for and with 

the constituents. 

 

For me, Mr. Speaker, it‟s always the way I look at the budget or 

throne speeches, budgets especially, is how they affect the 

constituents of Moose Jaw Wakamow and what effect will they 

have on the people that I represent. And I know that they‟re . . . 

I guess the two main pieces or a couple of the main pieces out 

of this budget, truly are issues that have been discussed for a 

number of years, studied and lobbied and a great deal of 

discussion that‟s happened over the education portion of 

property tax and municipal revenue sharing. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there has been a fair bit of work 

that‟s been ongoing over the last number of years by 

stakeholders and by the government to reach an acceptable 

resolution to this permanent revenue sharing. And I know 

everyone was very pleased by the Sask Party government‟s 

decision that they carried on all the good work that had been 

done previously. And they resisted the temptation to toss out 

any of the good work that had been done by the previous NDP 

government, and today we see a solution in place. 

 

Deputy Speaker, I know that municipalities seem very pleased 

with the revenue-sharing proposal that has been put forward, 

and it is good to see a permanent solution put in place for 

revenue sharing and predictable revenues for the municipalities. 

Municipalities have many demands on their plates, and this will 

definitely make it easier for them to put in place some 

long-term planning and put their budgets together in a more 

timely fashion. So, Mr. Speaker, I think we‟re all pleased with 

the municipal revenue sharing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Now, Mr. Speaker, there will always be 

concerns that this may not be enough and we will see, as cities 

and municipalities develop and finalize their budgets, if some 

communities may see increased property taxes. We don‟t know 

yet, but an increase is expected to come forward a year from 

now for the same program, and I‟m sure that municipalities will 

hold government to their word to receive a full point of the PST 

[provincial sales tax] in their revenue sharing. 

 

So it‟s good to see this move ahead, and I‟d like to thank all of 

those who have worked over this past number of years to put 

forward a fair and balanced solution to this issue. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the other big issue that affects not just my 

community of Moose Jaw but all communities is the education 

portion of property tax. And people are pleased to see a firm 

proposal put forward, but many are reserving their opinions on 

the issue until we see the final effects. 

 

I know that the minister handed out some charts on budget day 

with the impact of the proposed changes, all wonderful and 

good, but I think the minister only used the best examples of the 

most drastic improvements, namely his own constituency. And 

I‟ll reserve my opinion until I see some solid numbers from 

Moose Jaw. 

 

This is a reassessment year, so property values will be going up, 

and as yet communities do not know the impact of the proposed 

changes. So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we‟ll have to wait and see. 

The total property tax bill should go down, but what effect will 

reassessment have? Or will there be property tax increases in 

various communities to meet the demands facing municipalities 

and communities? There are a number of unanswered questions 

by property taxpayers across the province, so we‟ll just have to 

wait and see when more information is available. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many more questions from the school 

boards and the professionals who work within the education 

system. So now we have the autonomy of the school boards 

removed, and the provincial mill rates are set by the minister. 

Are the changes drastic? Some may feel they are. Are the 

changes needed? Well some may argue yes and no. And is this 

really the best way to proceed to answer the issue of the 

education portion of property tax? Well the jury‟s still out on 

that. But I guess it really doesn‟t matter what the answers are to 

these questions because the minister felt that no consultations 

were needed; he had all the answers. 

 

But to have these changes proposed to the officials within the 

education system during the budget speech was somewhat crass 

and, I have to say, disrespectful of the many professionals that 

have spent their careers improving the education system in our 

province and provided the best education for our children. 

 

Saskatchewan‟s education system has a stellar record of 

excellent communication and consultation. And across Canada 

we are — or should I say, we used to be — held as an example 

of good work that could be done working together between the 

Government of Saskatchewan and the education system. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the proposal also has a number of 

questions left unanswered. How will capital be funded and 

priorized? Will capital projects be at the province‟s discretion 

or at the school division‟s? I‟m hearing the province has already 

taken over this role — not officially, mind you, but to the 

frustration of some school divisions. Will a school division‟s 

funding remain whole with the provincial dollars being injected, 

or will there be shortfalls and adjustments? 

 

And what is the funding formula that is being used? Average 

expenditures I‟m hearing rumours of, which is really a difficult 

way to go, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Because if you‟ve only had 

$1,000 in your pocket and that‟s what you‟ve spent over the 

past year, and for the past couple of years you‟ve spent each 

and every year that $1,000, so then they come along and say, 

well the average of your last few years spending has only been 

$1,000, so that‟s all we‟re going to give you. 

 

Well there may have been programs and projects that were 



2436 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2009 

worthwhile, but the funding wasn‟t there. So to go purely on an 

average of previous expenses is pretty difficult for many school 

divisions, so I hope the minister will be flexible when he looks 

at this. 

 

There is a number of questions. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

know that there will be some hours of questioning that will 

come in estimates, so we can hopefully get some clear answers 

from the minister. And I know the school divisions are waiting 

to meet with him further. After having a bit of a surprise on 

budget day, I know they have many questions also. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another initiative in the budget that I will 

wholeheartedly support is the 1,000 child care spaces. Now the 

bad part is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we‟re still waiting to see the 

500 care spaces that were announced and promised in last 

budget. But if the minister is now proposing the 500 from the 

‟08-09 budget and another 1,000 in this budget, I think that 

would be pretty good. But if he‟s adding the 500 that he 

announced last budget with another 500 this, and only 

announcing 1,000 all in total — he‟s just moved that first 500 

forward — well then there will be some disappointment. 

 

And it will clearly show to Saskatchewan families that this 

minister still is not taking this issue serious, that children need 

that early start, that early support — whether it‟s in 

pre-kindergarten or early learning in child care— they need the 

early start, the good information and support. Families need that 

support if they are to access increased education or return to 

educational or career training opportunities, or to return to the 

workforce. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to repeat that the other day we 

contacted just seven centres in Saskatoon. And the wait list 

there in these seven centres was 835 spaces for child care. 

These are people that are on the wait list. We need, I mean, 

1,000 spaces or more. If it is 500 from last year and 1,000 new 

ones this year, well that‟s even better because 1,500 would 

make a better dint into the wait lists that are out there. 

 

And at the University of Saskatchewan, the child care wait list 

just at the university is 500. That‟s appalling that there are 500 

families waiting to be able to access child care spaces. There‟s 

money that comes in from the federal government into this 

province to support the creation of child care spaces, and the 

province is sitting on the best financial situation it has seen in 

many years. Mr. Speaker, there is no reason that we aren‟t 

moving ahead with this. 

 

There needs to be some action on this issue, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. We know the importance of early learning and child 

care, and we know that the need is there. If all of this is as it 

should be — with spaces, support for early child care education, 

and capital— I mean that‟s absolutely great. And I can hardly 

wait for the announcements, but there also is an area of concern. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you look at the budget . . . And we will 

know that while the Ministry of Education has control of the 

spaces, the criteria that‟s put forward for child care spaces, they 

will do the designation — ELCC [early learning and child care] 

is contained within the Department of Education — but when 

you look at Social Services, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the cost for 

subsidy has always been contained within the Ministry of Social 

Services. So when you look at the child care parent subsidies, it 

remains the same. So I guess the question is, are we expecting 

1,000 new child care spaces not to receive subsidy? 

 

It would be very difficult for lower income families or even 

middle-income families to pay the full cost for child care 

spaces. And I‟m sorry the minister thinks this is funny because 

it isn‟t to many families. It‟s not to families. I mean to be able 

to access child care for your children — quality, affordable 

child care — but then to see, yes we‟re offering all these spaces, 

but we‟re not offering any increase in the subsidy amount in the 

department; it stays the same from ‟08-09 to ‟09-10. So new 

budget‟s supposed to be more spaces coming forward, but 

we‟re not seeing any financial support for it. So that raises a 

number of concerns. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there‟s also a couple of areas that are of 

concern in the budget and it includes . . . I know the members 

opposite have stood in their places a number of times and they 

have said, well this budget has just improved everything for 

people right across the board. They talk about how much better 

life is for Saskatchewan residents, but there is some gaping 

omissions in this budget. 

 

The government‟s own charts within the budget documents will 

quite clearly show that in the inter-city comparisons of taxes, 

utilities, and housing for a single person at $25,000 total 

income, in 2008 the cost for that person in the city of Saskatoon 

was $10,389. In 2009 for that same person living in Saskatoon 

for taxes, utilities, and housing, a single person at $25,000 total 

income, the costs are $11,149. So you‟re talking about 

increased, increased costs for a single person. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, just as a bit of side note, in ‟07 the costs 

were 9,600. So I mean we have seen, since the Sask Party 

government has come in, we have seen utilities increase, we 

have housing increase, and we have seen no response to that for 

the average person. Costs have increased substantially. And 

quite often when you look at the comparisons, it‟s the housing 

costs and rent that have skyrocketed and are adding the extra 

costs besides and utilities. So this is a gap in the budget. We 

haven‟t seen much to address housing increases and the stress 

that‟s caused, not only on seniors, but low-income and 

affordable housing initiatives. 

 

[19:45] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there‟s another area of the budget that was a 

bit of a surprise. When I took them home over the weekend, and 

I sat down and I started reading through the documents, having 

a look at what was contained in the documents themselves, and 

I was surprised at the number of issues that were repeats in the 

budget. 

 

And no, don‟t jump to conclusions, it isn‟t the repeat of good 

programs that are moving forward. There is a few of those, but 

not a lot of repeats that way. They‟re just plain old repeats 

where things that were done last year, things that were done 

mid-term are again announced and announced and announced. 

And they‟re evident throughout the whole budget. So, Mr. 

Speaker, that‟s an area that also raises a number of concerns. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when you look at the documents themselves, 



March 23, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2437 

and you look at the government‟s own charts, there is one chart 

in there, page 61 in the budget summary, that speaks to the total 

debt of the government of Saskatchewan. And it shows quite 

clearly that debt will rise over the coming budget cycle of $900 

million. 

 

So it‟s kind of interesting when we see that over the past couple 

of months there‟s been these billboards all around the province 

talk about one-time oil dollars. Well we know it‟s one-time 

dollars that come from resources. Oil was at an all-time high, 

and what we‟ve seen was the dollars put on debt which we all 

agree with, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But then we see all these 

smiling billboards all around the province with the Premier‟s 

face on them talking about how he‟s reduced debt. 

 

Well I‟m just wondering, Mr. Speaker, after looking at this 

budget document, will we also see those billboards when he 

starts to increase debt? And it looks like we‟re going to have a 

number of years of increased debt. People just have to go the 

budget summary on page 61 and it shows debt steadily 

increasing over the next number of years up to 2013. And 

there‟s also other documents, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that shows 

the total debt as a percentage of GDP [gross domestic product] 

continuing to rise, total debt of the province continuing to rise. 

So it is a concern. It‟s a real concern, and something that of 

course hasn‟t been talked about very much. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there‟s a number of other areas too; one I 

guess that has been talked about before, the projections for the 

coming year. And there‟s been a number of concerns that have 

been expressed with the numbers that were used in the budget 

development — GDP growth calculating the budget, and 

making your future projections on GDP growth at 2.1, when all 

of the revised projections from financial institutions put the 

current projection not at 2.1, but at point six three per cent. 

Which is a wee bit of a difference, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And when we look at some of the articles that have come out in 

the news media over the past little while, there‟s a comment 

that has to do with David Dodge‟s comments that he made 

concerning the federal government, and also a comment that 

was added by Mr. Douglas Porter, an economist with BMO 

Nesbitt Burns. And he talked about the “. . . „lavish global 

praise‟ for our banking system should not be „torqued‟ into 

sunny overall comparisons with other national economies . . .” 

 

And then he goes on to say, „“Amid the well-deserved 

back-patting,‟ Porter said, „is the rather uncomfortable fact that 

Canadian economic indicators are now deteriorating nearly as 

quickly as their US counterparts.”‟ 

 

Which we can say, okay, that has to do with the federal budget, 

it has to do with the federal budget‟s concerns. But, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, when we look at the optimistic projections that were 

used here for the provincial budget — GDP growth at 2.1 per 

cent when current projections are at point six three per cent — it 

does give us a bit of cause for concern. 

 

And also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we look the amount of 

revenues that are coming from potash — the sales of potash, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker — a full 20 per cent of the revenues are 

projected to come from potash. Now it‟s kind of interesting in 

the pieces of criticism or comments that have been put forward 

on the calculation or projection that 20 per cent of your 

revenues will come solely from one resource. It makes you 

think back to the Minister of Finance talking about the wild 

gyrations of a resource economy. Doesn‟t seem to bother him 

now. 

 

But it‟s also, the government, I think . . . The comments today 

when we had a member from the government side stand up 

during members‟ statements, which is traditionally a time to get 

up and talk about some good news out of your constituency. 

Well oh no, they felt some need to get up and defend 

themselves — that it wasn‟t on production; it was on sales. 

 

Well I beg to differ some of the comments, but potash mines 

don‟t stockpile huge amounts of potash. What they do is 

produce what the guaranteed sales and contracts they have 

from. There may be some stockpiles, but it‟s not a huge 

amount, just by the sheer logistics of it. 

 

So anyway, they proceeded to stand up and try and clarify the 

difference between sales and production, and that this all 

smoothed away this whole concern. But the fact of the matter is, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, $1 out of every 5 that they have projected 

will come into this province in revenues comes from one 

resource. Kind of like putting your eggs all in one basket, and 

here‟s hoping nobody trips and falls because we could have 

some serious repercussions. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, no matter what your faith in the potash 

industry is, no matter that you feel you can ignore the whole 

economy worldwide, that sales may be slowing down, that 

things may be tightening up, and we may see some changes 

here in Saskatchewan, it causes concern that 20 percent, a full 

20 percent of our revenues projected by this government for this 

province in the coming year comes from one resource industry. 

Still a concern. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is some concerns. There‟s 

concerns with the budget. There‟s concerns with some of the 

projections. But time will tell. We will see what will happen in 

the coming months. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there also is some concerns about the 

insurance policy, that even though the money put into the 

Growth and Financial Security Fund, I believe it‟s called . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Pretty close. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Pretty close. Close enough. That half of that 

money‟s been spent. So during a year of unprecedented growth 

in this province, unprecedented financial situation, we are 

seeing the insurance policy cashed in to pay the bills, which is a 

little bit unnerving because it‟s not exactly what you would 

think an insurance policy would be used for. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I have to make one other comment. When 

we talk about they stand up and they say balanced budget, I can 

remember one of our members from this side of the House 

stood up during the winter. It was end of December, into 

January when first the Premier was talking about instead of 

spending $1.5 billion on infrastructure in the ‟09-10 budget, he 

was going to take 500 million and spend it in the current year, 

the ‟08-09 budget, move things up, provide an economic 



2438 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2009 

booster shot to the province. But he also saved his skin and 

balanced his ‟09-10 budget. Because if they had of spent that 

$500 million in this budget coming up, they would have been in 

a deficit position. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it‟s interesting how these things can be spun. 

But I would just say to people, you need to have a look at the 

numbers. You need to be sure. I mean, even go back, look at 

last year‟s budget, look at this year‟s budget. You will see the 

repeats. You will see the areas of concern. 

 

Some good things, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I‟ll grant them 

that. With these kind of resources, it‟s wonderful to see things 

being done for the people of Saskatchewan because this 

economic prosperity, this economic prosperity is what 

Saskatchewan citizens have worked for. They have earned it. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, while there are good things, there a 

number of concerns. I look forward to more questions, the 

opportunity to be able to ask more questions in estimates. And I 

will be supporting the amendment put forward by my colleague. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Canora-Pelly. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. Mr. Deputy Speaker, it‟s indeed a privilege and an 

honour to speak on the second budget of a Saskatchewan Party 

government, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think people have recognized very 

quickly with the speech delivered last week by my colleague, 

the Minister of Finance, when he talked about strong and 

steady. Because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that‟s what the people of 

this province want. They want a government that delivers a 

strong and steady approach to growth, Mr. Speaker. That‟s what 

the people in this province want. They want to be assured that 

there is a government that has a plan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, one of the other things that I think is starting 

to show through very clearly as we assess budgets of other 

provinces across Canada, that indeed Saskatchewan is in a bit of 

an unusual situation in that we have a balanced budget, Mr. 

Speaker. One of few provinces — maybe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

the only province — to have a balanced budget this year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do want to spend a few minutes talking about the 

Growth and Financial Security Fund. And I know my 

colleagues will wonder why I‟m beginning there. But, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, there have been some things said by the 

opposition members that need to be clarified. They need to be 

clarified right now, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The purpose of the Growth and Financial Security Fund is this, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it‟s listed on page 65 of the budget 

document. It says this: 

 

The purpose of the GFSF is twofold: 

 

[One] to assist in the achievement of the Government of 

Saskatchewan‟s long-term objectives by providing for 

financial security of the Government of Saskatchewan 

from year to year; and, 

 

[the second point, Mr. Deputy Speaker] to provide a 

source of funds that are to be available for appropriation 

to be used for programs of the Government of 

Saskatchewan identified as promoting or enhancing the 

economic development of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you take a look at those two 

points, the reason for its creation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you 

have to remember that in ‟08-09, the opening balance of the 

fund was $1.634 billion — 1.634 billion. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

the fund again at the end of this next fiscal year is going to end 

at almost $1.2 billion. Now you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

heard the members opposite talking about the fact that the rainy 

day fund has been drained — it‟s been drained. $1.2 billion, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I don‟t think is much of a drain. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to go back in time a bit to 2002, 

because you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in that time the NDP 

were talking about a particular fund. And the members on this 

side of the House will remember the definition of what they 

then said was the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. 

 

And the government talked about this until a couple of people 

actually studied it and made some comments. And this was a 

comment made on November 28 by Provincial Auditor Fred 

Wendel. And I‟m paraphrasing a bit because he made a large 

amount of comments. And he says, the Fiscal Stabilization 

Fund is not a proper accounting practice. It‟s not following 

generally accepted accounting principles. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, at the very same time, Norm Halldorson, 

who at that time was with the chartered accountants, he was a 

chartered accountant and Chair of the Saskatchewan Chamber 

of Commerce, and he said that: 

 

This has been an accounting shell game. There‟s nothing 

to withdraw. There‟s nothing there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and I heard from members opposite saying, oh 

well, your Growth and Financial Security Fund is just like our 

Fiscal Stabilization Fund. Mr. Speaker, in 2002 there was no 

money in the NDP‟s so-called Fiscal Stabilization Fund — 

unlike, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the $1.2 billion that‟s going to be 

in a Growth and Financial Security Fund of a Saskatchewan 

Party government. 

 

[20:00] 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, Nola Joorisity also at that time, a couple 

years later, weighed in on this debate and she said from . . . And 

by the way, I used her quote in the March 24, 2005 Hansard, 

and it is this: „“When you draw down the fiscal stabilization 

fund, you are, in fact, incurring debt because there‟s no actual 

money in there.”‟ 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you look at the position that the 

NDP has taken regarding the Fiscal Stabilization Fund and 

trying to compare it to the Growth and Financial Security Fund, 

it‟s like comparing apples to oranges, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

They‟re just not the same. 



March 23, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2439 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I also listened with interest today when 

our Minister Responsible for First Nations and Métis Relations 

was answering to some questions about what our government 

has done for schools and for the North and in terms of 

expenditures. Mr. Deputy Speaker, last year the amount of 

spend that we as a government did for capital infrastructure on 

schools was a record $259 million. 

 

You know, and I want to bring the members opposite, to their 

attention, but also people in the North and in all schools that 

have First Nations and Métis children attending schools — and 

that‟s occurring right across the province — but I do want to 

make special mention, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of the Northern 

Lights School Division. Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the Northern 

Lights School Division, we have a project that is going on in 

Churchill High School at La Ronge. We have a project at La 

Loche. We have project in Pinehouse. We have a project in 

Buffalo Narrows and a project in Beauval — all recently 

announced, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the value of those projects in the Northern 

Lights School Division is $31,294,625. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, and that‟s on top 

of all of the other projects that we have announced — projects 

like a brand new school in Duck Lake, projects in Porcupine 

Plain and in Balcarres and here in Regina, in community 

schools in Regina and in Saskatoon and in Prince Albert. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, this is a record spend.  

 

And this is a government recognizing that for last year‟s 

projects, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are spending total value, that 

is the Ministry of Education‟s share plus the school division‟s 

share. We are going to be spending over $350 million in total, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I dare say that‟s an 

astounding amount of money because . . .  

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I took a look at 

the last estimates for the NDP government in 2007-08. And the 

last time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the combined ministry was 

called Learning which included K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 

12] education plus advanced education. And, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, two numbers jump at you from that set of estimates. 

And in that set of estimates in 2007-08, the amount of capital 

that was spent or allocated by the NDP for their K to 12 capital 

was $18.3 million. And the year before, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it 

was 21.8 million. That‟s what the NDP‟s record is, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker.  

 

It‟s not $259 million which we just completed in this fiscal year 

or in the fiscal year that we‟re in now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

because in fact we still have to go until March 31 before we in 

fact will be concluding the fiscal year. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think the most important part of this 

budget, as far as my ministry is concerned, is of course the 

announcement about the property tax. Mr. Deputy Speaker, it‟s 

been a situation that‟s been long needed. We have heard about 

the weakness of the foundation operating grant, the FOG 

[foundation operating grant] grant. 

 

The FOG grant has been in place since 1974, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, 35 years. It probably served its purpose well, but we 

have heard from many school boards that it did not address their 

needs. So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we were elected in 2007, 

we made three commitments. We indicated to the people of 

Saskatchewan that we needed to achieve a fair balance for 

education funding. Saskatchewan has one of the worst records 

as far as the reliance on property owners to fund education. So, 

Mr. Speaker, we made that commitment. 

 

We also made a commitment to ensure the K to 12 education 

system is properly funded. Mr. Deputy Speaker, for a number of 

years I have heard from boards of education who talk about 

recognized expenditures that the government used, and the 

actual expenditures that the board faced were quite different, as 

much as 12 per cent where the real cost at a board level was at 

least that much higher. So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you know, 

when a board of education has two sources of money, and they 

are now short 12 per cent and the grant has been announced, the 

only other source that they can go to, of course, is the taxpayer. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the third commitment we made was 

that we would reduce the education portion of property tax. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was very proud of the fact that our Finance 

minister, in his address to the province, indicated that there 

would be an additional $241 million allocated to school boards. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, this addresses a 

number of the concerns that board members have had, that 

parents and students in schools have had, to ensure that in fact 

we are recognizing the real expenses. And, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I understand the concerns of boards of education who 

have changed from a system that they‟ve been familiar with for 

decades and decades, and that is a system where they had access 

to the property tax base. Mr. Speaker, I have committed to the 

boards of education that we‟re going to work with them over 

the next two years as we move through a transition phase to 

recognize the real costs. 

 

And that is why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we developed the 

budget necessary for the $241 million, we‟ve taken into account 

the full increase of teachers‟ salaries that will come about with 

the next year of the contract coming into force on September 1, 

2009. We‟ve built in a 4 per cent inflation rate on all of the 

other costs that a board of education has. 

 

But I do also want to indicate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that these 

are estimate numbers at the time of budget. And we recognize 

that of the 29 boards of education that are in the province of 

Saskatchewan, there may be, there may be some unusual 

circumstances — I hope circumstances where suddenly the 

enrolment of a board of education grows by 500 students 

because we‟ve attracted 500 children from outside of the 

province of Saskatchewan. Those will be great things. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we recognized as a government, after 

the tremendous work done by the member from Rosetown who 

worked on a report for me to find out what is the best way of 



2440 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2009 

addressing the funding of education. The member made out a 

number of recommendations in his report that I received in the 

first week of February, and I had a chance to assess that report 

against other reports that have been produced over time — a 

number of reports have been produced for government. And the 

situation that developed, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was that there 

had to be first of all a cut, and secondly a cap to education 

property tax. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, that is exactly what we have done. We have 

put in place fixed mill rates for the three classifications: 

residential, agriculture, and commercial. We have indicated 

what those mill rates will be effective January 1, 2009. And, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we‟ve also indicated what those mill rates 

will be on January 1, 2010. In this first year, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, the savings for property owners in the province of 

Saskatchewan will be $103 million, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 

when you look ahead to January 1, 2010 and the mill rates are 

lowered again, you will recognize that there will be a further 

savings to property owners of $53 million. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the short-term program that we were 

using, before we have moved to this current position that is 

fixed, was a rebate program. And the rebate program last year, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, for all property owners in the province of 

Saskatchewan, we actually returned about $158 million.  

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you add the numbers — the 158 

million for a rebate program, the 103 million that taxpayers will 

save this year, and the additional 53 million that they‟ll save 

next year — Mr. Deputy Speaker, if government had not 

addressed the education property situation, the tax that was 

levied on property owners, they would have to contribute over 

$300 million more from property to fund education. And that 

number, Mr. Speaker, has been reduced by that full $350 

million. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the goal of course 

is to enhance the amount of funding that is the responsibility of 

the province. And this year, that number that we will be moving 

towards with the $1.38 billion worth of expenditure in the 

education budget will move the percentage of cost to about 63 

per cent for government, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And next year 

that will move to 66 per cent. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I‟ve also been asked, well will that 

continue to increase? Will that percentage continue to increase? 

And the answer, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is of course. Because 

now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the entire costs — inflation, new 

contracts, all of the things that will happen in the K to 12 

education model — that full cost is going to be picked up by 

government. So as costs increase to boards of education overall, 

and we continue to enhance the funding 100 per cent, we will 

see a continued change in the percentage that the government of 

Saskatchewan will be picking up, and a further reduction in the 

amount that taxpayers will be contributing. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are so many great things in this 

budget. And I want to highlight a number of them. And I think 

the first one that I want to talk about is the early learning and 

child care. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have listened to the people 

of Saskatchewan who have indicated to us that there is a need to 

address the number of spaces that are available for early 

learning and child care. So that is why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 

have announced an additional — an additional, for the benefit 

of the member of Moose Jaw Wakamow — we have added an 

additional 1,000 new child care spaces. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that‟s a pretty significant amount because 

the member opposite raised some concerns about, oh there have 

been announcements, and the child care spaces haven‟t been 

delivered, and there are concerns. So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for 

the record, I want to place on tonight‟s record the actual 

numbers that have been assigned. Mr. Deputy Speaker, on 

March 31, 2009, for centre- and home-based spaces, there will 

be 9,942 spaces in operation. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have 251 spaces that have been 

allocated, but they haven‟t been opened yet because of some 

delays — delays because of construction, delays because of 

municipal sewer and water system installations. And they are: 

45 spaces in Fairhaven School in Saskatoon, 50 spaces in Lester 

B. Pearson School in Saskatoon, 25 spaces in Frontier, 30 

spaces in Gravelbourg, 41 spaces in Birch Hills, 15 spaces in 

Montmartre, and 30 new spaces in Vanscoy. Plus, Mr. Speaker, 

the 15 spaces that were just announced here in Regina with the 

YMCA [Young Men‟s Christian Association] and the transfer 

of 60 spaces from Argyle. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, if you add up those numbers, those add up 

to 251. There are additional 207 spaces that are delayed due to 

overall school construction, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because now 

we‟re remodelling and renovating schools to incorporate child 

care. 

 

[20:15] 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are 50 spaces for Mount Royal in 

Saskatoon, 21 spaces in Turnor Lake in the North, 50 spaces 

allocated to St. Michael School in Saskatoon, 50 spaces for the 

Saskatoon Open Door Society for Queen Elizabeth School in 

Saskatoon, and 36 spaces allocated to Nipawin. That‟s 207 

spaces. So, Mr. Speaker, the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow is right. There are 458 spaces that have been 

allocated. There‟s monies that have been budgeted for them, but 

there are various concerns as to why they haven‟t been opened 

yet — construction and plans for the future. So, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that will take the total amount to 10,400 spaces — 

exactly what we said would be in operation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we‟ve also 

indicated that that 10,400 is going to increase by an additional 

1,000 spaces to 11,400. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — So the member opposite has indicated 

that, you know, she was wondering whether they were real 

numbers. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know that she 

understands the file because she was the minister of Education 

sometime back, but in fact there are going to be 11,400 spaces 

when all of these spaces are implemented, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 



March 23, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2441 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, last year one of the lobby groups that 

wanted to ensure that we moved forward very quickly was the 

libraries, the public libraries in the province of Saskatchewan. 

They wanted to implement a single integrated library system, 

also referred to as SILS. SILS, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a 

cost-effective way for the 310 local public libraries in the 

province, that are found within the 10 public library systems, to 

share resources. They had to ensure that there was one hardware 

system, one project set of software in all of the 310 libraries that 

could address these resources. 

 

So last year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we announced a $5.2 million 

expenditure over four years. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I‟m pleased 

that we have again kept our promise, and the additional 

$625,000 necessary to help those 500,000 registered users in the 

province of Saskatchewan be able to use SILS is indeed going 

to happen, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I indicated to you at the beginning the 

record of the NDP as far as school capital in 2006 and 2007. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, while 259 million would have been 

accepted again by the Ministry of Education for spending on 

school capital, we know that that wasn‟t realistic because of the 

fact that the economies of the province and the economic 

conditions in the nation have changed. But, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I‟m very pleased to announce that in this budget we 

are again allocating $61 million for K-12 school capital. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — You know, and my colleague is right, 

on top of last year‟s 259 million, when we add the 61, we‟re 

now going to have allocated, in the short time that we have been 

a government, $320 million in capital. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are many more projects. There‟s no 

question about that. All the people who have concerns, the 

people that are living in communities right now where there‟s 

overcrowding and, you know, people in the province know that 

there are those kinds of situations in Lloydminster and in 

Warman and in Martensville and in White City and in Balgonie. 

There are a number of schools that need to be expanded, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

And you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are a huge number 

of projects, and I‟ve indicated that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, after 

last year‟s spend of $259 million, we were able to address 

almost all of the schools listed on priority 1. Priority 1 schools, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are only two projects left in that 

category. And now we‟re going to be able to start to address the 

schools that are listed under priority 2. But I can tell you, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that there are 21 projects listed under priority 

2, and we probably require 325, $350 million to address those 

schools. So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with $61 million, of course 

that‟s not going to be possible. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have a couple of other situations 

that we need to address immediately. One that has been around 

for the entire 16 years of an NDP government was the problem 

with asbestos. And we‟re going to have to move on those 

projects in schools. 

 

We‟re also going to have to address a concern, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that has been put in place by the occupational health 

and safety standards. We now have to ensure that on every 

school roof in the province of Saskatchewan, we have a system 

that will ensure that anyone who goes on that roof will be 

protected by either attaching themselves to a guide wire or they 

will have to be kept within an enclosed space. Huge, millions 

and millions of dollars, Mr. Speaker, a huge cost will be 

required, and we‟re going to have to start addressing that. We 

started with some projects last year. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we look at $61 million, and we 

look at the needs and we look at all of the things now that we 

have to do, it‟s a small amount. And we‟re going to try to 

ensure that we address those concerns that are of course 

jumping at us in a fashion that will ensure that we have to move 

on those projects. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are many school divisions who 

know now, as we‟ve addressed the capital concerns in the last 

while, that there is hope, that there is a situation where this 

government will recognize the projects. Because, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, under the NDP, as I indicated last year at this time, 

first amount of money that we have to allocate out of our new 

budget was to pay for the projects of 2003, which were the last 

set of projects that the NDP were attempting to put in place. So, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we‟re catching up, but we‟re catching up 

fairly slowly. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I also want to talk a bit about the learning 

technologies. I‟m very pleased to be working with the Minister 

Responsible for Crown Corporations as we address delivery of 

technology through technologies delivery of distance learning. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the necessary items in all schools, 

in public libraries, in regional colleges, is the CommunityNet 

connection. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we‟re going to be 

spending an additional $4 million to support the increased 

capacity of CommunityNet and to ensure that the blackboard 

learning management system is in place. So we‟re moving 

forward with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

We‟re going to be adding $500,000 to school divisions to 

support the transition of distance learning. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

we made a change, we made a change that was initiated, oh I 

guess, about four years ago under the NDP, when they indicated 

that there was a need to restructure the correspondence school, 

to move away from that paper model courses to a technology 

supported distance learning. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can tell you that the uptake, the 

uptake by the boards of education and others has been 

astounding. We have, I believe, 12 providers now, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker — 10 of them are school divisions and 2 others that are 

providing courses through distance education. We now have 

over 100 courses that students can take through distance 

supported learning, and that‟s outstanding, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

We now recognize how this system can truly deliver quality 

education to all parts, all parts of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the other enhancements — it‟s not 

a large enhancement in the budget — it‟s $150,000 additional 

monies beyond what was spent last year, and that $150,000 is to 

subsidize adult students‟ registration fees. We are ensuring that 



2442 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2009 

adults who want to take these courses to complete their grade 

10 or their grade 11 or their grade 12 now will have their fees 

subsidized. And we‟re subsidizing to the tune of $225 to ensure 

that more adults, more adults will be able to access these 

courses and of course complete their education. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the other changes that we 

announced to our educational agencies was a significant amount 

of money overall to all educational agencies, but I do want to 

talk about an expenditure of $80,000. An additional $80,000, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, was given to the heritage languages grant 

program. Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, while everyone says, well 

that‟s a pretty small amount of money, I want to indicate to you, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that that is a 56 per cent increase, 56 per 

cent increase to the heritage language program. And, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that‟s the first increase to that program in 11 

years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, we recognize how 

important immigration is to this province. We‟re seeing a 

number of individuals moving into this province wanting 

support. They need to be able to address English as a second 

language. They need to be able to address heritage languages 

that they have brought with them and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

am very pleased to be able to announce that kind of increase to 

that program. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, you know, the budget that we have 

described in the last six days has been a budget, I think, that 

people of Saskatchewan have been waiting for for years 

because they recognize, they recognize that we are facing tough 

times in Canada. We‟re facing some economic difficulties in 

the world, yet this province has positioned itself well over the 

last 16 months. It has positioned itself well to attract 

immigration. It has positioned itself well so that in fact we are 

leaders, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are leaders in creating jobs. 

We are leaders in so many different factors, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and that is why it‟s an exciting time. 

 

As the Minister of Finance indicated that, you know, there‟s 

just no better place to be from right now than from 

Saskatchewan because this is a province that is going to 

continue to grow. It‟s going to continue to recognize the strong 

leadership of the Premier of the province. It‟s going to continue 

to recognize that we as a government understand that there are 

many needs. There are many needs in education — as I‟ve 

indicated the few that I‟ve been able to explain tonight — the 

many needs in health, in highways, agriculture. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, it goes on and on and on. 

 

But the exciting thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that this is a 

strong and steady budget. It is a budget that is balanced, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and it is a budget that is sustainable. And, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I am proud to be able to support this budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

Minister of Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It‟s my 

pleasure this evening to join in the budget debate and to talk 

about the highlights within the budget. 

 

But I want to start off by just saying thank you to some people. 

First of all, in my constituency office in Kindersley, there are 

two ladies there that make sure everything‟s kept in order there 

— Susan and Sherri. They do a great job. Unfortunately, as a 

cabinet minister, from time to time we don‟t get as much time 

in our constituencies as we probably should get. And if it 

wasn‟t for the very good work of these two ladies, it‟d be much 

more difficult in my constituency than it is. They‟re able to 

keep things in order, and very seldom are there any concerns 

that are too significant that they can‟t deal with. 

 

I also want to take the opportunity to thank the staff in my 

office here at the legislature in the ministry offices here. They 

do a great job as well in terms of research, in terms of 

organization, in terms of keeping the office managed properly. 

And they certainly do a great job with respect to that. And I 

want to take this opportunity to publicly thank them as well. 

 

In addition to that, I want to thank the good people of 

Kindersley. I‟ve had the very good fortune, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, of being elected on four occasions, and certainly I 

want to thank the people for that increased majority on each one 

of those occasions. It‟s been a great and very rewarding 

opportunity and a great honour to have served in that capacity. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this budget has many highlights in it. 

We‟ve heard speeches from both sides of the House about it. I 

think that Saskatchewan has never been in better fiscal shape 

than we are in today in this province. The people of 

Saskatchewan have worked very, very hard to get where we are 

today. 

 

[20:30] 

 

Clearly, after 50 years of collectively or longer of NDP 

administrations, it‟s going to take a little while for us to get out 

of the ditch that we‟re in right now over the last number of 

years, but we‟re making progress. In 18 months, I think we‟ve 

done more than the previous administration did in 16 years. 

 

And I can‟t help but notice, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you 

travel around Saskatchewan, when you travel around and talk to 

people, I‟ve never seen the level of optimism that there is in 

Saskatchewan today, compared to what I‟ve seen over the last 

15 or 16 years. People in Saskatchewan are extremely proud of 

the progress that this administration has made in the last 

number of months. They are looking at it and they‟re saying 

that Saskatchewan for once is on top. For once in their lives, 

Saskatchewan is number one in Canada in terms of economic 

growth, in terms of job prospects, in a number of areas like that. 

 

On the weekend — I think I want to illustrate this point — on 

the weekend, I attended, I went to a playoff hockey game at 

home. Standing around visiting with a number of folks in the 

area there in this particular juncture in the evening, there were a 

number of business people that I was standing there visiting 

with. 

 

And a gentleman came up, and he is one of the most, I would 

say, one of the most astute business people I‟ve ever met. I 



March 23, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2443 

doubt very much that he votes for the Saskatchewan Party, 

doubt very much, but what he did was really quite interesting. 

This is a guy that has been probably one of the bedrock 

supporters of the NDP for as long as I can remember — my 

entire life . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And if you want me 

to, I‟ll share with you, I‟ll share with you his name later on, 

member from Athabasca, if you want. Because I‟d be happy to 

provide you with his telephone number and everything else to 

substantiate what I‟m about to say. 

 

He came up to me, and in the presence of a number of business 

people, he said to me — he‟s a Massey Ferguson dealer and a 

General Motors dealer in Eston, Saskatchewan — and he came 

up to me and he said to me, I want you to know in the presence 

of all these other business people in this small, little town that I 

think this is the best budget I‟ve seen in my entire life. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — And he said that for a number of reasons, 

for a number of reasons. He said, we‟ve seen a substantial 

amount of property tax decreases in this budget. That‟s very 

good for his business. He thinks it‟s good for rural 

Saskatchewan. It‟s good for urban Saskatchewan. It‟s a step in 

the right direction. It leaves more money in the pockets of 

people to make the decisions about where they spend it, rather 

than government making it for them. That was one of the 

points, he said. 

 

In addition to that, we see a substantial amount of money going 

into health care, into education, into infrastructure. He said as 

well that he thinks that these are very, very important initiatives 

that government should be funding. In addition to that, he said, 

there‟s a number of measures that help the disadvantaged in our 

society in Saskatchewan these days. And you can look to all of 

them in the budget, from tax decreases to income support for 

those that are disadvantaged in society in this province. There‟s 

a number of areas there, he said, that are very, very important. 

 

I think he was being very, very sincere. And this is a gentleman 

that I don‟t think is, as I said, I would be surprised if he‟s ever 

supported the Saskatchewan Party. But I suspect that in the next 

election he may. I strongly suspect that one more of the bedrock 

support that the NDP has had, opposite, for probably 50 years is 

about to abandon them. And I think that‟s the kind of thing that 

we‟re seeing all across Saskatchewan today. 

 

There are people, there are people looking at Saskatchewan, the 

management of the Premier of Saskatchewan, the Minister of 

Finance, and the caucus as a whole, and they‟re looking at them 

and saying, I think these people are managing this province 

pretty well. 

 

And we‟re not just us that are saying those kinds of things. You 

look at the news from across Saskatchewan, from across 

Canada, and internationally. We‟ve seen stories on CNN [Cable 

News Network], BNN [Business News Network] about what‟s 

happening in Saskatchewan. Everybody is sitting up and taking 

notice about the good news that there is in our province these 

days. They‟re saying, what has happened in Saskatchewan 

that‟s resulted in such a dramatic turnaround in the fortunes of 

that province? 

 

They‟re sitting there and they‟re looking at it. And they‟re 

saying, they‟re running a balanced budget. They‟re running 

with the highest level balanced budget, which is the only one in 

Canada at the moment that‟s going to be running a balanced 

budget with the possible exception of Manitoba, who 

incidentally has about two and a half billion dollars of transfer 

payments on a yearly basis from the federal government. So it‟s 

a little bit hard for them to argue that they are running a 

balanced budget if they didn‟t have that level of support from 

the federal government. 

 

The fact is, is that people are looking at Saskatchewan and 

they‟re saying, this government is on the right track. This 

government is moving in the right directions. Yes, there are 

areas of the economy that are struggling. Yes, there‟s no 

question about that. You look at the forestry sector; there‟s 

difficulties there. There‟s no question about that. We have 

admitted that. We have said we are working on that. I think 

you‟ll see over the next number of days and week a number of 

steps that will start to help that. 

 

But the only thing that‟s really going to help the forestry sector 

is for there to be an upturn in the housing market in the United 

States. We cannot as an administration make a marketplace for 

lumber if there is no marketplace out there for it. There‟s no 

government on earth that can afford to support an industry 

when there simply isn‟t a market for the product that they 

produce. 

 

And I‟m interested, I‟d be interested in knowing what the 

members opposite would want an administration to do. Would 

you want to continue, as one of the members opposite has 

advocated, to pour money into the pulp mill in Prince Albert? A 

hundred million dollars you folks were going to put on the 

table. And the fact of the matter is, is I don‟t think there‟s 

anybody out there today that believes that that $100 million 

now, in light of what‟s happened in the economy, would be a 

good investment. There‟s no one alive out there that would 

believe that that money would be anywhere other than gone 

right now. That‟s the fact of the matter. 

 

And I look at the other member from P.A. [Prince Albert], 

when questioned by the media with respect to this said, yes, it‟s 

probably right, that the government shouldn‟t be putting 

additional resources into this. 

 

So it‟s going to be a very difficult turnaround in that industry. I 

look at housing start numbers that come out of the US — 3 

million starts on a normal basis — under 500,000 and actually 

still dropping in the US, not climbing yet. But that industry will 

turn around, and we‟re going to do everything we can to help 

make that turnaround possible. And I think the member 

opposite from the North will be seeing some of those measures 

very soon. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people are proud of Saskatchewan for 

a number of reasons. We‟re paying down debt at record levels, 

and I think that that‟s important to the people of Saskatchewan. 

There‟s large tax relief, and I think that that‟s important. 

There‟s big infrastructure investment. 

 

And I couldn‟t help but note last week in the legislature after 

question period, the former premier was very, very, I will say, 



2444 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2009 

agitated at the fact that we were talking to them about the 

infrastructure deficit that his administration left the province of 

Saskatchewan. A huge infrastructure deficit. 

 

And again to just illustrate the point, you look at the 950-some 

million dollar investment of SaskPower. And the members 

opposite reaction to that was, that all that is going to happen is 

we‟re going to see power rates go up. Well the fact of the matter 

is, is we have no choice but to invest that or we won‟t see the 

lights on in Saskatchewan. SaskPower officials have said very 

clearly we are on the edge, frankly, in terms of being able to 

manage the level of power generated in our province, to the 

point where we have to make this significant investment in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

There‟s an infrastructure deficit out there that‟s very critical that 

has to be managed some how or another. And everyone knows 

in Saskatchewan, the only way that you‟re going to address that 

is to pour significant number amount of dollars into that 

SaskPower rebuild in order to manage that. And that‟s very 

important. 

 

And again to just illustrate that point, if you drive around rural 

Saskatchewan, a number of years ago, SaskPower, under the 

NDP administration, SaskPower sent out crews all over the 

province. And anybody that lives in rural Saskatchewan will 

remember this. They sent crews out all over rural 

Saskatchewan. They had some way of being able to test the 

soundness of power poles. This is just to illustrate the 

mismanagement that we see courtesy of the NDP when they 

were in government. They went out and they assessed the 

soundness of power poles. There‟s some measurement that they 

are able to ascertain whether these power poles needed 

replacement or not. And if they did need replacement, with an 

aerosol can of red paint, they painted a big X on them. 

 

That is so many years ago now that the paint has worn off with 

the weather. And those poles are still standing there today — 

the ones that the NDP said should‟ve been replaced I think it 

was in the neighbourhood of 10 years ago approximately. 

There‟s two right out in front of my farmyard, and they‟re still 

standing there, sort of precariously balancing away there. And 

the fact is, is that after that length of time, that now we‟ll have 

to — if you want to replace those poles — you‟ll have to go 

around and do the assessment once again because the paint is 

worn off. They‟ve been so long in need of replacement. And 

that‟s just an illustration of the kind of mismanagement. 

 

What was the point? What was the point, I would ask the 

members opposite, of going through that exercise and that cost 

and all of that kind of a problem without doing anything about 

it? What was the point of that? Other than to just make it look 

like the same thing that the NDP members and their 

government has done all of the time — make it look like you‟re 

going to do something even though you have no intention of 

carrying forward with it, none whatsoever. 

 

And it‟s a little bit like the member from North Battleford. He 

stands in his place day after day after day and talks about the 

hospital in North Battleford. He was the Health minister for, I 

think, three years or in that neighbourhood, and he says he had 

plans to do it. He was going to get around to it; he was going to 

make sure that if they would‟ve won the last election, you could 

bet for sure that they‟d be building. 

 

Well the problem with that is, is as everybody knows, he 

committed not one thin dime towards doing that for the people 

in his constituency. And now he has the unmitigated gall to 

stand up in this legislature and say to the Government of 

Saskatchewan, I want that hospital built immediately in my 

constituency. 

 

And I would ask the member opposite, with respect to that is, 

what would he have us not do in order to fund something in his 

constituency? What would he rather have? Or what would he 

look at, the Government of Saskatchewan, and say, we want to 

cut you back in health care, in other areas of the province. We 

want to cut you back in Education or Highways or First Nations 

and Métis or any other department in order to be able to put 

more money into his constituency. 

 

The fact of the matter is, is this has been a problem in his 

constituency for a long, long time. It‟s one more of those NDP 

infrastructure deficit questions that‟s out there. And again, you 

look at departments all over this government and you can see 

that same sort of thing. Just travel rural Saskatchewan and take 

a look at the highways. I think the Minister of Highways has 

said that if you gave him $6 billion, he could spend it entirely in 

the Department of Highways just trying to address the 

infrastructure deficit that you folks left on the people of 

Saskatchewan — that the NDP left on the people of 

Saskatchewan — and that goes from department to department 

to department. 

 

You go to the schools in rural Saskatchewan. You go to health 

care facilities. I had the Minister of Health tour the Kerrobert 

Hospital in my constituency, and I was even astounded. It had 

been a few years since I‟d been there and toured it myself. But I 

was astounded at the level of degradation that you could see in 

the facility. Thumbtacks in the roof with a string down draining 

water into buckets — in hospitals in Saskatchewan. Crumbling 

infrastructure all over the place in that hospital. It was 

absolutely astounding at the level of disrepair that there was in 

that facility. 

 

And the members opposite have said that that‟s been well 

managed. Well I would dare say that the people of 

Saskatchewan don‟t manage their affairs that way, and they are 

ashamed of the fact that our government has . . . that that NDP 

administration has allowed things to go to that level. 

 

When you look at in the health care fields having to shut down 

operating theatres in the summer because the fact that there 

wasn‟t adequate air conditioning in the operating theatres — 

and at the same time the members opposite say it‟s been well 

managed. Well the fact of the matter is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 

Saskatchewan is just beginning to find out the level of that NDP 

Ponzi scheme that they‟ve been portraying on the people of 

Saskatchewan for a long, long time. 

 

It‟s coming down in a lot of ways. People are looking at it and 

saying, what was wrong with the previous administration that 

they didn‟t manage some of these things much better than they 

are? And I say to the people of Saskatchewan, we‟ve just begun 

to uncover the kinds of problems that the NDP left the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan . . . 



March 23, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2445 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — And the other thing that‟s really, really 

interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in this debate, is the level of 

optimism that there is on this side of the House, the level of 

pessimism that there is on the NDP side of the House. And it‟s 

shocking to see that. 

 

I remember not too many years ago when they were on the 

government side, they were saying things like, up your attitude; 

you‟ve got to be more positive about Saskatchewan. Well the 

fact of the matter is, is we‟re extremely positive about 

Saskatchewan now that it‟s being managed properly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[20:45] 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — We see speech after speech after speech 

trying to say to the people of Saskatchewan that it can‟t get any 

better; it‟s only going to get worse. You have to, you‟re going 

to, wait and see; we‟re going to see the province go down the 

drain in the not too distant future. It was astounding in the 

budget address and shortly after, in the member‟s response, the 

Finance critic‟s response to the budget that he was talking about 

this can‟t last; this prosperity can‟t last in Saskatchewan. Doom 

and gloom. This is simply, you know, we‟ve got too many eggs 

in one basket, in the potash revenue side of things. 

 

And the fact of the matter was, is he was just wrong in terms of 

how the calculations are made with respect to potash royalties 

for the province of Saskatchewan. It seems astounding. It‟s 

either a case of he knew and deliberately told the people of 

Saskatchewan something that wasn‟t quite right or he didn‟t 

know — which is even worse as a former minister of Finance 

— that he simply didn‟t understand how the potash taxes were 

collected in this province. And that‟s frightening to think, that 

as a former minister of Finance, that he didn‟t know better with 

respect to how potash taxes were calculated. 

 

So I think as members on this side of the House all thought 

these members would know, these numbers are not just 

something that are picked out of thin air. There‟s a lot of 

analysis that‟s done by Department of Finance officials and 

other agencies with respect to coming up with these numbers. 

 

In addition to that, we‟ve talked to senior executives of all of 

the potash corporations and said to them, we want your best 

estimates as to what you think is going to happen in the potash 

market. They‟ve been very forthcoming with respect to that. 

They have said that they think our numbers are accurate. They 

think that they may even be on the low side in terms of these 

projections. 

 

I look at Scotia Economics from the Scotiabank talking about 

this. The budget‟s price projection of 556 US [United States] 

per tonne of KCl [potassium chloride] for 2009-10 fiscal year 

seems reasonable.  

 

So I guess when you look at that, when you look at what we‟ve 

been able to, in speaking with the potash executives of the 

various potash producing companies, they are all saying that 

these numbers are achievable. 

And in fact in the marketplace recently, the Russians have sold 

a significant quantity of potash to Brazil recently for $750 US 

per tonne of KCl. So our 556, when you look at comparables 

that are out there in the marketplace right now, is extremely 

reasonable. And in fact, we may see a significant increase in the 

amount of potash royalties for the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And the members opposite for some reason want to suggest that 

that just simply isn‟t going to be the case and we‟re on a fiscal 

train wreck, I think is what one of the members suggested with 

respect to that, even though he was dead wrong in terms of the 

calculations of it. So you have to wonder a little bit about his 

credibility on the whole issue of potash taxes when he simply as 

a former minister of Finance doesn‟t even know how they‟re 

calculated. 

 

So we think that these numbers are reasonable. Potash is an 

internationally traded commodity. We‟re seeing in recent days, 

as I said, potash prices are actually strengthening.  

 

We are reasonably confident that we will see a conclusion to the 

latest round of potash negotiations with China and India here 

very soon. I am told by potash officials the discussions are 

going well. They‟re talking about significant quantities. They‟re 

talking about prices in the neighbourhood of what has been 

negotiated with other countries, so they are confident that we‟re 

going to see those numbers met. 

 

We‟ve already seen oil in the last few days improving. It‟s not 

to say that it may not bounce back the other direction, but we‟re 

already some 7 or $8 over what the Minister of Finance‟s 

budget estimate is. So we‟re on track, I think, in a lot of ways, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

In addition to that, we see an economy that‟s growing, one of 

the only ones in Canada, and I think again it‟s something that 

we as a province should be extremely proud of. We see people 

moving back to Saskatchewan. I can‟t help but note my son on 

the weekend told me about three of his friends that he went to 

school with have moved back to Saskatchewan recently. They 

say that there isn‟t the kind of opportunities in Alberta that there 

once was, and now they‟re happy to be moving back to 

Saskatchewan. And I think members in the government here 

from all across Saskatchewan can point to numerous examples 

of that, of people moving back to Saskatchewan, and that‟s 

probably one of the best things that we can ever see. 

 

If you go to rural Saskatchewan these days — and I think the 

same exists in urban areas as well — you go to events in your 

constituency and you see for the first time young people there 

that you have never seen, little children wandering around at 

these functions, which is a tremendous change than what we 

have seen in the last decade or so in Saskatchewan. And it is 

very much welcome across this province, and I think we‟re 

going to see that trend continue because Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, has been identified by many people as one of 

the best places — and I think the best place in Canada — to live 

and raise a family. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — This is a balanced budget, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, $424 million surplus. I think that‟s a tremendous 



2446 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2009 

accomplishment when you look at what is happening in other 

jurisdictions across Canada. Some 15 or $16 billion deficit, I 

think it is, in Ontario. Province after province after province, 

including the province of Alberta, with deficits. And 

Saskatchewan, the only one in Canada that‟s going to post that. 

And I think that that speaks to the fiscal management of a 

government that wants to see our province move forward for 

the first time in 50 years. 

 

We see the largest reduction in education property tax. That‟s 

something that‟s been talked about in this province for longer 

than I‟ve been around in political life — going back into the 

‟40s, Tommy Douglas talking about that, saying that this 

needed to be addressed. The NDP talked about it and talked 

about it and talked about it, study after study after study, the 

former premier saying that the status quo was not on. 

 

I think people in rural Saskatchewan, in urban Saskatchewan 

have been waiting for property tax changes for a long, long 

time. And now, thankfully, as a result of this budget, we see 

that kind of property tax reductions that the people of 

Saskatchewan have been waiting for for a very long time. 

 

In addition to that, we see historic revenue sharing in 

Saskatchewan, something again that the municipalities across 

this province have been waiting for for a very long time. And 

the only answer that the NDP, the members opposite have to 

this whole change in terms of education and property tax and 

revenue sharing is, we were going to do it too; we just didn‟t 

get around to it. 

 

And frankly I think, members opposite, that the problem with 

that is, is people look at you folks and say, you were the 

government for a long, long time. How come you couldn‟t get 

around to these things? How come you couldn‟t do some of the 

things that have been accomplished in the last 18 months in 

Saskatchewan when you were the government for such a long, 

long period of time? 

 

Well the fact of the matter was, is when NDP governments have 

been in power in Saskatchewan, we‟ve seen economic 

stagnation, the likes of which Canada has never seen in any 

other jurisdiction except in this province. 

 

The fact is, is that we are seeing a turnaround in the economy 

here that we have never seen in this province ever in my 

lifetime, nor any of the members opposite‟s lifetime have we 

seen the kind of turnaround in an economy. Saskatchewan is on 

top, and I dare say we will stay that way. 

 

In addition to this budget, I think that something that‟s not well 

known or hasn‟t been publicized a great deal is, is the changes 

that have been made in the field of agriculture. This is the 

largest single budget in the history of the province of 

Saskatchewan with respect to agriculture — the largest budget 

ever. 

 

Saskatchewan agriculture‟s back on the radar screen, when it 

comes to the Government of Saskatchewan, for the first time in 

decades. The fact of the matter is, is the NDP systematically 

went about reducing the budgets in Agriculture over the years, 

starting back in the years of Roy Romanow, when they ripped 

up the GRIP [gross revenue insurance program] contracts with 

farmers, when they gutted the crop insurance program in terms 

of yield averages and drove the price up with respect to that. 

They closed down infrastructure in rural Saskatchewan, the 

rural service centres. They closed down a number of crop 

insurance offices. They systematically went about gutting 

Agriculture for years, and now we see a government that‟s 

moving back in the right direction in terms of supporting still 

the largest industry in our province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — And it‟s really quite interesting. It‟s going 

to be quite an interesting time coming up in Saskatchewan 

because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at the same time we‟re debating 

the budget, we see the NDP going through a leadership process. 

And they‟re starting to talk about some of the things that they 

would do, some of the leadership candidates. I see some of the 

most left wing propaganda coming out the — that you can 

imagine in Saskatchewan — coming out of the candidate from 

Regina here talking about nationalizing the oil and gas industry, 

talking about a number of those things. 

 

You would think the social experiment that we‟ve gone through 

for 50 years would be enough, but still we see members 

opposite talking about the merits of the Regina Manifesto. And 

that‟s one of your leadership candidates. Just look it up and 

check it out for yourself, the people of Saskatchewan. This is 

what these people are talking about, opposite, is a return to the 

past with the Regina Manifesto and all of the good things that 

were accomplished in it that the NDP have been promoting for 

50, 60 years. 

 

We see in addition to that, we see one of the leading contenders 

talking about nuclear energy and how he is supportive of 

nuclear industry, just not the Saskatchewan Party‟s version of 

the nuclear industry.  

 

I will predict one thing though, that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

think that in this leadership race, we will see, I think, the 

member from Moose Jaw Wakamow will probably be 

successful in this. I think she‟ll likely be the winner in this 

thing. I think the . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — And the former executive with Nexen, I 

doubt the NDP are ready for an oil industry capitalist from 

Calgary to take over their party. Just don‟t think it‟s going to 

happen. I just don‟t think that the good socialists of the NDP are 

going to allow the capitalist from Calgary, Alberta to take over 

their party. I‟d be very surprised if that‟s the case, and we‟ll be 

watching with great interest, but I‟ll make the prediction right 

now. 

 

In addition to that, I‟ve said to the member opposite, I think 

she‟s a good candidate. I‟ve offered to provide her with a little, 

very modest amount of financial support, and I‟ll see that she 

gets that. The fact of the matter is, I think she‟s the best of the 

bunch over there, even though it‟s not a very deep talent pool. 

But nevertheless, Mr. Speaker, it‟s going to be on the radar 

screen here in Saskatchewan for the next number of months. 

Watching that with great interest, I think the people of 

Saskatchewan will be. 



March 23, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2447 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are a number of members that want 

to get into the debate with respect to the budget. I certainly 

believe that this is a budget that moves Saskatchewan in a 

positive direction. It moves Saskatchewan in a direction that the 

people of this province have been waiting for, for a long, long 

time. They‟re very proud of the fact that we are making 

progress. They want us to continue with the good work that has 

been started in the last number of months. We certainly will be 

doing that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and that‟s precisely the reason 

why I will not be supporting the amendment. I will be 

wholeheartedly supporting the budget as presented by my good 

friend, the Minister of Finance. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Regina northwest. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it‟s 

truly a pleasure for me to have the opportunity to rise and 

participate in this debate, the debate on the budget speech. It‟s 

truly an honour for me to do so on behalf of the fine folks in 

Regina Northeast. 

 

As I‟m sure you‟ve heard me say before, Mr. Speaker, that 

wherever you travel in Saskatchewan, it‟s been my experience 

of wherever you travel in Saskatchewan, you meet nothing but 

fine, great people — warm, friendly, very hospitable people. 

And where will you find more friendlier and hospitable people 

than the good folks in Regina Northeast? And as I do every 

summer, I‟m looking forward to, this summer, to have the 

opportunity to get out and door knock, visit with my 

constituents on their doorstep. I like to try to do 14 polls every 

summer. I do so because it keeps me in touch with the folks 

there. It keeps me in touch with their issues and their concerns, 

and it‟s just nice to get around. And having done this a number 

of times, it‟s the opportunity to watch people grow and watch 

their families grow and watch how things change and how life 

affects each and every one of them. 

 

I also at this time want to say thank you to my constituency 

assistant, Sylvia, who does an excellent, excellent job of 

keeping me on track and keeping me on time and usually at the 

right place at the right time. Anybody who‟s ever had to work 

with me knows that‟s quite a challenge, and she does a good job 

of that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when it comes to the budget, the budget we had 

the opportunity to sit through the other day, we see the 

government‟s attempt to put a spin on it, their tag on this budget 

of being strong and steady. But it doesn‟t take much of a genius 

to go through the budget to recognize very quickly that the 

comments made by my colleague, the member from Regina 

Douglas Park, was probably the correct ones when he said that 

this budget was really wrong already. 

 

[21:00] 

 

And it‟s sad to say that, Mr. Speaker, because this is the second 

budget of this Sask Party government, and I would have hoped 

that they would have been a progressive budget, a positive 

budget, moving forward type budget but it unfortunately isn‟t 

the case. What we‟re seeing here is a budget that comes up 

really short; in fact, quite short in regards to the time in which 

their budgets are coming down in the history of this great 

province with the revenues that are available. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we look at this budget, for those of us 

who‟ve been around for a while, we can‟t help but think, I‟ve 

seen this movie before. In 1982, a very similar movie to this 

played out across this great province of ours, played in 

communities right across Saskatchewan. The plot of that movie, 

Mr. Speaker, was overinflated government revenues. It was 

done so by — in those days it was called creative accounting — 

now I think the new buzz term, according to the government 

opposite, is creative financing. But nevertheless it‟s still the 

same results, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We look at the plot of that old movie and it was a movie that 

was based on overly inflated provincial growth. And that‟s an 

old mathematic or accounting trick, I guess, Mr. Speaker, that if 

you don‟t have enough revenue, genuine revenue to be able to 

balance the budget and support your financial claims, then you 

inflate the revenues or you inflate the province‟s growth to 

reflect inflated revenues. It‟s helped offset, offset the shortfall 

in your budget. 

 

But then this is a political tool also. You need to have a hook 

out there to be able to catch the voter so you introduce 

unsustainable tax reductions. That‟s what we saw in the old 

movie. We saw the old movie storyline, a storyline of wildly 

increasing government spending. They spent money that they 

didn‟t have. And part of that process was an infrastructure 

spending that basically they had, I think, a rule of thumb of a 

new building in every community. 

 

That was the old movie, Mr. Speaker. That movie had a bad 

plot. This movie had a very bad storyline. Mr. Speaker, that 

movie didn‟t make any money. Just the opposite is true, Mr. 

Speaker, that movie cost Saskatchewan taxpayers $14.7 billion 

of debt. Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan gave that old 

movie two thumbs down. 

 

In 2007, people of Saskatchewan, I believe, thought that the 

new Sask Party maybe had learned some lessons from the past. 

And I know that there was people who shared with me they 

were going to be voting for the Sask Party. They hoped they 

wouldn‟t be like the old party was. They hoped they had 

learned some lessons, and they extended that opportunity to 

them by electing them government in 2007. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, let‟s look at the remake of this movie, a 

movie that is coming to every community across Saskatchewan 

and across this great province of ours, and will be playing in a 

theatre near you soon. Some of the supporting players in this 

remake movie were also bit part players in the original movie. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party budget, really when you boil it 

down, is nothing more than short-term gain for long-term pain. 

Short-term gain for long-term pain, Mr. Speaker. The Sask 

Party‟s runaway spending and unrealistic expectations will lead 

to disaster down the road. That‟s exactly what was playing out 

in the old movie, Mr. Speaker, and that‟s exactly what‟s playing 

out in this movie. 

 

The Sask Party‟s forecast figures for economic growth are 



2448 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2009 

blindly optimistic and completely out of alignment with those in 

the private sector forecasts. Instead of reducing the debt as they 

had promised, when you look at the bottom line here, Mr. 

Speaker, this Sask Party budget will increase the provincial debt 

by nearly $1 billion — a Sask Party budget that doesn‟t provide 

a long-term plan or a vision of a strong future for this province. 

 

The Sask Party is stripping away, Mr. Speaker, stripping away 

nearly half— not quite but nearly half — of the rainy day fund 

and they‟re doing it at a time of unprecedented prosperity in this 

province, Mr. Speaker. The Sask Party is really gambling with 

Saskatchewan‟s future. The unfortunate part of that gamble, Mr. 

Speaker, it‟s not the Sask Party that will lose; it‟s the people of 

Saskatchewan that will lose. 

 

Wild revenue projections and out-of-control spending and a 

mounting debt is all the old movie that we‟ve seen before. The 

Sask Party will allow them to call this a balanced budget, Mr. 

Speaker. Well, raiding the rainy day fund in order to balance the 

budget is not a balanced budget. Whenever you spend more 

money than you take in in one year, it is not a balanced budget. 

If you have to go to the reserve fund to balance it out, it‟s not a 

balanced budget; it‟s simply digging a hole deeper or growing 

the debt higher. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the debt — the GDP ratio — is once again on the 

increase, once again on the increase, Mr. Speaker. After more 

than a decade of decreasing that during the former government, 

we‟re seeing that within the second year, second year of 

government, they‟ve turned that around, and they‟re increasing 

the debt. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they‟re basing 20 per cent of their revenue 

projections on potash sales, and there may be some productivity 

there. But why potash? Why all of a sudden potash? Well they 

couldn‟t stretch the reality of the oil revenues, but they think 

they may be able to get away with stretching the reality of the 

potash industry. We will see. They‟re in negotiations right now 

with China, as a major, major purchaser of potash. And we‟ll 

see how that comes out. 

 

But we do know that United States farmers are rethinking their 

cropping plans simply because of their inability to secure 

financing, to finance their farming operations for the 

forthcoming years. They‟re looking at production of crops that 

take little or less or no fertilizers at all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a single mother making $25,000 in Saskatchewan 

today is worse off under the Sask Party government than she 

was last year. The Sask Party‟s reckless promises, wishful 

thinking, and extravagant spending has jeopardized the future of 

this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, 12.5 per cent increase in spending in this year‟s 

budget over last year‟s budget; last year‟s budget had a 10.5 per 

cent increase over the previous year. At that rate of increase 

each and every year, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan party 

government spending will double in six years. That simply isn‟t 

sustainable, simply isn‟t sustainable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this new movie, this new movie is starting out on 

the same foot as the old movie did, starting out with inflated 

provincial growth numbers. And how is that done, Mr. 

Speaker? Well it‟s the old story that you have to have the 

balance sheet; you need to have enough money coming in to 

offset the expenditures. 

 

So how do you do this? Well you know what the expenditures 

are going to be, so now you have to ensure that you have that 

revenue. So you look at the formula and say, well what do we 

need to support this? Do we need a half a per cent provincial 

growth? So you put that in. Close, not enough. One per cent. 

No, it‟s not enough. Jump it to 2 per cent. Even that‟s not 

enough. They finally settled on 2.1 per cent. 

 

Yet, Mr. Speaker, experts across this great nation of ours — 

whether it be the Toronto Dominion Bank, CIBC [Canadian 

Imperial Bank of Commerce], the Royal Bank, the Scotiabank 

— all, all are predicting zero growth to, at the very best, point 

six. But this government who knows all is predicting 2.1 per 

cent. Well, Mr. Speaker, I‟ll take the word of the experts any 

day. 

 

We have a government here, Mr. Speaker, who in their second 

budget alone, their second budget found it necessary to strip 

away at the rainy day fund, a fund that they had set up just a 

year ago to guard us against wild fluctuations in the economy. 

At a time when we have some of the record resource revenue 

incomes to this province, they found it necessary to dip into the 

rainy day fund simply to balance their budget. Mr. Speaker, this 

government is on record of spending at an unsustainable rate, 

growing the provincial debt only in their second year in office. 

Only in their second year in office they have seen fit to grow 

the provincial debt by nearly a billion dollars. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those of us who‟ve been around for awhile have 

seen this movie play out before. When you have a lot of money 

to spend, you have a lot of new friends. But when the bills come 

due, your new-found friends aren‟t anywhere to be found. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this new movie has a bad plot just like the old one 

did. Mr. Speaker, this new movie has a bad storyline just like 

the old one did. And, Mr. Speaker, I‟m afraid this new movie 

will have the same painful ending as the old one did for the 

people of our great province of Saskatchewan, a legacy of debt. 

Mr. Speaker, I fear that our children and our grandchildren will 

be paying for a movie they never saw. This new movie will 

soon be renamed as a nightmare on main street. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at the end of this movie when the credits roll, 

we‟ll see many new names — not all; some of the old names 

are there — but we‟ll see many, many, new names and different 

names, different from the old movie, but we‟ll also see that the 

characters are the same. Mr. Speaker, the people of 

Saskatchewan will give this new movie two thumbs down also. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Sask Party budget, when all is said and done, 

when all is said and done and time has gone, the budget 

speeches have all ended and we‟re back to the regular business 

of the House and all is said and done and it‟s no longer new 

news but old news, when all is said and done, the dust has 

settled, I believe, Mr. Speaker, that this Sask Party budget will 

truly make history. I believe it will truly make history because I 

believe history will show that this budget was the tipping point 

that led this government to be the second one-term government 

in the history of Saskatchewan. 



March 23, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2449 

Mr. Speaker, it may be a surprise to you and my colleagues in 

the House here, but I will not be supporting the budget. Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Saskatoon Sutherland. 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very pleased 

to enter the budget debate this evening, but before I do, I would 

like to say thank you to my constituents of Saskatoon 

Sutherland and thank you to my constituency assistant, Danielle 

Velazquez, and my mom who always watches, and my children, 

Elise and Jarrod, and my partner, Gary, for his patience and 

understanding. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatoon Sutherland constituency is a very 

diverse constituency. It houses the University of Saskatchewan. 

It has trailer courts, people living in poverty, millionaires, 

middle-income people. There‟s quite a mixture in Saskatoon 

Sutherland and with reference to the budget, the budget had 

something for everybody. As diverse as my constituency is, the 

budget was equally diverse in addressing the needs of all people 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

This past weekend, Mr. Speaker, I made phone calls in my 

constituency to ask the citizens how things were going and what 

they thought of the budget. In one phone call, the lady that 

answered the phone said that she found our Minister of Finance 

to be one of the nicest, most honest people. And she has the 

utmost respect for him. I thought that was very nice. 

 

[21:15] 

 

In another phone call, this person commented on our Minister 

of Social Services, saying that she cares. She‟s taken the time to 

meet with the foster parents regarding the issues surrounding 

foster care in the province. And we all know that the report 

from the child‟s advocate was definitely not supportive of our 

foster care program in the province, and that there had been 

problems with this program for some time. So, you know, it 

could have been addressed before, but wasn‟t. And I would like 

to say thank you to our Minister of Social Services for doing 

such a fine job and addressing those needs. 

 

The only complaint basically was that the children‟s hospital 

wouldn‟t support a sub-specialty in pediatrics like a pediatrician 

sub-specializing in nephrology, a kidney specialist for children, 

that something like that wouldn‟t happen here because the cases 

wouldn‟t support the skill level that that physician would have 

to use. 

 

I think that time will tell. We do know that we need a large 

number of pediatricians and sub-specialties with regard to 

pediatric problems because we‟re sending all of our cases out of 

the city. So someone who has a child that needs cardiovascular 

surgery, for example, has to travel with that child, sometimes on 

an air ambulance all the way to Edmonton or Calgary where the 

child would then receive treatment. The costs concerning the 

mom and dad‟s parking, their food, their hotel, of course those 

are costs that the parents have to absorb in these cases. And it‟s 

extremely stressful on these families, given that they‟re away 

from their community, away from their own support system and 

could financially create some problems as well. 

 

So I don‟t agree with that comment. I think a children‟s hospital 

in Saskatoon is of immense importance. 

 

The other issue regarding our budget, Mr. Speaker, is that the 

education proportion of our property tax, which the Premier 

promised to address in the campaign for the 2007 election, that 

promise, Mr. Speaker, has been kept. And we have to thank the 

Legislative Secretary that took on that task, the member from 

Rosetown. And we congratulate him and the Deputy Premier on 

their excellent, excellent work. The people of this province have 

been asking for this to occur for years, Mr. Speaker, at least a 

decade. So the Saskatchewan Party government has made a 

decision, and this property tax will help people, especially in 

the constituency of Saskatoon Sutherland, that this issue will be 

dealt with. 

 

I‟m a little concerned, however. We know through the figures 

that the property tax in Saskatoon, the education portion will go 

down. Now we know why we changed the system, and there‟s a 

lot of other things that we should change as well in the 

province. For instance the RMs, the school boards, the regions 

for social services — all of those areas in the province, there‟s 

not one coterminous boundary, Mr. Speaker. Not one. We have 

bureaucrats on top of bureaucrats in some of these areas 

because there‟s no consistency. There‟s no consistency in the 

borders, and there‟s no consistency in the taxation. 

 

But what concerns me is the member from Nutana, the member 

opposite from Nutana, who is telling the citizens of Saskatoon 

that their taxes will go up, Mr. Speaker. That their taxes, their 

education portion of their tax will go up. And mark my words, 

Mr. Speaker, she will be proved wrong. And when she is 

proved wrong, I‟m hoping that she would apologize to the 

citizens for leading them down a garden path. 

 

Another announcement in this budget, Mr. Speaker, that affects 

Saskatoon Sutherland immensely is the U of S [University of 

Saskatchewan] student housing. Mr. Speaker, we have given 

14, $15 million to the University of Saskatchewan for badly 

needed student housing. After more than 30 years, the 

University of Saskatchewan is ready to get back into the 

business of building resident spaces for its students. 

 

On February 4, Minister of Social Services “. . . announced the 

government would contribute $15 million towards the cost of 

new residences along Cumberland Avenue that will add about 

400 additional beds to the university‟s inventory.” 

 

Four hundred beds, Mr. Speaker. That really is something and it 

sure helps the university and the university area and the city of 

Saskatoon. 

 

The multi-building construction project is expected to be 

underway later this year with full occupancy anticipated 

for 2011. 

 

The funding for the U of S is part of $150 million 

infrastructure investment plan unveiled by Premier . . . 

Wall [by our Premier] Feb. 2, and will be provided 

through the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation. 



2450 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2009 

Richard Florizone, U of S vice-president finance and 

resources, told the media conference the Feb. 4 

announcement was the result of a “coming together” of 

the city, the community, the university, the private sector 

and “the people of Saskatchewan through our government, 

to help us find a solution.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, this really impacts my constituents in the city of 

Saskatoon Sutherland, given the amount of rental spaces we 

have in the constituency and the amount of university students 

living in the area close to the university. So this is a very, very 

positive step, extremely positive step, for the housing and rental 

issues in our constituency. 

 

Now, Mr. MacKinnon, the president of the university said that: 

 

. . . recent opportunities he has had to meet with young 

people have shown that “the number one question on the 

minds of our students is housing.” The funding 

announcement was the culmination of a “creative 

partnership among all parties” that will give the university 

the opportunity to be more competitive. Speaking directly 

to the government ministers in attendance, he added what 

he described as the most important words in the English 

language — “Thank you. Thank you very much.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is just wonderful news, wonderful news for 

our constituency. 

 

I‟d like to talk about a little bit about Saskatoon as a whole and 

what this government is providing in the 2009-10 budget for 

Saskatoon as a whole. We are giving $200 million investment 

in a new children‟s hospital, as I stated earlier; $23.3 million to 

accelerate twinning on Highway 11, completing twinning from 

Saskatoon to Prince Albert in four years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that highway is one of our busiest highways in the 

province. And in the summer, the traffic — with the campers 

and all of our citizens from, you know, south of Prince Albert 

travel north to the lakes — there‟s extremely, extremely heavy 

traffic, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I remember working as an emergency medical technician 

and attending many, many accidents on that highway, Mr. 

Speaker. They were horrible accidents, and they took the lives 

of our citizens. A lot of times, it was families because the 

parents were travelling up to the lake with their kids for the 

weekend. And it was quite traumatic, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I applaud our government for increasing the monies to get 

this highway completed so that the citizens in our province can 

travel to their vacation spots more safely. 

 

The other new monies is $15.7 million for the international 

vaccine centre at the University of Saskatchewan which 

consists of $9.8 million in new funding and 5.9 million 

previously committed through the Innovation and Science 

Fund. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I toured InterVac [international vaccine centre]. 

And they are in the process of building a international-class 

laboratory for the research and development of vaccines. As 

you can well imagine, Mr. Speaker, this laboratory has to have 

some very unique qualities in order to be able to do proper 

research. 

 

When doing research on cattle, for example, if you immunize a 

cow, you have to have a sterile environment in order to house 

that animal to prove that the vaccine works as a result of the 

medical intervention. So it‟s very important that these facilities 

are able to sterilize or keep the air quality clean while doing 

their research. This facility is going to be world-class and one 

of the largest and most advanced in North America, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Again, you know, this is housed at Innovation Place on campus 

at the university, and it‟s part of my constituency. And it‟s an 

innovative, wonderful idea, and shows just where this 

government is going. We‟re going forward. We are innovative, 

and we‟re not scared to try new things because success 

sometimes takes risks, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So there‟s also 5 million for the first year of a $27 million 

overhaul and renovation and expansion of the Saskatoon 

Queen‟s Bench court house. Mr. Speaker, the Saskatoon 

Queen‟s Bench court house is on Spadina Crescent in 

downtown Saskatoon and overlooks the river. It is a beautiful 

building, and it‟s in a beautiful location. 

 

However, it is very antiquated. Our Queen‟s Bench trials that 

go on there — those are the trials for homicides, kidnapping, 

robbery, your more serious federal offences that go to trial, be it 

by judge or judge and jury — the trials occur in Queen‟s Bench 

court. Now one of the issues at Queen‟s Bench court is that 

there‟s no secure entrance that you can bring a prisoner through. 

And this does create some concern, given what the charge 

would be and how much animosity there was for the prisoner, 

so to speak, that you would find it very difficult to protect him 

or her while you were unloading at the back door to go up into 

the court house. 

 

So the expansion of this facility is greatly needed, and I‟m 

happy to say that this government is committed to that. 

 

The next project in Saskatoon is $3.2 million operating fund for 

SIIT [Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies]. As you 

well know, SIIT caters to the Métis and First Nations people 

who are going on to certificate programming in a level or a 

course that is offered by SIIT — chemical dependency course, 

licensed practical nurse course. We‟re finding that, you know, 

there‟s an increased employment rate with our First Nations 

people and that the education and opportunities have to be 

supported in order to encourage participation. And this is also a 

very needed and wise investment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[21:30] 

 

Now when we look at our budget, I commented that we have 

people living in poverty in my constituency, and a very diverse 

constituency. And so it‟s very important that we address the 

issues surrounding higher rents and higher cost of living in the 

cities with fixed income earners or people on social assistance. 

Low-income families and individuals, what we have done as a 

government is this: 80,000 low income earners will no longer 

pay Saskatchewan income tax. Mr. Speaker, 80,000 will pay 

zero income tax in this province. Family-based tax exemptions 



March 23, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2451 

are now the highest in Canada; right here in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker — the highest in Canada. 

 

New Saskatchewan low-income tax credit puts more money 

into the pockets of low-income people who pay no taxes — 

seniors, students, others and low-income working families. 

Maximum tax credits. Mr. Speaker, provided to eligible 

families with children is increased to $600 per year — $600, 

Mr. Speaker — twice as much as the old sales tax credit. 

 

This also provides additional tax savings to over 300,000 lower 

income provincial residents. And we eliminated the 2008 tax 

refund from the income calculations for SAP which stands for 

Saskatchewan assistance plan and TEA [transitional 

employment allowance] which stands for the transitional 

employment supplement, and the new income support program 

for people with disabilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is a constituent that came to me, and it‟s a 

couple that‟s in their late 50s. And their youngest child, I 

believe it‟s their youngest child, who‟s now 30 was born with 

Down‟s syndrome. So, Mr. Speaker, they have cared for their 

son at home. And he walks across to an old folks home and 

spends the afternoons there visiting the old folks, and they 

really like him. 

 

But the way the payments are made through social assistance, 

the way we inherited this program from the former government, 

was that the person with disabilities, this young man with 

Down‟s syndrome, is paid the same as other persons on social 

assistance payments. So therefore they can cut off the payments 

for the same reason they cut off a welfare recipient‟s payments. 

 

So this young man went with his parents to Australia for four 

weeks. They thought they‟d take him to Australia rather than 

get a caregiver for him. And while he was gone, Mr. Speaker, 

he was cut off welfare; he was not paid. And they did that 

because he wasn‟t in the country to fill out the forms, Mr. 

Speaker. It‟s a sad statement. 

 

Persons with disabilities have been asking for special 

recognition because there is a difference, Mr. Speaker. There is 

a difference getting payment for a person who has a disability 

than there is for a person who can‟t find employment for 

whatever reason. So what we‟re doing, Mr. Speaker, is the 

Minister of Social Services is presently in conversation with the 

stakeholder groups to discuss how they can change this, so this 

kind of unacceptable thing doesn‟t happen again. 

 

So we also have increased support for seniors, Mr. Speaker. 

And I have a lot of seniors in my constituency as well. A lot of 

them have moved in from rural areas and retired in the city. 

Some live in the same house that they‟ve raised their children in 

and now are retired in. We have more than doubled the 

maximum monthly Saskatchewan Income Plan benefit for 

single seniors and each member of a two-pensioner household, 

Mr. Speaker. That‟s a huge difference; that makes a huge 

difference for seniors on fixed income. 

 

We have increased income thresholds for seniors; increased to 

qualify for social housing. So a senior who‟s on a fixed income, 

housing goes up, we‟ve increased that cost to allow more 

people to be supported by that program, Mr. Speaker. 

Rent is something that . . . or rental properties is something that 

exists quite a bit also in the constituency. And there is some 

concern over the increasing cost of rent. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

we‟ve also done things to address that problem. 

 

Like I said, there‟s something in this budget for everyone. We 

have increased shelter rates for 6,500 households on the social 

assistance plan and the transitional employment assistance, 

between $32 and $119 per month. As well, the shelter rates for 

the provincial training allowance. So, Mr. Speaker, our 

government is responding to the needs of its citizens and 

responding very well. 

 

We have increased the TEA utility benefits by 20 per cent 

October 1,2008 to support families on TEA to pay higher utility 

costs. SAP recipients will continue to have actual utility costs 

fully paid. So, Mr. Speaker, again, you know, the opposition 

accuses us of not helping when utility rates or rent rates go up. 

And that‟s just not true, Mr. Speaker, not true at all. 

 

We have increased the Saskatchewan rental housing supplement 

for low-income families, between 36 and $136 per month. 

We‟ve introduced an automatic twice-a-year rate adjustment for 

the above housing programs — an automatic twice-a-year rate 

adjustment for the above housing programs, Mr. Speaker. That 

didn‟t exist ever in the opposition‟s world — ever. 

 

We‟ve increased the income thresholds to be eligible for 

Saskatchewan Housing Corporation social housing. So we have 

made changes to allow more people to access programs that 

they may need, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have touched on the issue of child protection issues and 

foster homes earlier. But I‟m going to just go over some of the 

main things that we have done as this government to better 

protect the children at risk. Fifteen per cent increase in foster 

care rates; 41 per cent increase for extended family caregivers; 

3 million increase in the intensive supports factor, providing 

programming for students with learning difficulties, disabilities, 

and disadvantages. That‟s huge, Mr. Speaker. People who are 

already disadvantaged being afflicted with a learning disability, 

it‟s not a real good measure for success.  

 

This government is responding, the Department of Social 

Services is responding through our minister, Mr. Speaker: $5 

million for 30 additional child protection case workers and 30 

permanent placement planners to handle the increased number 

of children needing help from Social Services. You know, a lot 

of times we sit, Mr. Speaker, and we just don‟t think of children 

needing protection because if we as a human being can‟t 

reference it, then it really doesn‟t occur to them in their reality. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, years ago as a young constable, I went to a 

noisy house party complaint. And we were clearing out the 

house, and in the basement of the house, which was a dirt 

basement, sat a 2 year old child in fetal position in the corner, 

wearing only a diaper and a very, very dirty diaper. She was 

shivering. She was crying. I picked her up and she hung onto 

me like a little kitten does. And, you know, these are the kind of 

children that need society‟s protection. They need intervention 

because the child should not be made to suffer the sins of the 

parents, Mr. Speaker. 

 



2452 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2009 

I‟m very, very pleased with this budget. I‟m very pleased with 

the government‟s behaviour. We are a government that have 

responded to the needs of the community. We are inclusive. 

And one of the criticisms was that there was nothing for First 

Nations people. Well I mentioned a bunch of things that crosses 

over to that area — SIIT, housing support, etc. So I don‟t really 

believe that statement at all, Mr. Speaker. And I mean, it‟s just 

not true. 

 

What is true, however, is the gloom and doom and darkness that 

is shed by the members opposite. And in fact, the member 

speaking before myself made a comment about the result being 

very dark, the results of the budget will be very dark, Mr. 

Speaker. That has a couple of problems. Number one, I don‟t 

think it‟s really healthy to be that negative. But it speaks to the 

whole mentality of where our province is, and where our 

province is going. 

 

And there is a presentation that was given by General Colin 

Powell on leadership. And I want to share a few of these lessons 

hoping that members opposite will understand and maybe 

change their behaviour to one of caring for the province, as 

opposed to being negative about the province: “Leadership is 

the art of accomplishing more than the science of management 

says is possible.” 

 

And this is something that we‟re finding, Mr. Speaker, and the 

Minister of Energy and Resources commented earlier about the 

infrastructure and hospitals and how our infrastructure wasn‟t 

kept up, how our things are breaking down. And we‟re having 

to look at those things, Mr. Speaker, and we‟re going on tours 

and seeing them. 

 

And lesson no. 7 from General Powell is “Keep looking below 

surface[s] . . . Don‟t shrink from doing so just because you 

might not like what you find.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are finding these breakdowns and we are 

fixing them, and that is the job of a good government and it‟s 

the behaviour this government has. 

 

The last quote for my friends across the way. Lesson no. 12: 

 

“Perpetual optimism is a force multiplier.” The ripple 

effect of a leader‟s enthusiasm and optimism is awesome. 

So is the impact of cynicism and pessimism. Leaders who 

whine and blame engendered those same behaviors among 

their colleagues. I am not talking about stoically accepting 

organizational stupidity and performance incompetence 

with a “what, me . . .?” smile. I am talking about a gung 

ho attitude that says “we can change things here, we can 

achieve awesome goals . . .” 

 

We can be the best and we will, Mr. Speaker. I am in support of 

this budget and will be voting so. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Weyburn-Big Muddy. 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, it‟s a pleasure to stand in the Assembly and take part 

in the budget debate. Before I do I just want to offer my 

congratulations to the previous speaker. I‟m always a little bit 

nervous about speaking after the likes of the Deputy Premier 

and the Minister for Energy in this House, and now I‟ll have to 

add my colleague from Saskatoon Sutherland to that list. She 

did an excellent job, Mr. Speaker, and a very thoughtful 

presentation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s my pleasure to stand in the Assembly and to 

speak in support of the budget presented last week by the Hon. 

Minister of Finance. Mr. Deputy Speaker, before I get to my 

comments, I do want to put on the record a couple of things. 

First, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to publicly thank my 

constituency assistant, Marcie, for all her hard work over the 

last year, especially in the last few months. She does an 

incredible job not only for me but for the people of 

Weyburn-Big Muddy, Mr. Speaker. And she is going on, I 

believe, her 10th year as the constituency assistant in 

Weyburn-Big Muddy, and I want to congratulate her on that 

and thank her for all her help. 

 

[21:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also of course want to extend my thanks and my 

appreciation to my wife, Amanda, for her support. I consider 

myself one of the lucky few in this Chamber, Mr. Speaker, of 

the members that don‟t reside full time in Regina who can get 

home most evenings. And that‟s been a great source of strength 

and support for me to be able to see my wife, and just to know 

that she‟s there and usually trying to catch me on when I‟m on 

TV and critique me when I get home. So that‟s probably going 

to be no different this evening. So I want to thank her for her 

support, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Duncan: — And, Mr. Speaker, before I get to the budget, I 

just want to congratulate a couple of hockey teams in Weyburn, 

Mr. Speaker. The Weyburn Red Wings and the Senior Devils‟ 

seasons have both come to an end. They fell a little bit short in 

playoffs, Mr. Speaker, but I know they worked very hard. And 

they do a good job representing the people of Weyburn and, 

you know, a great group of young men. I believe the Red Wings 

have nine that are moving on after this season, Mr. Speaker, and 

they‟ve just been great ambassadors to our community. And I 

want to congratulate them and coach McMillan and his staff on 

another good season. And they‟ll be back at it next year, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I like to collect quotes and little sayings that mean 

something to me, to speak to me. And the one that I have in my 

office, one of the ones that I have on my bulletin board here in 

Regina in the office, it says, and I quote, “Plan, read the Bills 

you are passing, and think of the kids who will have to pay for 

all this in the future.” 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I spent the weekend reading the budget. And I 

want to thank and congratulate the Minister of Finance and his 

ministry officials and, Mr. Speaker, this government, our 

cabinet, and my caucus colleagues for crafting a great budget 

for the people of this province — a historic budget, a 

transformational budget, Mr. Speaker, and one that I am very 

happy to support. 



March 23, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2453 

Mr. Speaker, I also spent the weekend reading the report 

produced by my friend, the member from Rosetown-Elrose. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate him for all the hard 

work that he put into this report, Mr. Speaker. He did an 

excellent job, and I‟m very happy to call him my colleague and 

my friend, Mr. Speaker. I think he did such a great job that as a 

reward we should just, you know, let him golf the rest of the 

summer, Mr. Speaker. But I‟m not sure how that would be 

different from any other summer in the past. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to say that this budget, Mr. Speaker, has been well 

received would be an understatement. The accolades were 

almost universal. And this extends also to the Weyburn-Big 

Muddy constituency. I have had numerous people call the 

office, email, stop me on the street over the weekend to express 

their support for the budget, Mr. Speaker. And I want to speak 

to a few of the specifics of this year‟s budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at a time of global uncertainty, Saskatchewan is 

truly in a very enviable place. While our province is not 

immune to the economic issues facing the North America and 

in fact the worldwide economy, we are certainly in a better 

position than most. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this budget, we are forecasting a budget surplus 

of $424 million. And this is a really amazing accomplishment 

and achievement, considering that every other government in 

Canada — with maybe perhaps the exception of one — is 

expected to post deficits this year, and in some cases, several 

years into the future. Mr. Speaker, this is true also in the United 

States where, with very few exceptions, state governments are 

instituting mass layoffs, service cuts, and massive tax hikes, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

One of the things that I‟ve looked at recently is a report, Mr. 

Speaker. This was a report published by the National 

Conference of State Legislators. And it‟s an update. The title is 

an Update on State Budget Gaps, fiscal year ‟09-10, Mr. 

Speaker. And just to summarize the report, they are projecting, 

Mr. Speaker, in the United States, that for fiscal year ‟09, there 

will be a budget gap for state governments. When you total up 

all the state governments in the United States, there‟ll be a 

budget gap of nearly $47.5 billion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In most cases in the United States, the governments by law 

can‟t run a deficit. So when they have a budget shortfall, that‟s 

when they have to cut services. They have to cut staff, and they 

have to try to raise revenues somehow, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And when you look at all of the states that are projecting to run 

a shortfall, when you look at 2009 and 2010, the estimates that 

are coming forward, there are only five states that at this point 

are estimating not to have a shortfall in either one or both of 

those years, Mr. Speaker. So it‟s certainly not just governments 

in Canada that are looking at tough budget choices, but also in 

the United States. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there‟s even states that are not issuing tax refunds 

to those who are eligible because they simply have no cash. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the quote that I will read now comes from the Los 

Angeles Times and it says, and I quote: 

 

They have plundered reserves [this is in reference to state 

governments], enacted hiring freezes and engaged in all 

manner of budgetary voodoo to shield us from the pain. 

 

But now state governments — reeling from a historic free 

fall in tax revenue — have run out of tricks. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, at a time when balanced budgets are just not 

realistic for the vast majority of provincial and state 

governments — and in fact our two federal governments — 

Saskatchewan isn‟t just looking forward to a balanced budget, 

but a surplus of nearly half a billion dollars, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if that was all that we could point to in this 

budget — and I‟m certainly one that believes that we have a 

responsibility as government to not run deficits, to keep taxes as 

low as possible and provide services that governments are 

responsible for — if that‟s all we can point to, then I think it‟d 

be a very good budget, considering the circumstances. But, Mr. 

Speaker, this budget includes so much more. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this budget delivers on two very major 

promises that our party and Premier, in fact each of us as 

candidates together, made in the last provincial election. We are 

well over 100 campaign commitments delivered on. And the 

best part is that unlike previous governments, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, we aren‟t waiting until the eve of an election to do so. 

We‟re not stringing the people along trying to buy votes with 

their hard-earned money. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the first measure in this budget that I want to talk 

about is the measure to fundamentally transform how education 

is funded in Saskatchewan. Mr. Deputy Speaker, in this budget 

our provincial government is delivering on a campaign 

commitment that achieves a fairer balance for education 

funding, ensures that K to 12 education is properly funded, and 

ensures that education portion of property tax is further 

reduced. 

 

Mr. Speaker, under the new system — and certainly I‟m not the 

first member to go over the details, but I think they‟re important 

to put on the record — under the new system, the provincial 

government will cut and cap education property tax rates for 

residential, commercial, and agricultural property. The overall 

amount of tax paid to fund education will be reduced by $103 

million this year, 14 per cent reduction compared to last. This, 

Mr. Speaker, is the largest education property tax cut in a single 

year in the province‟s history. 

 

Last year the provincial share of education funding was just 51 

per cent. This year it will increase to 63 per cent and 66 the 

next. On top of this, Mr. Speaker, we are adding $241 million in 

funding to education. Mr. Speaker, this is significant because in 

the last 30 years, I don‟t believe any provincial government has 

funded more than 60 per cent of education until this year, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the reaction to this has certainly been very 

positive, and I want to put a couple of comments on the record. 

Saskatchewan realtors had this to say, Mr. Speaker, on budget 

day: 

 

It shows a government isn‟t afraid to tackle big issues and 



2454 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2009 

make tough decisions. That is a very positive message 

after decades of delay. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Stock Growers, Ed Bothner: 

„“The $35 million reduction in the education portion of 

farmland taxes will be especially beneficial to cow-calf 

producers‟ . . .” 

 

The early reports from my constituents have been very positive. 

For constituents of Weyburn-Big Muddy, most who reside in 

the South East Cornerstone School Division, property taxes 

have funded the vast majority of education in our region. Last 

year, I believe, only 9 per cent of education funding in the 

Southeast came from the provincial government. Mr. Speaker, 

the local chair of the board believes that under the new changes, 

we‟ll be closer to 40 per cent, which will be a significant burden 

removed from our citizens, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I want to 

express my appreciation to the government, especially to our 

Premier and our Education minister and to the cabinet, for 

having the courage to implement this change. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP‟s favourite argument is that they were 

going to get to it or they didn‟t have the money to do it. But, 

Mr. Speaker, I don‟t buy that at all. What they didn‟t have was 

the courage to make this change; indeed with the NDP, the 

status quo was always going to be on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget already budgets for a surplus at a time 

of economic calamity. It provides for historic property tax 

relief, and it also provides for a new deal with municipalities. 

This has been a long-standing issue with municipalities. And, 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased that we have delivered on this 

commitment. 

 

For many years, our RMs, villages, towns, and cities have been 

asking for a better deal from the provincial government. For 

many years, they have had to come to the legislature on budget 

day to see what they would receive from the province by way of 

revenue sharing. The new municipal operating grant will 

provide equal to 90 per cent of 1 per cent of the PST for this 

year, and that will be increasing to a full 1 per cent next year, 

Mr. Speaker. This will provide a reliable and predictable source 

of revenue. This year they will receive $170 million, and this is 

in addition, Mr. Speaker, this new commitment is in addition to 

the $100 million that municipalities received by this 

government in February to address their long-standing 

infrastructure needs, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I could quote from municipal leaders and how pleased they 

were to see that this was happening. But really for me, Mr. 

Speaker, it really hit home on Friday when I was in Weyburn 

making an announcement with our Member of Parliament and 

our mayor of Weyburn, Her Worship Mayor Button. We were 

announcing some funding for some infrastructure in the city of 

Weyburn through Building Canada, the community component. 

And I was very happy that Weyburn was a part of the first 

intake. And, Mr. Speaker, the praise from Mayor Button was, 

you know, it was really great to hear from her in her public 

comments, even though what we were announcing on Friday 

had nothing to do with what was announced in the budget. But 

she went out of her way to make sure that everybody that was at 

the public event knew of her support for this, and she was 

certainly very, very happy to hear this news when she was here 

on budget day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m very fortunate to represent the people of 

Weyburn-Big Muddy, and it‟s just some of the greatest people, 

I would say, in this province that I have the honour of 

representing. And certainly agriculture is a large part of my 

constituency. We have a lot of land that‟s seeded every spring 

when you‟re more in the Weyburn part of the constituency. But 

as you move west, you get into the ranchland and into the Big 

Muddy, the Big Muddy hills, and lots of cattle in that area, Mr. 

Speaker. And before I get to the budget, I want to express my 

appreciation to the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

We‟ve had successive Agriculture ministers, all from that side 

of the House, Mr. Speaker, that would go to Ottawa and try to 

get a better deal for our producers, whether it was to fix the 

CAIS program or whether it was, you know, whether it was 

assistance for drought. And usually they didn‟t come back with 

a whole lot. And it didn‟t matter if it was a Liberal government 

or if it was a Conservative government. And then the minister 

of the day would stand in the House and give his reasons why. 

Why he didn‟t have any support is because the feds never gave 

him any support. And it was usually our Agriculture minister, 

who was the critic at the time, that would grill the minister of 

day and give everybody in this House a pretty good show but 

make some pretty good points about what this minister could be 

doing on their own. 

 

There‟s now a change, Mr. Speaker, because our minister, I‟m 

very pleased to say, went to Ottawa, tried to get the feds to sign 

on to some new deals — and maybe there‟s some things that 

still can happen — but at the time came home and wasn‟t 

successful in getting the feds on board. But what did our 

minister do, Mr. Speaker? He put the province‟s money where 

our mouth is as a province, Mr. Speaker. It‟s one thing for an 

NDP government to always say, well the feds aren‟t going to do 

it so we‟re not going to do it either; we don‟t have the money to 

do it. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I‟m very appreciative and I know my 

constituents are, of the work that our Agriculture minister has 

done on the front when it comes to cattle and livestock and the 

hog sector, Mr. Speaker. And I also want to speak on what the 

budget has to say for rural Saskatchewan. And this budget, Mr. 

Speaker, has been very well received in rural Saskatchewan, not 

only for the changes to the education property tax that will see 

more money staying in our producers‟ pockets, but because the 

budget for the Agriculture ministry is increasing, Mr. Speaker, 

by 58 per cent. It includes $177.5 million more for agriculture 

compared to last year. And I believe this is the highest Ag 

ministry budget in the province‟s history. 

 

[22:00] 

 

Our government is ensuring that our risk management programs 

are fully funded on budget day, Mr. Speaker. We are putting 

more money into crop insurance after fulfilling another promise 

to review and improve the program. The budget includes new 

funding to continue on with the water infrastructure program, 

Mr. Speaker, which I have to say, in the last year when the 

water infrastructure program came out, Mr. Speaker, part of my 

constituency was in the RMs that were eligible for the 

programs, and part of it wasn‟t. And I know there was a lot of 



March 23, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2455 

uptake on that program. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t‟ know the 

exact amount of dollars that that program would have cost the 

province last year for those areas affected by the drought, which 

is another thing that the NDP government — the Ag minister at 

the time — you know, didn‟t have the time of day to meet with 

producers in the Southwest, didn‟t have a program to put 

together; I don‟t even think really talked to the producers 

because the producers probably would have said this is a pretty 

good program. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, for what that program cost, it sure 

paid a lot of dividends, because it was certainly well received. 

And we‟re looking forward to hearing what the minister has to 

say on that in the future, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So it‟s interesting to see what the reaction has been, given the 

support for the Ag ministry budget in rural Saskatchewan. Now 

according to my local radio station, Mr. Speaker, in Weyburn, 

and I want to quote: 

 

The Saskatchewan Party government is saying the latest 

provincial budget is good news for farmers, but the 

opposition New Democrats tend to disagree. 

 

Now apparently the opposition critic, the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana, apparently thinks that it‟s not really a good 

budget for agriculture and for rural Saskatchewan. And because, 

Mr. Speaker, what are the reasons? Well, because the 177 

million increase will be spent on programs like AgriStability 

and crop insurance, Mr. Speaker — imagine that. We‟re putting 

all our money upfront into these programs, and that‟s not good 

news, you know. Imagine the logic of putting money into 

something that you‟ve committed to, Mr. Speaker. Also, 

because the provincial government is spending money to move 

AgriStability from Winnipeg to Melville, Mr. Speaker, and I‟m 

not sure I really understand why that‟s a bad thing, but maybe 

she‟ll have more to say on that later. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, a bad budget according to the Ag critic. So 

what are others saying, Mr. Speaker. Well, Dave Marit had this 

to say, and I quote, “. . . the best budget for rural Saskatchewan 

in history . . .”, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Duncan: — From Ed Bothner, president of Sask Stock 

Growers, and I quote, “We are pleased to see that agriculture is 

back on the provincial government‟s radar.” And he later said, 

“It‟s been decades since our industry has received this level of 

attention and support from the provincial government,” Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mark Elford, also from the Stock Growers: “It‟s the best we‟ve 

seen for a long time,” Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to judging this budget on the 

basis of how it treats rural Saskatchewan, with all due respect to 

the opposition critic, I will take the word of SARM 

[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] and of 

APAS [Agricultural Producers Association of Saskatchewan] 

and the Stock Growers and any one of my producers in my 

constituency over the critic from Saskatoon any and every day 

of the week, Mr. Speaker. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, this is the first time I‟ve had . . . 

In keeping with the budget but I also want to speak on the 

announcement of the booster shot that came earlier this year, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to extend my appreciation. This is my first opportunity in 

this type of forum or setting in the legislature to express my 

thanks to the Education minister for realizing the infrastructure 

needs in the Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency when it comes 

to our schools, Mr. Speaker. And we have been very, very 

grateful for the money that Weyburn-Big Muddy will see, not 

only in the city of Weyburn for the junior high renovation and 

the roof project, but also at the Weyburn Comprehensive, my 

old high school, that is going to see a major rebuild. And also in 

Gladmar, the community of Gladmar I believe is receiving 

some money for some upgrades. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t tend to agree with the opposition 

very often, but I do with my hon. friend from Regina Rosemont 

who said a few days ago in this very House, said that there is a 

very large education infrastructure deficit in this province and 

I‟m pleased to see that we have an Education minister that‟s 

making this a high priority. 

 

I also want to speak in regards to the infrastructure boost, the 

economic booster shot, and how that will affect health care in 

the southeast part of the province, Mr. Speaker. And I want to 

specifically point out, I know there are several long-term care 

facilities in the member from Cannington‟s constituency that 

are going to be priorities and that money has been dedicated to, 

but I also want to speak to a project in Radville, Mr. Speaker. 

And I appreciate my hon. friend‟s permission to talk a bit about 

Radville, Mr. Deputy Speaker, seeing how it‟s very close to the 

Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency, but not technically in. And, 

Mr. Speaker, I have a lot of constituents that consider Radville 

their home and so, for at a least a day, the member and I from 

Estevan will share something in common, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I want to thank the Minister of Health for making sure that 

Radville was going to be looked after. The Marian home centre 

in Radville is a long-term care centre in Radville. It was 

originally built in 1947; it was added on to in 1956. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I‟ve had the opportunity to tour the facility twice in 

the last year and meet with the board, the local board, the 

Marian home board, Mr. Speaker. And I know that the Health 

minister had made comments about some of the facilities that 

he had toured before making the announcement and I just want 

to put on the record what the citizens of Radville were dealing 

with. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the tour that I took of Radville — and it‟s a 

very old facility — it‟s, I believe, a three-storey facility that was 

built in the ‟40s and, as I said, added on to in the ‟50s. And like 

any old building, it gets really hot in the summertime and they 

have a hard time keeping it cool. 

 

But there‟s areas because of when the building was built, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and the tools that health care providers have 

today, the building just isn‟t set up right. Obviously it‟s set on a 

couple of storeys so it‟s difficult to move patients in and out, 

and if there‟s ever an emergency, I know the elevator has been a 



2456 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2009 

trouble at some times. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, even the rooms for the residents of 

the long-term care centre, there are rooms in that facility where 

you walk in through a doorway that is quite narrow and you 

then walk through another door that is straight ahead to get into 

one resident‟s room, and then if you turn to the right, a really 

sharp right turn, there‟s another door. And, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, there‟s no way that you can get a patient, in their bed, 

if there‟s an emergency, through that doorway. You can‟t make 

the turn. So if a patient is in that room and there‟s ever a 

medical emergency, they have to move the patient on to a 

gurney and then transport them out. 

 

There‟s areas where you can only wheel a patient in a 

wheelchair only so close to the room where the bathtub is 

because you can‟t even get the wheelchair into the room with 

the bathtub, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So this is definitely a facility . . . And it speaks to the long-term 

need for and plan for making sure that we have doctors. I know 

that Radville is served very well by Dr. Oberholzer, Dr. O as 

he‟s commonly referred to, and I believe his wife, Dr. Helms. 

 

And I had the opportunity the second time that I toured the 

facility, Dr. O gave me a tour. And it was about 8 o‟clock at 

night and he was there taking care of a patient that was in some 

distress. They were waiting for an ambulance to bring the 

patient, and so he was waiting with that patient. And in the brief 

time that he had, he took me around. And I believe they‟ve been 

there for a number of years. And I don‟t know correctly, but I 

think it‟s . . . I‟m not for sure that I know, but I believe they‟ve 

been in Radville — they‟re a husband and wife team — and 

they‟ve been in Radville for, it‟s got to be five or six, probably 

even more than that. And I‟ve been told by very reputable 

members of that community, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that between 

the two of them, there hasn‟t been a single day since they 

arrived in Radville where one of them hasn‟t spent some time in 

the health centre — every single day, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 

it speaks to the dedication of our health care providers. 

 

And I know now with not having a . . . We‟re short a doctor in 

Coronach, but also in Bengough. And I know that Dr. O has 

been taking care of patients in the long-term care facility in 

Bengough, and also there‟s a clinic in Pangman and a care 

home in Pangman that he‟s been providing coverage. If there‟s 

anybody in that area that is worthy of recognition in this House, 

they are certainly candidates for that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So 

again I want to put on the record my thanks to the Health 

minister for making that announcement. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will confess I haven‟t really been 

keeping a close eye on the time, so I‟m not sure if I‟m over or 

under, but I just have two more points that I want to speak on, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

One is this notion that . . . and it relates to the announcement 

made last Friday by the Minister of Crown Investments 

Corporation, the discussion about the long-term debt of the 

province, Mr. Speaker. And I‟m very proud, and I won‟t back 

down from anybody, in saying that this government indeed has 

lowered the debt of the province by 40 per cent in a year and a 

half of being government, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And there‟s this issue that keeps . . . And I would have thought, 

and I‟m sure, members — I certainly try to catch it as much as I 

can; members opposite do — I‟m sure that members on the 

other side would have caught a StarPhoenix editorial about this 

whole issue about the Crown long-term debt, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and I want to quote from that. It says, and this is a 

quote: 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen, who did a credible stint as Finance 

minister for the NDP, does himself a great disservice by 

feigning outrage at the debt figures. 

 

He fully knows there‟s a world of difference between a 

government racking up debt to finance irresponsible 

spending on public programs Saskatchewan cannot sustain 

in the long run, and with Crown utilities and business 

enterprises borrowing money for commercial purposes 

that are repaid with their cash flows [Mr. Deputy 

Speaker]. 

 

And the editorial finishes by saying: 

 

Sometimes, it‟s best to give a wide berth to a topic when 

to raise it means exposing oneself as less than credible on 

the issue . . . [Mr. Deputy Speaker]. 

 

Now this is an interesting area that the members opposite want 

to go, that somehow that this is adding new debt to the 

province, and you know, how is this going to affect ratepayers, 

and maybe we don‟t even need to do this, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

But it‟s interesting to note that between . . . And this is from the 

NDP. I believe the opposition, I believe the Deputy Leader of 

the Opposition said this on Friday, that in trying to refute the 

claims by the Crown minister that infrastructure was neglected 

in the Crowns over the NDP, she said that between 2000 and 

‟07 the NDP invested nearly 2.5 billion into SaskPower‟s 

infrastructure. 

 

Now let‟s just put that in perspective. At a time when the 

members opposite presided over a government that saw in the 

neighbourhood of 35,000 people leave this province, there was 

still a need in the Crowns, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to spend $2.5 

billion to make sure that there was infrastructure to serve the 

people of this province. By the way, it was less people in the 

province but still there was that need. 

 

So we‟ve come to a position where we have a growing 

province. And I‟m not sure about members opposite — I don‟t 

want to speak for them — but we‟re pretty proud of that on this 

side of the House. We‟re pretty proud that there are people 

moving back to this province, that we have a growing 

population when members opposite didn‟t think it was going to 

happen or didn‟t think it could happen. We‟re pretty proud of 

that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And if it means that we‟re going to have to incur some debt in 

the Crown corporations to ensure that there‟s infrastructure in 

this province to keep the lights on, to service the new people 

that come to this province and set up their homes in this 

province, to people that bring new businesses to this province, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I‟m not sure what the members opposite 

think is the alternative. 



March 23, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2457 

Maybe we pick a day. We don‟t spend all this money, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, keeping in mind that when they were losing 

35,000 people, they still spent $2.5 billion in infrastructure. So 

maybe they don‟t think we need to spend this money and then 

we decide — I don‟t know — by lottery, when the lights are 

turned on in Weyburn. Or maybe we decide . . . I mean it 

almost seems like we‟re going back to Soviet Russia here or 

something, you know, depending on the number of your 

household or maybe the last number of your licence plate, when 

you can use power, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So for the opposition members to use this phony-baloney 

argument that the debt is increasing in this province, it lends no 

credibility to what the members opposite are saying. 

 

And the last point I want to speak to is this notion that, well the 

GDP numbers are fiction, and we‟ve had to . . . you know, 

they‟re just all wrong, particularly from the member for Regina 

Northeast. Frankly he‟s a decent man, and I think he represents 

his constituents well, but with the tone that he was taking 

tonight, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think we just need to replay his 

speech tonight in this province for the next two and a half years. 

And there will be no doubt that there will be more seats on this 

side of the House under this party after the next election, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

[22:15] 

 

And I know my time, I‟m right to the end, but I do want to say 

this, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I don‟t think members on this side — 

and certainly not our Finance minister who‟s one of the most 

honourable people that I‟ve come to know in my short time in 

this House — need any lessons from members opposite on 

transparency when it comes to economic growth, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. Because it was the members opposite that were in 

government in an election year, in 2003, that said that we would 

have 6.8 per cent growth in this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And how did they back it up? Well let‟s compare. In our budget 

this year, in the ‟09-10 summary, there‟s a list of private sector 

GDP forecasts. And you can run down the list: IHS Global 

Insight, CBOC [Conference Board of Canada], TD [Toronto 

Dominion] Bank, RBC [Royal Bank of Canada]. 

 

In the budget that was presented by the NDP government in 

2003 in an election year, the members opposite were happy 

enough to produce a forecast that was — and this is on page 23 

of the ‟03-04 summary — and it was an individual company‟s 

forecasting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in a year that they picked out 

6.8. It‟s a bar graph. And it‟s for ‟02, and there‟s bar graphs for 

‟03 and ‟04, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And what did they do? They did a bar graph with the low 

private forecast and the high private forecast. So we didn‟t even 

know in 2003 what were the numbers used. It was amalgam. It 

was a consolidation of all the different private forecasters, no 

transparency whatsoever. So I don‟t think that our Finance 

minister, I don‟t think a single member on this side of the 

House needs to take any lessons from the members opposite 

when it comes to transparency and accountability, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

And with that, I thank you. And I will not be supporting the 

amendment, and I will be supporting the budget. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone.  

 

Mr. McCall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a 

pleasure to join the proceedings tonight. We‟ll talk the clock out 

of course. The member from Weyburn-Big Muddy has very 

thoughtfully left me with about 11 minutes to go until we hit the 

clock, so we‟ll take advantage of that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to start my remarks by of course thanking the good 

people of Regina Elphinstone-Centre for sending me to this 

Assembly to be their representative, to work with them and for 

them. And it‟s certainly a responsibility that I take very 

seriously, Mr. Speaker, and one that I feel very privileged to 

have. 

 

Other members are of course interested in these remarks. I don‟t 

know if it‟s late, they‟re sugared up, they‟re, you know, a little 

chatty from their chair, Mr. Speaker, but we‟ll see what they 

have to say throughout the debate here. 

 

Again it‟s interesting to follow after the member from 

Weyburn-Big Muddy. You know I quite respect him as another 

young MLA in the Assembly. Perhaps not the bellower that the 

member from Kindersley is, but, you know, I guess he‟s 

working on it. It‟s interesting that he would tail off with a 

discussion of the private sector forecasters that they used for the 

basis of this budget, Mr. Speaker, to come up with the 

projection of 2.1 per cent economic growth. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that‟s . . . You know, it‟s 

an old story that lawyers or economists, you can get six of them 

in a room and you have seven opinions. One of the things about 

the economic forecasters that they are in agreement on these 

days, Mr. Speaker, in this time of turmoil and volatility, is that 

the markets are changing very quickly. 

 

And certainly, you know, if you followed the evolution of the 

federal Conservatives as they went through the different 

permutations and . . . [inaudible] . . . as they went from, you 

know, Stephen Harper offering up the great advice that he 

suspected there are going to be lots of buying opportunities out 

there in the market; to a technical deficit; to, okay maybe we‟ve 

got some problems; to the born-again Keynesianism of the 

federal Harper Conservatives. You know it‟s interesting to see 

how quickly that‟s progressed, Mr. Speaker, almost like 

watching a gymnastics floor show. 

 

But in this time of volatility where the economists agreeing that 

yes things are volatile, you‟d think that the members opposite 

would err on the side of caution in terms of their GDP 

productions because that of course is where it all hangs 

together. That‟s the basis on which you can predict economic 

growth in terms of what you‟re going to get for revenues 

coming in, how that matches up with expenditures being made. 

And for them to almost, to triple, in fact, plus the projections, 

the latest projections from the economic forecasters right from 

the word go, Mr. Speaker, it casts a shadow over this budget of 

doubt that should not be there. That should not be there. 



2458 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2009 

It‟s funny, Mr. Speaker, this budget does a lot of great things. 

And I‟ll happily go on record saying that, but the problem that 

we have on this side, Mr. Speaker: it‟s one thing to promise 

good things to the people; it‟s another, of course, to pay for 

them. And how you‟re going to pay for them has to built on the 

solid rock and not on the shifting sands, which again the 

economic forecasters, they‟re quite happy to recognize. 

 

And we‟ve got, you know, the bellowing back and forth over on 

the other side about different budgets over the years. But, Mr. 

Speaker, one of the things that we were very clear on on our 

side of the House was that the credit ratings always went up on 

this side of the House. And when it came to financial advice 

from the members opposite, well it‟s very interesting, Mr. 

Speaker. I think I would take the affirmation coming out of the 

different bond rating agencies when it comes to financial advice 

over the bellowing of the members opposite. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I recognize the member. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. So again, if they . . . You know, this is the budget 

debate. You‟d expect they‟ve all got a chance to participate. So 

if they want to do so from their seats, that‟s of course up to 

them. But thanks for the assist there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Anyway, budget projections are based very much . . . The GDP 

number is of critical importance. So to have that number in 

question right off the bat, Mr. Speaker, raises a number of 

questions about the affordability and the sustainability of all 

these things that are good and well received. 

 

But again, Mr. Speaker, I think one of the things that‟s 

happened globally with the economic crisis . . . There‟s a good 

pundit I was listening to the other day who talked about 

economics having been divorced from history. And how the 

economists couldn‟t predict this because they had decided in the 

main that history had ended, and that they would not look back 

to see what had happened at different times in the economic 

history of the North American market or the global economy 

generally. And again, Mr. Speaker, those who forget their 

history are doomed to repeat it, Santayana would say. 

 

And we‟ve seen in this Legislative Assembly, we‟ve seen in 

this province before, what happens when you get people in that 

want to promise a bunch of great things off the top. And of 

course, they‟re very appealing, Mr. Speaker. But the problem is, 

sometimes you pay for those things over decades. And I think 

there‟s widespread agreement, Mr. Speaker, that the 1980s, we 

saw that kind of behaviour take place in this province, with 

disastrous effect for this province. And we spent the ‟90s 

cleaning up that mess and paying that off. 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, you can have a record expenditure in 

this budget of $10.2 billion, but if it‟s based on a foundation of 

shifting sand, then we worry about what‟s going to come over 

the long haul. And moreover in the main, Mr. Speaker, it has to 

do with a bet being made on potash and the price of potash, and 

getting the appropriate deal with China. 

 

So I guess it‟s merciful in that we‟ll see how that bet makes out, 

Mr. Speaker, but when it comes to the finances of the province 

and the well-being of the people of the province, to make bets 

that are that risky to that extent, this is not a venture capital 

fund that they‟re running, Mr. Speaker. It‟s the budget of the 

province of Saskatchewan. So we‟ll see how this all works out, 

Mr. Speaker; and you know, God only help us if it doesn‟t. 

 

I guess in the main, Mr. Speaker, I wanted to address my 

comments to two main perspectives. One of course is to the 

people of Regina Elphinstone and how I see this budget 

impacting their situations, and of course the second is how the 

budget impacts or rather does not impact the situation for First 

Nations and Métis people in this province. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, it‟s a funny business in this House to give 

credit because of course they‟ll pull quote you. And they‟ll say, 

you know, they‟ll take your comments out of context, and then 

next thing you know you‟re getting read off in the hosanna 

chorus of all the people that love the budget, you know — full 

stop, period. 

 

So I guess I‟ll be very clear, Mr. Speaker. I‟m supporting the 

amendments put forward for very many of the reasons that I‟ve 

been discussing so far. But I do want to point out a number of 

things that I think are steps in the right direction in this budget. 

 

Again I think the constituents in Regina Elphinstone Centre will 

look at what‟s happening with education property tax savings, 

with the increased funding there, how that works out. I think 

that, you know, they‟re going to be looking forward to a tax cut. 

And of course who doesn‟t look forward to a tax cut, Mr. 

Speaker?  

 

But again the question that we look at there is, how does this 

play out over the long haul, and is this built on a sustainable 

foundation? And that of course, Mr. Speaker, is something that 

you find out over time. So it looks pretty good on budget day, 

and the hosannas ring forth, but we‟ll see how this plays out. 

 

Something that I was most interested to note on budget day, Mr. 

Speaker, was the way that the Chair of the Saskatchewan 

School Boards Association, Roy Challis said that he was 

shocked. And when you think that the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose has been bandying about the province doing 

his reports, and you know I guess I‟m also glad to see on budget 

day, Mr. Speaker, that they finally freed the Reiter report — to 

use the common reference to it, Mr. Speaker — I was glad to 

see that report finally see the light of day. And I guess it‟s 

interesting if you‟re in the business of public policy, are you 

more interested in spin control, Mr. Speaker, or are you more 

interested in good public policy.  

 

So the fact that the School Board Association themselves, that 

what they had to say about the budget was that they were 

shocked. I think that speaks volumes as to the approach that has 

been taken with hiding the report under wraps, and then only 

releasing it on budget day for maximum effect. So we‟ll see 

how that plays out with the School Board Association, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And again the point has been well made, certainly by the trustee 

that represents the ward that I live in in the city of Regina, he‟s 

made the point that if you‟ve taken away the economic levers, 

then you effectively have lost your autonomy as a school board. 

And again that they would do this, to drop it in the budget, not 



March 23, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2459 

have the advanced debate around the Reiter report — again to 

use the common usage, Mr. Speaker — in advance of the 

budget, again I don‟t think it speaks to good public policy. I 

think it speaks to spin control, and we‟ll see how this goes over 

the years to come. 

 

One of the things that I was glad to see in this budget, Mr. 

Speaker, was increased revenue sharing for the cities and for 

rural municipalities, for the municipalities generally. It‟s 

something I‟ll have more to say about tomorrow, Mr. Speaker. 

And recognize that the clock is now 10:30. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The time of adjournment having been 

reached, this House now stands adjourned until 1:30 tomorrow 

afternoon. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 22:30.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2431 

  Chisholm .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2433 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2435 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2438 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2442 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2447 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2449 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2452 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2457 

 

 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 


