




















































Hansard: March 30, 2009


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 41A  MONDAY, MARCH 30, 2009, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2589 

 March 30, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — Before I recognize members, I’d like to 

introduce a couple of groups that have joined us this afternoon. 

In the Speaker’s gallery we have Gary Dickson along with his 

wife Arlene and a number of the staff from the Privacy 

Commissioner’s office. And I’d invite them to stand and be 

welcomed to their Chamber today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — As well I’d like to introduce the wife of a 

former member of this Assembly that many of us came to know 

and appreciate. Alma Neudorf is joined today by her sister Tena 

and her daughter Cheryl, her husband Tony, and her 

grandchildren, Morgan and Marley. We’re pleased to have you 

come and join us today. And we’d invite you to stand and be 

recognized by the Chamber. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In addition to 

welcoming the guests you’ve introduced on behalf of the 

government, it’s my pleasure today to introduce some very 

special people that have joined us, seated in your gallery, Mr. 

Speaker, that I’d like to introduce to you and through you to all 

members of the Assembly. And they include Michelle and 

Paige Hansen from Sturgis, Saskatchewan, Canada. 

 

Paige is more famously known as baby Paige, but we can see, 

all of us quite gratefully, that she’s grown beyond that. And so, 

Mr. Speaker, we want to welcome Paige to her Legislative 

Assembly. Joining them, by the way, is the constituency 

assistant to the Minister of Social Services, Susan Dunne. 

 

And we want to acknowledge Paige today, and also her mom 

for her courage in bringing that case forward. I think in no small 

way helps to underscore the importance of a children’s hospital. 

Mr. Speaker, all members will join with me in welcoming Paige 

and Michelle to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

would want to join with you in welcoming Alma Neudorf and 

her family to the legislature here this afternoon. The member 

for Cannington and I had the good fortune of having lunch, 

along with you, Mr. Speaker, with them at noon. We had the 

opportunity to share some very, very fond memories of former 

member Bill Neudorf in the legislature, and the opportunities 

that we had to serve with him and witness his quick wit, his 

quick anger, and also his very fine friendship that both the 

member and I — the member from Cannington and I — and 

along with you, Mr. Speaker, enjoyed over the years. Thank 

you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very 

pleased, delighted, and extremely happy today to introduce a 

number of individuals in your gallery, people that I was able to 

meet with earlier today for a great announcement for our 

province. 

 

With Habitat for Humanity we have Dennis Coutts who is the 

CEO [chief executive officer] of the Regina chapter; Bob 

Pringle, the executive director of the Saskatoon chapter; Dennis 

Elko, the executive director with Lloydminster; Roy Joans, the 

ReStore manager of Lloydminster; Joan Falaska, the steering 

committee Chair from Moose Jaw; Bill Harris, the board 

member of Moose Jaw; Lori Renton, the steering committee 

Chair for Yorkton; Louise Bellanger, the board member for 

Yorkton. 

 

And hopefully I’ve got them all covered, but I want everyone to 

welcome these great individuals who do such terrific work with 

Habitat for Humanity. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

join in with the minister in welcoming these very special guests 

from Habitat for Humanity to our legislature. They’ve done 

great work. I know the work particularly in Saskatoon around 

the rehab store and all the good stuff they’ve done. They 

provide strong leadership in our communities right across this 

province, and it was an exciting announcement today. And I 

just want to join in welcoming them to their legislature. Thank 

you very much. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to this 

Assembly, sitting in your gallery is my constituent assistant, 

Ryan Long. As all members of this House I think will 

acknowledge, they are the true masters of making MLAs 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly] work properly. 

 

And Ryan comes from his expertise through his father who was 

at one time the acting attorney general of Ontario and was the 

executive director of the Legal Aid Ontario. Ryan is a graduate 

of Teen Challenge and I’ve been privileged to have him live in 

my home with me as he graduated from that program. And he’s 

doing a most excellent job for the constituents of Saskatoon 



2590 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2009 

Northwest. Welcome to your Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am very 

pleased today to stand and present a petition on behalf of 

Saskatchewan residents in support of the government’s policy 

on green vehicles. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government ministers named in this petition to follow their 

own platform and government policies and trade in their 

Jeep Libertys for vehicles that are on SGI’s 2008 list of 

recommended fuel-efficient vehicles. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by members from Southey, 

Regina, and around the province, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition in support of indexing the minimum wage as members 

of our province are concerned about the rapidly rising costs of 

living and the sporadic increase in minimum wage. And the 

prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to indexing Saskatchewan 

minimum wage to ensure that the standard of living of 

minimum wage earners is maintained in the face of cost of 

living increase. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the petition is signed by Saskatchewan residents from 

Moose Jaw and Regina. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

present a petition calling for wage equity for CBO 

[community-based organization] workers. And we know that 

workers in the community-based organizations in Saskatchewan 

have traditionally been underpaid — in fact, in many cases were 

poverty level wages. I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the development and 

implementation of a multi-year funding plan to ensure that 

CBO workers achieve wage equity with employees who 

perform work of equal value in government departments. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

And these folks come from Regina, Saskatoon, and Moose Jaw, 

Canora, Weyburn, and Moosomin. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 

present a petition on behalf of rural residents of Saskatchewan 

who question why the Sask Party government is leaving them 

behind when it comes to providing safe and affordable water. 

Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to financially assist the town of Duck Lake 

residents for the good of their health and safety due to the 

exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency, and that this government fulfills its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by the good residents of Waldheim, 

Rosthern, and Duck Lake. I so present. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

pleased to rise today to present a petition speaking against 

means testing for the seniors’ drug plan. Mr. Speaker, the 

petitioners note that the income testing in general means dollars 

are spent on administration instead of helping people. Mr. 

Speaker, the petitioners ask: 

 

. . . that the Legislative Assembly call upon the 

government to reverse its decision to means test seniors 

and ensure that all seniors continue to have access to 

affordable prescription drugs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by residents of Biggar 

constituency, Cut Knife-Turtleford constituency, and The 

Battlefords constituency. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition in support of fairness for Saskatchewan 

students through the expansion of the graduate retention 

program. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately expand the graduate retention 

program to include master’s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 



March 30, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2591 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are 

students from the University of Saskatchewan, students from 

the University of Regina, as well as a number of health care 

professionals who have graduate degrees practising here in the 

province. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

in support of a new long-term care facility in La Ronge. The 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately invest in the planning and 

construction of new long-term beds in La Ronge. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by the good people of La 

Ronge and area. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Saskatoon Hindu Society Banquet 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — On Saturday evening I, along with members 

from Meewasin, Eastview, and Greystone, attended the very 

enjoyable and elegant 24th annual Hindu Society of 

Saskatchewan vegetarian banquet at TCU Place where 

Lieutenant Governor Gordon Barnhart addressed 600 banquet 

guests. 

 

This event is always a popular social function for Saskatoon as 

it helps the Hindu Society celebrate with others in the 

community and raise funds for their temple located at 107 La 

Ronge Road in Saskatoon. 

 

The Saskatchewan Hindu Society takes great pride in knowing 

that their temple was built and is maintained and operated 

exclusively through members’ and community donors’ 

generosity. Funding provides opportunities for the Hindu 

Society to have speakers, seminars, and projects of benefit to 

the Hindu community. 

 

Many members of the Hindu Society have been recognized and 

honoured for their contributions to our province. Some 

distinguished members have received Orders of Saskatchewan 

and Orders of Canada. The Saskatchewan Hindu Society 

believes that members must participate and integrate with the 

larger community to embrace their Saskatchewan home and to 

share their rich culture with others in our multicultural 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate the Hindu Society of 

Saskatchewan on this successful event, and I would encourage 

members to attend future annual Hindu vegetarian banquets to 

enjoy delicious food, good fellowship, and cultural diversity. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Regina Multicultural Council Public Speaking Contest 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this past 

Sunday I had the pleasure of bringing greetings on behalf of the 

Government of Saskatchewan to the 22nd annual public 

speaking contest hosted by Regina Multicultural Council. At 

this speaking contest, 42 students from grade 4 through to grade 

12 were provided with a valuable opportunity to develop their 

speaking skills while also exploring and expressing their views 

on the vital role that multiculturalism plays in our society. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all understand the value of developing the 

ability to communicate effectively with our peers. We also 

know that these skills are not simply developed overnight. For 

many people, it takes years of practice to eventually reach the 

point where they are comfortable addressing large crowds. It is 

nice to see that these students are getting a head start, learning 

communication skills that will help them in the future with their 

careers as well as their daily life. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the subject matter of many of these speeches also 

particularly was important in terms of development for each of 

these students. Saskatchewan has a very proud heritage of 

multiculturalism and this heritage continues to grow and thrive. 

By celebrating our diversity, we not only create understanding 

and acceptance of all people in our society; we develop and 

enrich our own individual lives. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Intercultural Association Graduation Ceremony 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, on Saturday, March 28, I along 

with the members from Saskatoon Centre and Saskatoon 

Greystone had the pleasure of attending the Saskatchewan 

Intercultural Association’s MYWAY [Moving Young Women’s 

Aspirations to Reality] project graduation ceremony. 

 

Mr. Speaker, MYWAY stands for Moving Young Women’s 

Aspirations to Reality. The MYWAY program is for immigrant 

and refugee women under 30. Its goal is to share information 

about the Canadian work environment with participants as well 

as to enhance their life skills. 

 

Over a wonderful multicultural meal, we celebrated the 

accomplishment of the 10 graduates who completed the 

10-month program. The highlight of the evening for me was to 

hear directly from some of the participants as they shared their 

stories of challenges, accomplishments, and gratitude. 

 



2592 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2009 

[13:45] 

 

This year’s graduates are a diverse group of talented women 

coming from the countries of Pakistan, Sudan, Ukraine, 

Bangladesh, and Iran. They are Sheeba Babar, Awak Boir, 

Olena Kolchuk, Salma Ismail, Masoumeh Safari, Syeda Tahira 

Kazami, Yaroslava Kurnosova, Nyakouth Wal, Svitlana 

Makarchuk, and Inna Baglay. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join me in 

congratulating these graduates as well as the MYWAY staff, 

Saskatchewan Intercultural Association board, and the partner 

agencies that support this program. I know I can speak for all 

members of this Assembly in saying that we are looking 

forward to seeing how these graduates succeed in Saskatchewan 

— their way. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Saskatchewan 4-H Recognition Banquet 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This weekend I had 

the pleasure of bringing greetings on behalf of the Government 

of Saskatchewan and the Ministry of Agriculture to the 

Saskatchewan 4-H annual recognition banquet. The event was 

held in Saskatoon and brought together many of our 4-H leaders 

and members from right across the province. It was a special 

event for myself as I was leader of my local 4-H club for over a 

decade with the West Prince Albert Beef Club. 

 

At this year’s banquet, we welcomed three new inductees to the 

4-H Hall of Fame: Louise Haubold, a resident of Medstead, 

who was a 4-H leader with the Glenbush Homecraft Club for 

many years; Donna Saunders, a Midale resident who has been 

active in 4-H for a number of years and served on the 

Saskatchewan 4-H Council board; and Colin Hughes, a 4-H 

beef leader from Canwood who I had the opportunity to work 

with for a number of years on the P.A. [Prince Albert] 4-H 

regional show and sale. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these individuals have made outstanding 

contributions over the years to the 4-H program throughout our 

province and are to be commended for their hard work and 

dedication. We know that 4-H is a key avenue to developing 

future leaders in a number of sectors throughout Saskatchewan 

and we look forward to its continued strength for years to come. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Accelerated Readers Program in Moose Jaw School 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, recently students from William 

Grayson School gathered to celebrate the end of the school’s 

first session of the accelerated readers program. William 

Grayson School is the first in Moose Jaw and the Prairie South 

School Division to implement this program. 

What happens is the students set reading goals for themselves 

and then accumulate points towards their goals by taking 

web-based quizzes about the books they read. At the end of four 

months, the points are tabulated and those closest to their goals 

or who have reached their goals are celebrated. 

 

The theme for the first session of the program was Life is a 

Highway, and its motto was Driven to Read. In honour of the 

theme, the top students received a limousine ride to the Oak & 

Rose Book Shoppe. And out of those students who reached 

their goals fully, a draw was made for two mountain bikes. 

Jayden Sanford and Adam Brotzel were the lucky recipients. 

 

The school staff is extremely pleased with the participation of 

the students and believes it has helped to increase the students’ 

interest in reading, and that’s the goal. Fifty students reached 

their goals, and the students are looking forward to the next 

round of the accelerated reading program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in congratulating 

all those involved in this innovative program, and mostly to 

recognize the motivated students that participated in reaching, if 

not surpassing, their goals. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Moose Jaw Little Princess Ball 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 

was a special day for more than 100 little princesses that 

attended The Little Princess Ball in Moose Jaw this past 

weekend. The Little Princess Ball was a fundraiser for the 

Moose Jaw Health Foundation for the renovation of a room and 

equipment at the pediatric unit of the Union Hospital. 

 

The little princesses came to the event in the modern-day 

equivalent to a magical coach, Mr. Speaker — a limousine — 

and, while there, dined on princess pea pasta, a plate of pasta 

with a single pea in the middle of the plate. These little 

princesses got the thrill of their lifetime, Mr. Speaker, when 

they met with Snow White, Sleeping Beauty, and Cinderella 

and many other princesses. As one of the organizers said about 

his daughter, I’ve never seen her smile so much. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the first-ever Little Princess Ball truly embodies 

the giving spirit of Moose Jaw. The community came together 

in celebration to support children’s health. The organization of 

this wonderful event doesn’t know yet how much they raised, 

but are estimating it to be in the tens of thousands of dollars. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of this House to 

congratulate the Moose Jaw Health Foundation on their very 

successful event in support of children’s health. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 



March 30, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2593 

Man of Influence 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to recognize the 

inclusion of Dr. Malcolm Wilson as one of Saskatchewan’s top 

10 Men of Influence by Saskatchewan Business Magazine. 

 

Dr. Wilson is the director of the Office of Energy and 

Environment at the University of Regina. He was involved in 

the initiation and development of the International Energy 

Agency greenhouse gas monitoring and storage program at 

Weyburn and Midale. At the university, he helped to found the 

International Test Centre for CO2 Capture and the international 

test centre for CO2 geological storage, as well as the Petroleum 

Technology Research Centre. Currently he serves on the Centre 

for Legislative and Environmental Research, CLEER, the 

research affiliate of The Energy Council. 

 

In 2007 Dr. Wilson was recognized as co-recipient of the 2007 

Nobel Prize for peace for his work on the Intergovernmental 

Panel on Climate Change with former US [United States] 

Vice-president Al Gore and the scientists of the IPCC 

[Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change]. Dr. Wilson 

continues to serve as adjunct professor of engineering as well as 

graduate studies and research at the University of Regina. 

 

Please join me in recognizing Dr. Wilson on his achievement 

and for the work that he continues to do in developing solutions 

to the challenges presented by climate change. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Future of Prince Albert Pulp Mill 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier claims the 

Saskatchewan Party intends to keep the promises made during 

the last election. But one of his candidates, the member for P.A. 

Carlton made a commitment in the Prince Albert Daily Herald, 

November 2, ’07, in which he promised, and I quote, “A vote 

for Darryl is a vote for the mill open and people working.” 

 

To the Premier: does he believe that the member from P.A. 

Carlton should be held accountable for the promise he made to 

reopen the Prince Albert pulp mill? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s certainly my 

pleasure to answer the question. The government along with 

Domtar is looking at all options for redevelopment at the site. 

We are talking on an ongoing basis with the Vice-president 

Patrick Loulou with respect to development opportunities. We 

have said to them that everything is on the table, with the 

exception of $100 million that the former premier was going to 

put at risk to the people of Saskatchewan. Everybody knows 

where that money would be today — absolutely gone. 

 

And I’m interested by the fact that the member asks this 

question because when asked by the media himself about what 

the government should do, whether the government should put 

$100 million at risk of taxpayers’ money, that member, the 

member from P.A. Northcote said no, they should not. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Now what’s painfully clear to the people of 

Prince Albert is they’re not going to follow our plan. But what’s 

also clear now is that they’ve got no plan of their own. 

 

On Friday, March 27, the Herald reported that the member 

admitted we won’t see, and I quote, “We won’t see an active 

pulp mill out of that site . . . ” This statement is admission that 

the Saskatchewan Party’s utterly and completely failed both the 

employees of the Prince Albert pulp mill and their families. To 

the Premier: will he admit that they’ve broken the promises 

made by he and the member for P.A. Carlton to the people of 

Prince Albert? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve indicated, the forestry 

sector is a very troubled sector all across North America. Since 

2003 there have been some 207 mills closed across North 

America with respect to forestry services in this country. Pulp 

prices have fallen some 35 per cent year over year, so it’s a very 

challenging time. 

 

The one thing that this government will not do — as the former 

government was prepared to do and put taxpayers into a very 

difficult position — was put at risk $100 million. There’s 100 

million very good reasons why we would not follow that former 

government’s position, and in fact the member’s question 

simply is, would we put at risk that kind of money? Would we 

follow the NDP’s plan? No, we would not, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Well it’s now painfully clear that they never 

had any intention of keeping their election promise. Instead 

we’ve had 16 months of bluster. The minister responsible for 

forestry talks for meetings with forest companies and promises 

plants will be opening in the near future, but never offers any 

details. I’m sick and tired of his treatment of the Prince Albert 

pulp mill families. What is the Sask Party’s plan for forestry? 

Did they ever intend to keep the promise made by the member 

from P.A. Carlton? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



2594 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2009 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

discussions with Domtar continue on redevelopment of the site. 

And you don’t have to believe me if you don’t want. This 

morning Patrick Loulou, the vice-president for Domtar, said 

this that, “We will continue to work together with the 

government to investigate a number of options . . .”  

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Vice-president of Domtar, Patrick Loulou 

said this morning, “We will continue to work together with the 

government to investigate a number of options for 

redevelopment of the site, some including the pulp production, 

some not.” 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as the vice-president has indicated, we are 

working with the company. We are looking at redevelopment 

opportunities for the site. We’re also looking at the 

redevelopment in terms of the forest management agreement 

that we put out this morning that forestry companies have been 

extremely supportive of. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Employment Trends 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, the following layoffs have 

happened in Saskatchewan since December: Doepker 

Industries, 50 to 60 employees; Babcock & Wilcox, 43 

employees; StarTek, 266 employees; Cameco, 35 employees; 

Agrium, 300 employees; Shore Gold, 89; Mosaic potash, 1,000 

employees; Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, 940; Evraz, 

175; Prairie Diagnostic Services, 13 employees; Advance 

Engineered, 96; and the Government of Saskatchewan, 77 

employees. Does the Premier have a plan to help the 3,000 

unemployed workers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, many times in the past, the Premier and myself and my 

colleagues have said that while Saskatchewan is not immune 

from the forces of the pressures of the economic turmoil right 

around the world, we are certainly better positioned than any 

jurisdiction in Canada to weather these . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, our province, our 

province is fairing better than any jurisdiction in North America 

in light of these circumstances. And while these companies are 

indeed experiencing some short-term challenges, they are very 

optimistic. In fact our businesses and surveys are more 

optimistic than any jurisdiction in Canada about the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, the question isn’t 

immunity and positioning. The question is, how is the 

Saskatchewan government dealing with an obvious situation 

here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, speaking of optimism, the government’s budget is 

based on blind optimism, projecting economic growth of 2.1 per 

cent while private sector forecasters project economic growth of 

less than one per cent — point six three per cent, to be accurate. 

At least 3,000 good paying jobs have been lost since December. 

Real families are struggling to pay their bills and make ends 

meet. That is what’s happening in the real economy in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

To the Minister of Finance: when will he get real, admit that 

these 3,000 lost jobs are a sign of things to come, and begin to 

plan accordingly? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, over the 

course of the last days, since the tabling of the budget in this 

House, I’ve had the distinct pleasure of being able to travel 

around this province and meet with community leaders, 

business leaders, and citizens right around the province. And 

nowhere in this province is there the sense of gloom and doom, 

except in that opposition caucus. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, every 

forecast for the economy shows Saskatchewan is likely to lead 

the nation again going forward into next year. We have led the 

nation this past year. We’ve gone into this recession later than 

any other jurisdiction, and we’re likely to come out of it quicker 

than any other jurisdiction. Why doesn’t the members opposite 

get on the program and share in some of the incredible 

optimism and wisdom looking forward into the future for our 

province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, the government’s 

optimism is cold comfort for those who are unemployed today. 

They can’t take that to the bank. 

 

Mr. Speaker, statistics released last week pointed to an eight 

and a half per cent increase year over year and an 11 per cent 

increase in January over December in the number of people 

collecting employment insurance in Saskatoon. Other provincial 

governments have been urging Ottawa to improve 



March 30, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2595 

unemployment insurance benefits for workers who lose their 

jobs, either by waiving the two weeks deductible or increasing 

benefits. 

 

But while unemployed workers and their families struggle to 

make ends meet, the Saskatchewan Party has remained silent. 

Why has the Premier failed to speak up for unemployed 

workers in Saskatchewan struggling to make ends meet on 

employment insurance? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education and Employment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I certainly appreciate the 

opportunity to speak about this, and we do so with a great sense 

of empathy. We have officials that are providing services today 

with assistance on resumé writing, advice on where to help look 

for jobs — of which there are over 6,000 jobs available still in 

Saskatchewan — finding to ensure that there’s career 

counselling, as well as referral to CBO partners. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me just contextualize some of the remarks. In 

British Columbia, that number was 47.7 per cent. In Alberta, it 

was 46.1 per cent. In Manitoba, it was 20.2 per cent. The 

national average, 21.3 per cent; in Saskatchewan, 8.5 per cent; 

Mr. Speaker. We know we’re not immune from what’s going 

on, but on a relative scale across Western Canada and indeed 

across Confederation, we’re doing quite well. And we have 

services available to help ensure that those who have been laid 

off will be provided services in a fashion that’s very productive. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that unemployed 

workers in Saskatchewan appreciate the opportunity to be 

contextualized. Mr. Speaker, speaking of contexts, 

Saskatchewan is no longer the most affordable place to live in 

Canada. In fact Saskatoon has fallen behind Winnipeg, 

Montreal, and St. John. 

 

The Frontier Centre for Public Policy reports that Regina has 

gone from the most affordable major city in Canada to 18th out 

of 34 in less than two years. And Statistics Canada reports that 

Saskatchewan now has the highest rate of inflation in Canada at 

2.6 per cent, and it attributes a big part of this to a 22 per cent 

increase in Saskatchewan’s utility rates over the course of the 

winter. Why is the Saskatchewan Party making life less 

affordable for 3,000 workers and their families who have lost 

their jobs, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, let me just begin by 

highlighting some elements. When we look at some of the latest 

statistics regarding average weekly earnings — up 4.4 per cent, 

Mr. Speaker. Average weekly earnings — $773, Mr. Speaker, 

the largest growth in wages in Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we continue to monitor and provide assistance to 

those who are going through this transition, Mr. Speaker. And 

what we can do, Mr. Speaker, is talk about the number of 

people that have confidence in Saskatchewan, which stands in 

stark contrast to those members opposite. We see population 

growing by over 15,000, by 15,000 people, Mr. Speaker. That 

does stand in stark contrast to the 35,000 people that left the 

province while the members opposite were serving in 

government. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Speaker, speaking of the 

previous government and its record, Mr. Speaker, my wife and I 

play a little bridge, and we’re judged by not the hand that we’re 

dealt but how we play the hand we are dealt. They have yet to 

play a serious hand, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Three thousand workers have lost their 

job since December. The Saskatchewan Party can try to spin 

this any way it wants. But the fact remains the number of 

workers collecting employment insurance in Saskatchewan is 

rising, and they’re looking for work and at a time when life in 

Saskatchewan is becoming less and less affordable, thanks in 

part to the government’s policies. 

 

These families need more than boosterism, Mr. Speaker. They 

need economic leadership. When will the Saskatchewan Party 

get real? What will they do to help Saskatchewan unemployed 

workers to get a job in Saskatchewan? Will the Premier host a 

job fair here at home? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, let’s stick to the facts, Mr. 

Speaker — 14,500 more jobs since February 2008, February 

2009. First Nation, Métis employment up by 3,500 just this past 

month — 10. 6 per cent increase. Employment among women, 

15,300 increase, Mr. Speaker. Unemployment in Saskatchewan 

just around 5 per cent, the lowest in Canada, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Are we immune? No, we are not, Mr. Speaker. We have the 

services available. We are out helping individuals through this 

transition, Mr. Speaker. In the meantime, today I’m happy to 

report over 6,000 jobs available in our province, Mr. Speaker. 

Most jurisdictions would be happy with half of that. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 



2596 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2009 

Northcote. 

 

Uranium Development Partnership Report 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, this government’s been clear — 

they want to build a nuclear reactor in Saskatchewan. This 

would be the largest infrastructure investment in the history of 

our province. With infrastructure investment of this magnitude 

comes huge risk. Saskatchewan people will potentially be on 

the hook for billions of dollars. Because of this risk, 

Saskatchewan people deserve total transparency in a process 

that would lead to a nuclear reactor. 

 

To the minister: will he guarantee the people of Saskatchewan 

that this government will be open and transparent in the process 

that leads to nuclear power in the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — I thank the member for that question, 

Mr. Speaker. Clearly whatever we do, first of all, will be done 

within the context of clean, safe, and economic, affordable 

power for the people of this province. 

 

But what we’ve embarked on, Mr. Speaker, is a multi-step 

process, and we haven’t even completed the first step of that 

process yet, Mr. Speaker. The process consists of a number of 

steps, starting with a report that I will be receiving late 

tomorrow from the UDP, the Uranium Development 

Partnership, on opportunities for Saskatchewan in the nuclear 

cycle. Following that, Mr. Speaker, I will be announcing a 

comprehensive round of public consultations. 

 

Meanwhile, Mr. Speaker, Bruce Power is doing its own study of 

nuclear power in the province. And if Bruce Power decides that 

they want to proceed with that, it puts in play a number of 

additional steps, including environmental assessment process, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, the Uranium Development report 

is to be released at the end of this month. The government’s 

history on releasing reports is questionable at best. They sat on 

the education property tax report for months before releasing it. 

They took two months to sculpt the Correction minister’s report 

on the jail break. 

 

To the minister: can Saskatchewan people expect the Uranium 

Development report to be released at the end of March as 

promised, or will the minister be sitting on this report as well? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The UDP 

committee has indicated that their report is ready on time and 

will be released to me tomorrow. Upon receipt I will do a short 

review of the proposal, and it will be released to the public 

within days — hopefully later this week. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am surprised that as conflicted as the NDP [New 

Democratic Party] are on this issue, that that member was 

allowed to ask the question. I have a quote, I have a quote here. 

I have a quote here from NDP leadership hopeful Dwain 

Lingenfelter who, according to this, wouldn’t bother with the 

UDP or public consultations or any of that stuff. He says this, 

Mr. Speaker. He says: 

 

We have been having this debate in Saskatchewan for 

many years and arrived at the contradictory position that it 

is okay to mine uranium and turn it into yellowcake as 

long as we then ship it away and wash our hands of it. It’s 

a bit like a piano player in a brothel who helps to warm up 

the guests but claims to know nothing about what is going 

on upstairs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — I think that the people in the province of 

Saskatchewan would . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the member from 

Prince Albert Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Once again, I think that the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan would be very upset to find out that 

they think it’s a laughing matter in this province to spend 

billions of dollars and go down this process in a ham-handed 

way, the way they have so far. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Furber: — They’ve had a so-called feasibility study 

conducted by Bruce Power, a company that operates nuclear 

reactors, and soon the public will receive a report from a 

government panel composed of 10 or 12 people connected to 

the nuclear industry. Saskatchewan people deserve transparency 

on this issue of nuclear reactors in this province. To the 

minister: will the full UDP report be released or will it be 

blacked out like the jailbreak report? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think it is 

time that that member’s heard some facts. And you know, he’s 

heard them before. I think it’s time he stuck to them. 

 

That report will be chaired by Dr. Richard Florizone, a nuclear 

physicist and a vice-president of the University of 

Saskatchewan. The committee, the UDP committee, consists of 

members from industry, municipal officials, First Nations 



March 30, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2597 

people, labour, environmentalists, and our universities, Mr. 

Speaker. That report will be released unadulterated. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, unless something changes, it 

doesn’t matter what the minister says about transparency and 

accountability on the file. His colleague from Prince Albert 

Carlton made it clear that this government has tipped the table 

in favour of a nuclear reactor. When responding to the makeup 

of the UDP, the member from P.A. Carlton said, and I quote, 

“. . . you bet we are playing with a stacked deck and we would 

not have it any other way.” 

 

To the minister: in the interest of an open, transparent, objective 

process, will he guarantee that the UDP report is released? 

Saskatchewan people will be provided the panel’s work plan, as 

well as the agenda, and minutes of any meeting the panel had? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I thank 

the member for that question particularly. The UDP report will 

be released completely. 

 

But I have another interesting quote from Dwain Lingenfelter, 

the . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Is it as good as the other one? 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — It’s as good as the other one, only this 

time he deals with the matter of disposing of nuclear waste as 

well. He says this, Mr. Speaker, and I quote: 

 

It is hypocritical for any government in Saskatchewan to 

say that it is fine to mine uranium for use in nuclear 

reactors throughout the world, then turn around and take 

the position that it is too dangerous to use it here for fuel 

and deal with waste. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — I’d like to thank the member for his 

spontaneity in being open and accountable here. Mr. Speaker, in 

studies like this, occasionally a third party consultant is engaged 

in the process. 

 

To the minister: was a third party consultant hired? And if so, 

will the people of Saskatchewan be told who it was? Will they 

be provided the consultant’s full report, including the research 

done and the studies that they conducted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Yes, a consultant was hired to assist the 

UDP. Yes, the report will be released in its entirety. No, there 

will be not be blacked-out sections. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, the UDP was given $3 million to 

study four sources of energy — nuclear, wind, hydro, and clean 

coal. This is $3 million of public money. 

 

To the minister: will Saskatchewan taxpayers be provided a 

complete breakdown of how the $3 million was spent, including 

a breakdown of how much money was spent to research each of 

the four energy sources? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — . . . obvious, Mr. Speaker, the 3 million 

went to support the costs of the Uranium Development 

Partnership. A substantial portion of that would go to the 

consultants, there’s no question about that, and rightfully so. I 

believe that we hired the best consultants available for the job. 

Dwain Lingenfelter . . . Media clips, Mr. Speaker, are a target 

rich environment for Lingenfelter quotes. He said this, Mr. 

Speaker, and I quote: 

 

Again, I’m not talking about debating the pros and cons of 

nuclear power until the cows come home. As I said earlier, 

that debate is over. We need to elevate the discussion as to 

how we best capture the opportunity. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, let’s cut out their rhetoric and 

spin. Will the minister stand up today and admit what 

everybody else already knows, that the UDP will come back 

and report that they will be recommending the development of 

nuclear power? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and the answer 

is that I don’t know. But I will find out late tomorrow, I expect, 

when the UDP releases its report to me. And I’ll be happy to 

report to you the next day in question period or when the details 

of the report are released to the public. 



2598 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2009 

Mr. Speaker, I have a question. My question, my question to 

that member, Mr. Speaker: is he still supporting Mr. 

Lingenfelter? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Now the minister has stated that this is a 

multi-step process. But Bruce Power did a feasibility study 

before the minister commissioned UDP to study this issue. Will 

the minister admit that they put the cart before the horse? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Before I recognize the minister, I’d ask 

members to give the minister the opportunity to respond. Order. 

Order. The Minister of Health and the member from P.A. 

Carlton, come to order. I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. No, certainly 

we’re not. We’re doing this exactly the right way. The UDP 

was set up to study the nuclear cycle in . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The minister of Enterprise and 

Innovation is trying to respond. I would ask members to 

respectfully allow the minister to respond. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. No, the answer 

is certainly not. The UDP was set up to study this by 

community people, by experts in the industry, by a nuclear 

physicist, by our First Nations people, by our two universities, 

municipalities, Mr. Speaker, to determine what opportunities, if 

any, exist for further nuclear involvement in this province. 

 

And I think it’s perfectly correct — not only acceptable, but 

correct — to do it this way. I think that we need some basis for 

public consultations to be held, rather than just rumours and 

speculation that are proliferated from that side of the floor, Mr. 

Speaker. I think that it’s . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

New Funding for Affordable Housing 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am indeed 

pleased, delighted, and extremely happy to announce the 

Government of Saskatchewan is committing 10 million of new 

funding for affordable housing for seniors, low-income 

families, and those most vulnerable within our province. This is 

on top of the nearly 30 million announced by this government 

for affordable housing projects this past February. 

 

I would like to highlight two of the initiatives that will result 

from this new funding, Mr. Speaker, initiatives that will 

increase the availability of affordable housing in Saskatchewan. 

The first announcement, Mr. Speaker, is a grant of $1 million to 

Habitat for Humanity in support of Habitat’s ongoing efforts to 

provide affordable home ownership opportunities for lower 

income families across the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Today’s announcement, Mr. Speaker, 

will assist Habitat to build 20 new homes for deserving 

families. These new homes will be built right across the 

province in the communities of Regina, Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, 

Prince Albert, Lloydminster, and Yorkton. These projects will 

make a difference in the lives of low-income Saskatchewan 

families. These families, some for the very first time, will have 

safe, secure, and affordable housing. 

 

This announcement of significant new funding addresses the 

task force on housing affordability’s recommendations to 

enhance government’s partnerships with community-based 

organizations that have the expertise in the creation of 

affordable housing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in addition to the 1 million in capital funding, I’m 

pleased to announce of further funding of $180,000 for the 

Habitat Regina YouthBuild project. This project will distribute 

60,000 a year over the next three years to train 40 young adults 

for careers in the construction trades. Habitat Regina will be 

partnering with North Central Community Association, the 

Saskatchewan Indian institution of technology, the Ehrlo 

Community Services to recruit and retain young people for this 

project. 

 

Our government recognizes the necessity of developing a 

skilled workforce to maintain the current economic growth in 

this province. We are investing in the future of young people in 

Saskatchewan by providing them with training opportunities 

and access to well-paying jobs within their community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we know, housing is a basic necessity of life. A 

home is where families connect and unite to become proud, 

contributing members of a community. It is where they develop 

a sense of self-being and dependence and security. Our 

government believes that people of this great province deserve 

to have homes that promote health, dignity, security, and 

independence. Homes that enhance our communities, socially 

and economically. 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan is pleased to partner with 

Habitat for Humanity to construct not only just homes, but 

better future for Saskatchewan people. By working together to 

create affordable housing and to create opportunities for our 

youth, we can ensure that Saskatchewan remains on a strong 

and steady path towards safer communities and a better future 

for the people of Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



March 30, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2599 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I want 

to thank the minister for providing me an advance copy of her 

remarks. And of course you saw the news and it’s . . . We 

appreciated it very much, and I want to say that this is indeed a 

good news announcement. 

 

Habitat for Humanity is a great partner. We’ve always had a 

good working relationship with them. They’ve been 

enthusiastic, committed, and they have resources that can really 

make a difference. But most of all they’re very innovative. I 

think what we’ve seen over the past several years, the work that 

they’ve done with students — I know in my own riding students 

of E.D. Feehan and Mount Royal and Bedford — some really 

good work there. And I’ve got to say the store they have in 

Saskatoon is the best store ever, where they’ve recycled their 

curling rink and actually made it into a recycled buildings store. 

So that’s great. 

 

But this is good news. This is the core of their business, 

affordable housing, and for 20 families this truly will make a 

difference. 

 

We also appreciate the $180,000 support for YouthBuild. 

They’re also a very innovative group, and it’s really important 

that young people do get the opportunity to build, to develop 

their skills. This is 1 million out of 10 — 10 million. We’re 

waiting to hear what happens with the other 9 million, and 

we’re looking forward to that. 

 

I have to say . . . And I know the minister certainly talked about 

the Alberta model, where they’ve announced $3.3 billion over 

10 years. That was announced just a few weeks ago. This is 

really exciting. Their plan, Mr. Speaker, is to build 11,000 units 

over the next 10 years — something phenomenal — and I really 

think that we really need to take a look at that. 

 

In many ways I would rather see one big announcement about 

the plan forward, the framework about how we’re going to deal 

with housing in Saskatchewan. We know housing is a basic 

human right, and the minister is right — everybody deserves a 

home in Saskatchewan. That is a basic human right, and so I’m 

really glad to hear that. 

 

So we welcome the announcement and I’d look forward to 

hearing more in the weeks ahead. What I’m really looking 

forward to hearing is the framework, the plan that will make 

everyone in Saskatchewan having a home. Thank you very 

much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

One-to-One Laptop Initiative 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We all 

know children are the future of our province. What we teach 

them today has a direct impact on the success they may achieve 

personally, not to mention the benefits they will bring to our 

province, in years to come. That is why I’m very pleased to 

announce, as Minister of Crown Corporations, along with the 

Minister of Education, that ISC [Information Services 

Corporation of Saskatchewan], the Information Services 

Corporation, has made a significant donation of $90,000 to 

Regina’s Albert Community School to fund the one-to-one 

laptop initiative, making it the most technologically advanced 

elementary school in the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The one-to-one project means one laptop for each child. It’s a 

pilot project supported by Regina public schools that provides 

all students in grade 5 to 8 with notebook computers to use at 

school. Video projectors and Smart Board technology have 

been added to their classrooms, and their teachers have been 

trained to incorporate the technology into their day-to-day 

learning. As well 10 additional laptops have been provided to 

the grade 4/5 classroom for a two-to-one laptop introduction. 

 

This project is the realization of a dream between ISC and the 

Albert Community School to try to address the inequities that 

exist for vulnerable youth living in impoverished 

circumstances. And that is certainly something that this 

government supports, Mr. Speaker. These children don’t have 

access to computers or the Internet at home, and it limits their 

possibilities for the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the one-to-one laptop project is an exceptional 

investment in these children that will greatly enhance their 

technical and literacy skills, giving them — easy for me to say; 

needed a little more time in English and a little less in poli-sci, I 

guess — giving them the abilities they need for the 21st century 

workforce, and erasing the digital divide. 

 

This special donation is an example of how Saskatchewan’s 

Crown corporations are giving back to the community and 

making investments in our future, Mr. Speaker. ISC entered 

into a partnership agreement with Albert Community School in 

May 2008. The one-to-one project is part of that corporation’s 

commitment to help improve and support the ongoing 

educational experience of students that attend core area schools. 

Mr. Speaker, this government believes that the students at 

Albert Community School should have a great learning 

opportunity like most in more affluent neighbourhoods. We 

hope that the one-to-one laptop initiative will level the playing 

field and give them the same chances as their peers. I for one 

look forward to their success. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 

want to thank the minister for providing me with a copy of his 

address prior to us coming into the Chamber today so that I 

could read it in advance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a welcome initiative, a very interesting pilot 

project. We of course all hope that it makes a significant 

difference in these children’s lives and is therefore . . . can be 

duplicated and extended. 

 

I can’t help but note that if $90,000 is a significant expenditure, 



2600 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2009 

I don’t know how the $700,000 the same minister threw away 

on enhanced driver’s licence could be a modest expenditure. 

But this is a worthwhile initiative, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The initiative, as I said, Mr. Speaker, is very worthwhile. It’s, I 

think, an open question, Mr. Speaker, it’s an open question as to 

whether this addressing of the digital divide, this issue of 

fairness at the age of 10 or 11, can do much to address 

inequities that could be far better addressed by a greater 

commitment to early childhood education at the ages of four to 

five, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I don’t think it has to be either/or, Mr. Speaker. I think we 

can recognize the achievements approach like Head Start and 

pre-kindergarten in our province, for example, Mr. Speaker, and 

still congratulate the government on this initiative, and 

congratulate ISC on this initiative. As the minister points out, 

Crown corporations in Saskatchewan continue to play a unique 

role in what they give back to our province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Minister Responsible 

for Government Services. 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With 

leave to move a motion recommending the reappointment of 

Gary Dickson as the Information and Privacy Commissioner. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has asked for leave. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the Minister Responsible 

for Government Services. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Reappointment of Information and Privacy Commissioner 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to rise today to recommend the reappointment of Gary 

Dickson as the Information and Privacy Commissioner. 

Approximately five years ago, Mr. Dickson was selected by a 

bipartisan committee and is being recommended again, 

unanimously, by the Board of Internal Economy, which also 

represents members from both sides of the House. 

 

[14:30] 

 

This is an independent office of the legislature, Mr. Speaker, 

and a very important office. In today’s connected world, 

information can be accessed very readily from very many 

sources. Therefore the Information and Privacy Commissioner’s 

role is to ensure that clear rules are in place and that he is very 

vigilant and holds government to be very vigilant to the 

protection of privacy, but also, Mr. Speaker, to allow the public 

to have access to government information without undue 

restrictions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Dickson has done a very good job of walking 

this tight line between freedom and the need for protections. 

Therefore it’s my pleasure to move: 

 

That a humble address be presented to His Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor recommending that the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council reappoint Mr. R. Gary Dickson, Q.C. 

[Queen’s Counsel],of the city of Regina in the province of 

Saskatchewan, as Information and Privacy Commissioner 

pursuant to section 38 of The Freedom of Information and 

Protection of Privacy Act. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Cannington, the Minister 

Responsible for Government Services, has moved: 

 

That a humble address be presented to His Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor recommending that the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council reappoint Mr. R. Gary Dickson, 

Q.C., of the city of Regina in the province of 

Saskatchewan, as Information and Privacy Commissioner 

pursuant to section 38 of The Freedom of Information and 

Protection of Privacy Act. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order for 

the Standing Committee on Human Services and 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice can conduct their work, I 

move this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — Before I place the question, I would just like 

to invite members to join the Privacy Commissioner, Mr. 

Dickson, and his staff in my office for tea following the 

adjournment of the Assembly. 

 

The minister has moved that this House do now adjourn to 

facilitate the work of committees. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. This Assembly stands 

adjourned until tomorrow afternoon at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 14:33.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2589 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2589 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2589 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2589 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2589 

  LeClerc .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2589 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2590 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2590 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2590 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2590 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2590 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2590 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2591 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Saskatoon Hindu Society Banquet 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2591 

 Regina Multicultural Council Public Speaking Contest 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2591 

 Intercultural Association Graduation Ceremony 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2591 

 Saskatchewan 4-H Recognition Banquet 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2592 

 Accelerated Readers Program in Moose Jaw School 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2592 

 Moose Jaw Little Princess Ball 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2592 

 Man of Influence 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2593 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Future of Prince Albert Pulp Mill 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2593 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2593 

 Employment Trends 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2594 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2594 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2595 

 Uranium Development Partnership Report 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2596 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2596 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 New Funding for Affordable Housing 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2598 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2599 

 One-to-One Laptop Initiative 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2599 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2599 

MOTIONS 

 Reappointment of Information and Privacy Commissioner 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2600 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 


