




















































Hansard: April 07, 2009


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 46A  TUESDAY, APRIL 7, 2009, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2691 

 April 7, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to all members of the 

Assembly, I’d like to introduce representatives of the canola 

industry. Just to start with, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce 

Kelvin Meadows, chairman of the Saskatchewan Canola 

Development Commission; Catherine Folkersen, executive 

director of the Saskatchewan Canola Commission; Dave 

Hickling, vice-president of the canola utilization, Canola 

Council of Canada; and Jim Everson, vice-president of 

corporate affairs, Canola Council of Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we all know, canola is a vital part of our 

agriculture industry in Saskatchewan. Last year alone 

Saskatchewan producers grew about 7.7 million acres of canola 

which generated about $2 billion in farm cash receipts and 5 

billion in overall economic activity in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my colleagues and I will be joining and meeting 

with them later on at a reception. And I would ask all members 

to welcome them here to their legislature today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On 

behalf of the official opposition, I too want to welcome 

members of the Canola Commission to our legislature this 

afternoon. I know that all members are looking forward to the 

reception between 5 and 7 this evening.  

 

I will note, Mr. Speaker, that I think that they were quite 

ingenious in terms of how they got us to that reception with a 

little kit of crushing canola. We want to thank them for that. 

The more that we can raise the profile of canola in our province 

and in our country, we certainly will add to the advancement of 

this particular agri-food industry. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure for me to introduce to you and through you to all 

members of this Assembly, a special guest who’s joined us in 

your gallery today. The consul general for India, Mr. Ashok 

Das, is with us today in the province of Saskatchewan meeting 

with officials, elected and otherwise, in our province. And we 

want to welcome him here to this Legislative Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s important to note that India is now the second 

largest customer for Saskatchewan exports in terms of the 

global economy — $1.114 billion worth of exports to India last 

year, Mr. Speaker. And you will know that our government is 

very interested in further diversifying our export interests. And 

frankly, we’re very interested in developing an even stronger 

relationship with India, with its entrepreneurs and companies, 

and linking them to our own businesses and companies here in 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

So I get to meet with the consul general later this afternoon, and 

we’ll be talking about these and other matters. In the meantime, 

I want to ask all members to help me welcome him to this 

Legislative Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join with 

the Premier in welcoming the consul general to the legislature 

and to Saskatchewan on his first visit. And I wish the Premier 

and he well, and all that you will meet with, to foster and build 

that relationship which is so important between our province 

and India, not only in the trading aspect of our relationship but 

in the human aspect. We have a large and growing 

Indo-Canadian community in Saskatchewan — which I’m sure, 

sir, that you will encounter while you’re here — contributing a 

great deal to the culture of our province, both economically and 

culturally. And on behalf of the official opposition, I’d want to 

extend our deep welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, c’est mon plaisir de vous présenter 

65 étudiants de l’École St. Mary à la circonscription électorale 

Regina Walsh Acres. Les enseignants avec les étudiants sont 

Mme. Carrie Vany — merci beaucoup — Mme. Erin Dubord, 

M. Frank Gelinas, et le directeur-adjoint, M. Paul Tourigny. Ce 

matin les élèves ont eu la chance de visiter le palais législative. 

Ensuite ils ont fait une tournée autour du lac Wascana pour finir 

un projet. Ça me fait grand plaisir d’acceuillir ces élèves et leurs 

enseignants ici cet après-midi pour observer notre procès 

législative. J’invite mes collègues de leur souhaiter la bienvenue 

et on leur envoie nos meilleurs voeux pour leur succès à l’école. 

Merci beaucoup. 

 

[Translation: Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce to you 

65 students from École St. Mary in the Walsh Acres 

constituency. The teachers with the students are Mrs. Carrie 

Vany — thank you very much — Mrs. Erin Dubord, Mr. Frank 

Gelinas, and the vice-principal, Mr. Paul Tourigny. This 

morning the students had the chance to tour the Legislative 

Building. Then they walked around Wascana Lake to finish a 

project. It gives me great pleasure to welcome these students 

and their teachers here this afternoon to observe our legislative 

process. I ask all members to welcome them, and we wish you 

every success at school. Thank you very much.] 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



2692 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2009 

Hon. Mr. Toth: — Members, I would also like to inform you 

of a group that are visiting the Chamber — actually the second 

time — a group of students from Cowessess Community 

Educational Centre. We have five students from 7 and 8. 

They’re accompanied by their teachers, Ann Dusterbeck and 

Warren Daniels. They have come back to the Assembly just to 

spend a bit more time to observe the proceedings, not just 

question period but the transition to the business section as well. 

So I invite members to join with me in welcoming these 

students to the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s well known that inadequate access to quality and 

affordable child care is a major roadblock for parents who want 

to access the labour market or further their own education and 

that too many Saskatchewan families are struggling or unable to 

find quality child care for their children, and this truly limits 

their future. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government through consultation with the child care 

community to immediately invest in growing the capacity 

of the early child care community to enable new child care 

spaces. This investment must include infrastructure 

funding for new facilities and expansion, funding to 

significantly increase the number of early childhood 

diploma and certificate training seats, and funding to 

ensure that the sector is able to increase its wages and 

benefits to attract and retain the needed personnel. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

On behalf of Saskatchewan families, Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I stand and present a petition 

in support of the indexing minimum wage. Increases to 

minimum wage help low-income individuals and families 

improve their standard of living and build a better future, Mr. 

Speaker. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to indexing Saskatchewan 

minimum wage to ensure that the standard of living of 

minimum wage earners is maintained in the face of the 

cost of living increases. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petition is signed by residents of Regina. I so submit. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for wage equity for CBO 

[community-based organization] workers. And we know that 

many of these workers in community-based organizations in 

Saskatchewan have traditionally been underpaid and many 

continue to earn poverty level wages. I would like to read the 

prayer. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the development and 

implementation of a multi-year funding plan to ensure that 

CBO workers achieve wage equity with employees who 

perform work of equal value in government departments. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And these petitioners come from Moosomin, Maryfield, 

Whitewood, Rocanville, Kennedy, Langenburg, Weyburn, 

Carlyle, and Regina. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 

present a petition on behalf of rural residents of Saskatchewan 

who question why the Sask Party government is leaving them 

behind when it comes to providing safe and affordable water. 

Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to financially assist the town of Duck Lake 

residents for the good of their health and safety due to the 

exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency, and that this government fulfills its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I so present, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased 

to rise today to present a petition in support of a new 

Saskatchewan Hospital. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners note that 

Prairie North Regional Health Authority has indicated the 

construction of a new Saskatchewan Hospital is a priority and has 

committed resources to develop preliminary facility and site plans. 

Mr. Speaker, the petitioners ask: 

 

. . . the Legislative Assembly to call upon the government of 

Saskatchewan to immediately recommit funds and resources 

for the continued development and construction of a new 

Saskatchewan Hospital at North Battleford and provide the 

Prairie North Regional Health Authority with the authority 



April 7, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2693 

necessary to complete this essential and much-needed 

project. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petitioners all come from The Battlefords and 

area. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand to present a 

petition in support of expansion of the graduate retention program 

to ensure fairness for all post-secondary students here in the 

province. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately expand the graduate retention 

program to include master’s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are 

students from the University of Regina as well as the University 

of Saskatchewan. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

in support of a long-term care facility in La Ronge. The prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately invest in the planning and 

construction of long-term care beds in La Ronge. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by the good people of La 

Ronge, Stanley Mission, and area. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from P.A. [Prince 

Albert] Carlton. 

 

Prince Albert Parkland Health Region Volunteer 

Recognition Event 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night I had 

the honour of attending the Prince Albert Parkland Health 

Region’s greatest natural resource volunteers recognition event 

with my colleague, Health minister, Don McMorris. 

 

The Prince Albert Parkland Health Region has 3,500 volunteers 

and over 48,000 hours of time volunteered yearly. The region is 

the third largest of the province’s health regions, and also 

provides a range of specialty services in neighbouring regions. 

 

Last night 218 volunteers were recognized; some with 5-, 10-, 

15-, 20-, and 25-year awards, and even a few with 30- and 

35-year awards. These individuals give of their time selflessly 

year after year, and I was pleased to be in attendance for their 

recognition. Without these volunteers, the city of Prince Albert 

and its health region would not be where they are today. 

 

There were also volunteer groups recognized with the Royal 

Canadian Legion Ladies Auxiliary Branch No. 122 receiving an 

award for 55 years of volunteering with the health region. One 

particular individual caught my attention and touched my heart. 

Alexis Chamberlain received her five-year volunteerism award, 

and she is only nine years old. With children like Alexis 

contributing to our province, the future is truly bright. 

 

So today, Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join with me in 

thanking the 218 volunteers that were recognized last night in 

Prince Albert, and the thousands more that give of their time in 

our great province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

World Health Day 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When diplomats from 

around the globe came together to form the United Nations in 

1945, one of the items they discussed was starting up a global 

health organization. This came to be known as the World 

Health Organization or WHO. The WHO’s constitution came 

into force on April 7, 1948. Each year, countries around the 

world celebrate April 7 as World Health Day. 

 

Each year, World Health Day picks a specific health theme to 

highlight a priority area of concern for the WHO. Over the past 

61 years, World Health Day has brought to light numerous 

health issues. Previous World Health Day themes have 

included: protecting health from the adverse effects of climate 

change, make every mother and child count, safe motherhood, 

active aging makes a difference, and mental health. 

 

World Health Day 2009 focuses on the safety of health facilities 

and the readiness of health workers who treat those affected by 

emergencies. The WHO recognizes this as an important theme 

due to the changing nature of the world’s climate and the 

increasing number of incidences of natural disasters that have 

arisen over the past few years. And most recently, we’ve seen 

the earthquake in Italy. The WHO points out that 11,000 

medical institutions were damaged in China’s Wenchuan 

earthquake in May 2008, forcing tens of thousands of people to 

seek treatment elsewhere. 

 

World Health Day is marked by activities that extend around 

the globe and beyond the day itself. Events this year will 

advocate for safe facility design and construction, to build 

awareness and momentum for widespread emergency 

preparedness, and acknowledge countries around the world that 

are working to keep hospitals safe and to improve preparedness 

in order to protect lives. This day serves as an important 



2694 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2009 

opportunity to focus on worldwide awareness of these global 

health priorities. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Paragon Awards 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

on April 2, the annual Paragon Business Excellence Awards, 

sponsored by the Regina & District Chamber of Commerce 

were held at the Queensbury Convention Centre in Regina. The 

Paragon Awards represent the recognition of the chamber of 

commerce for its members of the business community that have 

demonstrated exceptional performance in a number of specific 

areas. 

 

The categories and their award recipients for this year are 

business of the year, Viterra; export achievement, Viterra; 

young entrepreneur, Barry Chamryk of Wee-Haul Delivery; 

community involvement, Group Medical Services; community 

alliance, Z99 Adopt a Family; marketing and promotional 

achievement, 1-800-Got-Junk?; customer service, 

1-800-Got-Junk?; new business ventures, Imagination Ink; 

diversity, Partners in Employment; environmental excellence, 

La Bodega. 

 

Congratulations to all the businesses for their hard work, their 

innovation which has won them the praise of their peers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to also take this opportunity to offer a 

special congratulations to Bill Thorn, the Regina franchise 

owner of 1-800-Got-Junk? He’s a resident of my constituency 

of Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. Congratulations to all of the 

winners. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Moose Jaw Artist Exhibits Work  

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to rise 

today to speak about one of Moose Jaw’s great artists, Gus 

Froese. Mr. Froese has painted more than 100 murals across 

Canada and around the world, and now he has a collection of 

works on display at the Moose Jaw Cultural Centre, 

representing 50 years of painting and sketching. Many of the 

pieces were inspired by the artist’s life experiences but, Mr. 

Speaker, my favourites are the ones that depict the history of 

our community and our province. 

 

Mr. Froese said, “It was like writing my memoirs,” when 

assembling the pieces for the show. The earliest piece for 

display dates back to 1958 and the latest, from 2008, labelled a 

retrospective of his work. Many of the paintings are landscapes, 

but there are some portraits as well. The Saskatchewan 

Dragoons commissioned Froese to paint two portraits of Prince 

Edward who is the honorary commander of the military reserve 

unit based in Moose Jaw. One of the portraits was taken to 

Buckingham Palace and presented to Prince Edward. 

 

While Gus made time for art during his many years as a teacher, 

it took 23 years before he was able to live his life as a full-time 

artist. Mr. Froese has given many weekend art instructions and 

workshops over the years and contributed greatly to our 

community. Mr. Speaker, I ask that the members join me in 

congratulating Gus Froese on his exemplary work. Over the 

years he has found satisfaction in sharing his love of art, and I 

thank him. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Batoche. 

 

Wakaw Couple Donates Ambulance to Congo 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased today to 

pay tribute to two very special constituents of mine. Fernand 

van Hulle and Chantal Nkandu of Wakaw are to be applauded 

for donating a 1994 Hummer to be used as an ambulance in an 

isolated area of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. 

 

Chantal, who was born and raised in the Congo, moved to 

Belgium to attend university. It was there that she met Fernand 

and they eventually married. Since 2004, Chantal has been 

raising money to send to the Congo through the Aid to the 

Development of Ntondo organization. Ntondo is the largest 

centre in this area and serves a dozen villages spread over a 

large distance and has the only hospital in this sprawling jungle. 

The Hummer will be stationed here at the same location where 

Chantal’s father works as a doctor. 

 

In order to raise enough money for the Hummer, Chantal and 

Fernand sold some of their own farm land. The Hummer was 

then loaded in a container and then started a three-month 

journey to the southern African country. With the vehicle went 

bicycles, mattresses, and hospital linens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish to express my sincere thanks to this kind of 

generous and thoughtful Wakaw family who are practising the 

true Saskatchewan spirit of goodwill toward those less 

fortunate. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Profile of a Hockey Player 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to profile a 

hockey player and a great Canadian, Mr. Trent Campbell of 

English River First Nation or Patuanak. Trent is currently 

playing in the American Hockey League with Worcester, which 

is a San Jose affiliate. 

 

And Trent began his career when his brother, TK, encouraged 

him to play hockey, and his parents drove him two days a week 

from Beauval to Meadow Lake for the minor hockey 

experience. From there he went on to play with the Eagles and 

then moved on to the La Ronge Ice Wolves, where Trent came 



April 7, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2695 

third in scoring in his last year in La Ronge. Trent then played 

for four years at Lake Superior State University in Michigan, 

where he received a degree in business management. 

 

Trent then took a short hockey stint in France and returned to 

the East Coast South Carolina Stingrays in 2007-08. He also 

played 17 games with Portland and finally settled with 

Worcester of the AHL [American Hockey League]. 

 

There’s no question that we’re all very proud very proud of 

Trent and want to tell him that all of our prayers for him shall 

be the wind beneath his wings. His proud father once told Trent, 

there’s a boss in every stage of life, whether it’s a teacher, an 

employer, or a coach. Once you realize that, you’ll be fine. That 

advice has helped Trent with his attitude, his perseverance, and 

work ethic. 

 

Today he’s a role model in Patuanak, being a community 

known for hockey legends such as Abe Apesis, Ovide 

McIntyre, Vincent Gunn, and many others. We can now add a 

younger hero in Trent Campbell to that impressive list of 

hockey players. 

 

There are five special people that cheer a bit more. And these 

include three siblings, brothers TK, Tal, and sister Tenille, and 

two of the proudest parents that I have ever met — Isidore and 

Ornella Campbell. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Saskatchewan Internet Child Exploitation Unit 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am proud to rise 

today to recognize the incredible work of the Saskatchewan 

Internet child exploitation team also known as the ICE [Internet 

child exploitation] unit. The ICE unit is an essential component 

used in fighting sexual exploitation on the Internet. In the 

2008-09 budget, this government fully staffed and integrated a 

13-member ICE team. This team includes municipal as well as 

RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] officers located in 

Regina, Saskatoon, and Prince Albert. 

 

Police investigators from the ICE unit receive specialized 

training for this very demanding job. Mr. Speaker, in excess of 

20,000 pornographic images of children are posted on the 

Internet each week. What is also frightening is that Internet chat 

rooms can lead to child luring. We need only remember the 

recent case from Swift Current. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last week the results of the ICE unit’s work is 

evident. Project Salvo, the largest coordinated investigation into 

Internet child abuse in Canada, resulted in over 100 criminal 

charges nationwide. Saskatchewan’s ICE unit arrested and 

charged two men in Saskatoon, two in Regina, and one in 

Estevan. ICE coordinator Sergeant Pat Nogier said, it’s the 

integration and dedication that makes this unit successful. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask this House to join with me in thanking the 

ICE unit for their tireless commitment to the safety and 

protection of Saskatchewan’s most trusting, innocent, and 

loving citizens — our children. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Choice of Vehicles 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. A year 

ago exactly today, the Minister for Crown Corporations 

announced SGI’s [Saskatchewan Government Insurance] 20 per 

cent green rebate program. At the time he described the green 

rebate, and I quote, “. . . a great incentive for Saskatchewan 

people to choose environmentally responsible vehicles and help 

create a cleaner, healthier environment, which benefits 

everyone in our province.” 

 

To the minister: does he still believe that Saskatchewan people 

should choose environmentally responsible vehicles in order to 

reduce greenhouse gas emissions? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. Yes indeed, that was a promise made during the 

election campaign, and it was a promise kept by the 

Saskatchewan Party government. I understand about 3,450 

people in Saskatchewan take advantage of that rebate and we 

hope that more continue to do so. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — So there you have it, Mr. Speaker. The Sask 

Party encourages Saskatchewan people to drive 

environmentally responsible vehicles, but not Sask Party 

cabinet ministers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that this issue received a lot of attention 

when it was raised last fall. To the minister: how many Sask 

Party cabinet ministers have turned in their keys to their Jeep 

Libertys? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services. 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’m more than pleased to answer this question. Mr. 

Speaker, we did promise to have the most fuel-efficient vehicles 

available for Government Services. And we have carried 

through with that promise, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member asked a question about the vehicles 



2696 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2009 

that are driven by cabinet. Mr. Speaker, the first one to receive 

one of these vehicles, a Jeep Liberty, was the Leader of the 

Official Opposition. Mr. Speaker, he drove that vehicle for 

about four months throughout the summer months before he 

finally returned it to CVA [central vehicle agency] sometime in 

September, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, cabinet members continue to drive those vehicles 

because they are in the top 20 per cent, Mr. Speaker, of fuel 

efficiency for vehicle in their class. Mr. Speaker, the members 

opposite, the members opposite disagree with that. Perhaps they 

can explain the four-wheel-drive trucks they drive, the 

Suburbans they drive for two blocks to come to the legislature. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Sask Party ministers continue to drive these 

Jeep Libertys, but we know the Crown Corporations minister 

drives a Jeep Grand Cherokee Hemi. A Hemi is a muscle car 

which auto reviews online criticize for its gas-guzzling nature. 

It’s a gas guzzler, not a sipper. 

 

Now meanwhile, the government central vehicle agency has 

purchased a number of new and greener vehicles, hybrids and 

the Smart cars, for public servants to use when conducting 

government business. 

 

Now last fall, the Sask Party Government Services minister 

explained that Sask Party cabinet ministers do a lot of travelling 

and that’s why they needed their Jeep Libertys. So to the 

minister: why are the government’s new hybrids and Smart cars 

safe enough for Saskatchewan’s public service but not good 

enough for Sask Party ministers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services. 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, Government Services did an experiment with hybrids, 

Mr. Speaker, and fact is the former premier, the Leader of the 

Official Opposition, had a hybrid and turned it back in for a 

Jeep Liberty, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, we have done a 

pilot project with the Ford hybrids, Mr. Speaker. It turned out 

they were much less efficient than the Libertys were, Mr. 

Speaker. It took more fuel to drive those vehicles up and down 

the highway, and besides that, Mr. Speaker, they cost 50 per 

cent more money to buy initially. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, last fall when that 

minister was asked why they drive Jeep Libertys, he defended 

the decision by saying, we didn’t buy Hummers and we didn’t 

buy Escalades. Now the Sask Party is so out of touch they want 

us to be grateful that their vehicles aren’t even bigger gas 

guzzlers and more extravagant. To the minister: why does there 

seem to be one standard for Sask Party ministers and insiders, 

and quite another for Saskatchewan families struggling to keep 

pace with the rising cost of utilities and auto insurance? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services. 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, as I mentioned earlier, we did a pilot project with the 

Ford hybrids which turned out to be more expensive to operate, 

Mr. Speaker, than the Jeep Libertys. 

 

In the city we continue to provide those particular vehicles 

because they’re not on the highway, Mr. Speaker. They’re 

efficient around town, but they don’t do the job on the 

highways, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As well as the pilot project, we found out that the hybrids don’t 

work well in cold weather. They don’t start properly. They 

don’t heat up in the middle of the wintertime at 40 below. And 

while the members opposite have talked in the past about global 

warming, this past winter seemed to indicate the global 

warming wasn’t a problem in Saskatchewan this past winter, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the Jeep Libertys that we are using are in the 

top 20 per cent of fuel efficiency for vehicles in their class, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Consultation and Study on Energy Sources 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Saskatchewan Party 

said that 14 days of debate on the nuclear issue is enough. But 

150 people at a rally on the steps of Prince Albert city hall last 

night don’t agree. 

 

Janis McKnight opened last night’s rally by telling the crowd, 

“I’m not an anti-nuclear activist. I’m just a concerned citizen 

that wants to get my voice heard.” She closed with a simple but 

powerful message saying, “All we are asking for here is 

transparency.” 

 

Meanwhile an editorial in yesterday’s P.A. Herald questioned 

the makeup of the UDP [Uranium Development Partnership], 

saying, “But given that the panel included several noted 

pro-nuclear members, how much merit does that report have?” 

 

To the Premier: why isn’t he listening to people like Janis 

McKnight and to major media outlets that are telling him we 

need more time to consider the province’s energy future? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:00] 

 



April 7, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2697 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I 

thank the member for that question as well. Mr. Speaker, it’s 

certainly not accurate to say that two weeks is what’s been 

allotted for public consultations. The public consultation 

process started last Friday, April 3, and will conclude on June 

15, Mr. Speaker. That’s two and a half months the way I 

calculate it. 

 

During that time there will be nine public consultation meetings 

held around the province. There will also be three days of 

stakeholders consultation meetings — one dedicated to First 

Nations and Métis people around the province, Mr. Speaker. 

And in the meantime, any citizen of this province can respond 

by letter or by email to the Government of Saskatchewan with 

their views on the subject, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Thank you very much for the question, member, but I hope that 

members will stick to the facts in the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Well the facts are that people feel that they 

haven’t been consulted, and they’re not going to be consulted 

appropriately by the government. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan 

people are saying that they need time to compare costs, 

benefits, and environmental impacts of nuclear with other 

energy sources, but they’ve not been given the appropriate time. 

 

Métis Nation president Robert Doucette noted yesterday that 

only one day has been scheduled for Métis consultation on the 

future of uranium. Given the impact of uranium and nuclear 

development on their traditional territory, that is clearly 

inadequate. But the Sask Party has taken a position that two 

weeks is enough for everyone, and a single day is enough for 

the Métis Nation. 

 

To the minister: why are Métis people being excluded from a 

decision so critical to their future as a people? Why is the Sask 

Party refusing to take time to do a proper consultation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I 

thank the member for that question as well. But my math must 

be getting worse, Mr. Speaker. It appears that the two and a half 

months between April 3 and June 15 has now shrunk to one 

day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Métis people are well distributed around this 

province, and they will have every single opportunity that any 

other individual in the province will have for two and a half 

months to respond to the UDP report. As well, Mr. Speaker, 

there will be one day dedicated solely to First Nations and 

Métis people on top of that, Mr. Speaker — one day more than 

the whole rest of the population of this province. I think that 

ought to do it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Well when it comes to what ought to do it, I’ll 

take the word of Robert Doucette over that minister any day of 

the week. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, the duty to consult and 

accommodate the interests of First Nations and Métis people is 

a provincial government responsibility. It’s not a responsibility 

of the private sector or anyone else. 

 

Yesterday MNS [Métis Nation of Saskatchewan] president, 

Robert Doucette, told the CBC [Canadian Broadcasting 

Corporation], and I quote: “You can talk all you want but you 

have to accommodate the interests of Métis people and that’s 

the thing I don’t see or hear from the province right now.” 

Additionally, FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 

Nations] Vice-chief Robert Wapass said that First Nations 

should also be part of the decision-making table. 

 

Mr. Speaker, like all Saskatchewan people, First Nations and 

Métis people want input on the province’s energy future. To the 

minister: how does the Sask Party plan to fulfill its duty to 

consult and accommodate the interests of Métis and First 

Nations people in this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for First 

Nations and Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, to the member opposite. I 

think it’s just a little hypocritical of anybody on that side of the 

House to talk about a consultation policy with First Nations and 

Métis people when they drew up a whole policy overnight 

without talking to them even once, without any consultation 

with First Nations and Métis people. 

 

My colleague has indicated that the Métis people and First 

Nations people will have an opportunity at nine separate 

meetings. Three of them are in the North. They’ll have a 

separate day for discussions as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve had an opportunity to speak to some of the 

chiefs who are saying that they are thinking about nuclear. They 

will continue to be in talks with people like Bruce Power. 

They’re interested in the future of a nuclear industry in this 

province, and are interested in getting ahead. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday 



2698 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2009 

on CBC, a call-in show, when the Minister of Enterprise and 

Innovation was asked if this government would provide funding 

to study sustainable energy sources, the minister said, and I 

quote, “We, the Sask Party, have already at this point 

committed a billion dollars to study clean coal technology.” 

 

Is the minister referring to the clean coal project in Estevan, and 

if so, when did the government’s share of this project increase 

from 760 million to $1 billion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, and I appreciate the 

question from that member, Mr. Speaker. Certainly we’re 

talking about the Estevan clean coal project, the one that the 

NDP backed out of, and yes, the cost will be about $1 billion. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

assuming this means the budget will now be amended to 

include the new number that the minister has given us. 

 

At the same time, Mr. Speaker, the minister earlier asked us to 

pay attention to his math, Mr. Speaker. Well let’s pay attention 

to the math. 

 

Yesterday, during the same call-in show, the minister said, 

“We, the Sask Party, spent hundreds of millions of dollars on 

wind technology and wind power generation.” Mr. Speaker, the 

NDP [New Democratic Party] built every megawatt of wind 

power in this province. The NDP built enough wind power 

capacity to service 73,000 homes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that the Sask Party likes to take credit for 

the NDP’s work so my question to the minister is: what has this 

government done on its own to the tune of hundreds of millions 

of dollars to explore wind technology and wind power 

generation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 

member for that question as well. He seems to be fixated on 

what the NDP did. And I was referring as well to what the 

province has done, Mr. Speaker, not necessarily what the 

Saskatchewan Party government has done. And I didn’t say the 

Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker. And if that member checks 

his facts, he’ll find out that that’s correct. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Call-in shows and 

blogs, as well as emails and letters that are being sent to the 

government and opposition offices, are calling on this 

government to ensure that an objective and unbiased discussion 

on nuclear power and alternative options takes place. There is 

considerable concern among Saskatchewan people that this 

government is not providing all the information needed for 

informed discussions to occur. In fact, Mr. Speaker, even the 

Prince Albert Herald said yesterday, and I quote: “The 

provincial government hasn’t done much to spawn productive 

discussion . . .” 

 

To the minister: will this government listen to Saskatchewan 

people and commit today to spending $3 million — the same 

amount they spent to get the UDP report in place — to study 

other sources of energy such as wind, hydro, geothermal, or 

solar energy? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, this government has 

embarked upon the most comprehensive public consultation 

process ever in the history of the province on this — or frankly 

any other issue — but certainly on this issue, Mr. Speaker. And 

you know, the people of Saskatchewan have been engaged in 

this debate for many years — even decades. Those members 

may have missed it, Mr. Speaker, because their heads have been 

buried in the sand, but certainly the debate has raged on without 

them. 

 

Here’s what Dwain Lingenfelter had to say about it. Here’s 

what he had to say about the length of consultations. He said: 

 

If you believe, as I do, that nuclear power production can 

be a powerful economic engine for Saskatchewan, how do 

we make it happen? We can start by ensuring that a 

healthy and vigorous debate occurs in the coming weeks. 

 

Not years, but weeks. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

Premier said yesterday that the nuclear discussions will be 

difficult because things are always evolving. Mr. Speaker, the 

Premier also said he thought Saskatchewan people should 

inform themselves, do their own darn research, Mr. Speaker, 

and come to the public consultations with more knowledge of 

the issues being discussed. 

 

To the minister: taking the Premier’s comments into 

consideration, will this government delay the consultation 

process until more information is brought forward by this 

government concerning the issue of nuclear power compared to 

wind, solar, or any other potential energy source? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 



April 7, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2699 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 

member for that question as well, although it appears that his 

head is not wholly out of the sand as yet. 

 

Mr. Speaker, over the last number of months, the Uranium 

Development Partnership has been engaged in exactly that 

process. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m proud of the report that they’ve 

provided to the people of this province. It’s been available on 

the website since last Friday, Mr. Speaker, and will continue to 

be so. And people have had an opportunity since then, and will 

be able until June 15, Mr. Speaker, to make their submissions as 

to how they feel about the issue. And, Mr. Speaker, there will 

be plenty of opportunity for comparison of the costs and 

benefits of all methods of generating power in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Development and Export of Electrical Power 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Enterprise 

indicates that he would like some facts brought into the debate. 

Perhaps he can bring some facts into the debate. The UDP that 

we’ve all read, the panel report, indicates that for a reactor or 

reactors to be feasible in our province, a significant component 

of the electricity generated must be exported. Initially, at least 

50 per cent and more must have an export market. 

 

Now I believe we’re all aware that Manitoba has existing and 

potential hydro resources. We’re aware that Alberta is 

considering, actively considering, as is the Sask Party, the 

construction of nuclear reactors in Alberta. Will the minister 

inform the House today where he anticipates this significant 

export market will be? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I think it is fair to say that the 

case for nuclear power in terms of conventional, available 

technology today in our province is dependent on export. The 

minister has indicated that. The Minister of SaskPower has 

indicated that. I think that’s pretty clear. 

 

One of the obvious customers would be the province of Alberta, 

should this be. It’s a hypothetical discussion we’re having, but 

one of the customers for Saskatchewan power, whatever its 

source, would be the province of Alberta. Another potential 

customer would be the United States of America. Mr. Speaker, 

you will know that under the previous administration the 

province of Saskatchewan engaged with Manitoba and Alberta 

in looking at a transmission grid that we can co-operate on and 

build together, ostensibly for the purposes of export and better 

transmission within our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re not going to make any decisions with 

respect to new energy sources for the province without ensuring 

that that energy is environmentally, sustainably delivered, that it 

is safe, and that it is affordable for Saskatchewan people. And, 

Mr. Speaker, people will be engaged in that very important 

discussion about our energy future. We welcome members of 

the opposition to join in that discussion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier indicated in his 

response to my question to the Minister of Enterprise that the 

export potentials that they’re aware of are “hypothetical.” Well 

it is not typically advisable in my view, Mr. Speaker, to invest 

in a project or to invest in a company who have hypothetical 

customers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is a very key issue here about the feasibility 

of a reactor in Saskatchewan. It is dependent — according to 

Bruce Power, according to the UDP, and according to this 

government — it is dependent on having export customers, 

export realities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

For these public hearings that the government is providing, will 

there be available to the people of Saskatchewan a more 

definitive answer on who it is that we expect, or who it is that 

we’ve contracted with, to buy the power from the nuclear 

reactor? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the reason that obviously final 

decisions on new energy sources have not yet been made, Mr. 

Speaker, whether it’s nuclear or anything else, is captured in the 

preamble of the hon. member’s question. No final decisions 

have been made, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Obviously there’s a process through consultation as a result of 

UDP. There will be possibly another process should the Bruce 

Power report back that there is ongoing feasibility. So what we 

have in the province today can be reflected in the following 

words: “Ongoing assessments of the potential for a nuclear 

reactor to supply Saskatchewan’s domestic requirements or for 

export are regularly carried out by SaskPower.” 

 

These are not the words of the Saskatchewan Party government. 

These were the words of the previous government. That is 

exactly what’s happening today. And, Mr. Speaker, when will 

members on that side, when will the Leader of the Opposition 

stand up and acknowledge that what is happening today is 

precisely what they were prepared to say in small print in their 

documents, if not talk about at their political conventions, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday in the rotunda of this 

legislature, in the presence of journalists, the Premier indicated 

that this decision must be made soon. It must be made soon. 

Hence this rush to have this consultation process, hence this 

truncated ability for people to participate in the process. 



2700 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2009 

If the decision is now on a rush mode, before that decision is 

made and before the people of Saskatchewan can voice an 

intelligent opinion on the decision, we need to know — 

according to Bruce Power, according to the panel — we need to 

know the reality or the unreality of the export potential. Surely, 

surely this government, having advanced the theory this far, 

having advanced this project this far, have some substantive 

views on what is the real export potential. 

 

I challenge the minister or the Premier to give us something 

more than a hypothetical example of where, maybe, we might 

sell the power from a machine that the people of Saskatchewan 

are going to pay for. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, when that member sat in this 

chair, presiding over the government as the Premier, he said 

that his government would be engaged in ongoing assessments 

of the potential for a nuclear reactor to supply Saskatchewan’s 

domestic requirements or for export. They are being regularly 

carried out by SaskPower. Mr. Speaker, not a single day, not a 

moment, not a website, not a phone line of consultation 

precipitated that claim by that member in that government, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The difference on this side of the House is this: we’ve been 

pretty clear that our vision for this growing economy is that 

we’re going to need more power from all the sources. Our 

vision’s pretty clear that we want to add value to uranium. 

We’ve been transparent about that, Mr. Speaker, but more to the 

point, unlike anything we saw from members opposite when 

they were the government, we will engage the people of this 

province. We will take this discussion to them in their 

communities right across the province. We’ll take it to the 

stakeholders. 

 

And the NDP need to drag themselves out of the past, where 

they refuse even to have the discussion or say anything too 

loudly, and join us in 2009 for the rest of the province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier would be 

well-advised to take that document that he is quoting from and 

implement the entire plan. He would be well-advised. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I ask on behalf of the 

people of Saskatchewan — the taxpayers and the consumers 

who are going to foot the bill for any future power generation in 

our province — the Premier today has said our potential for 

export is hypothetical. He even went so far as to say that there’s 

a hypothetical possibility that we might export into the United 

States of America. 

 

Well then, as they are assembling the facts to share with people 

at this truncated process over two weeks of public meetings, 

will they bring answers to these questions? Precisely, Mr. 

Speaker, how much will the transmission lines cost to establish 

linkages to export into the United States? And who will be 

expected to pay for those transmission line costs? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member raises 

an interesting point. He says, adopt their plan, adopt the NDP 

plan from 2007. Contained in this plan, foundational to this 

plan, are the targets set for emissions reductions by that 

member, the members opposite, adopted, adopted, Mr. Speaker, 

by all members of this Legislative Assembly — all parties. 

 

But we need to have that discussion about those specific targets 

because, Mr. Speaker, that hon. member will know that 

depending on the price of carbon — never mind what we do 

with nuclear power — those targets could cause significant 

increases in electrical bills in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so maybe it is time for this Legislative Assembly, for the 

all-party committee to engage the people of the province. 

Maybe the NDP will in fact join us in the debate on nuclear 

power and on the targets we ought to be setting, our plan for 

reducing greenhouse gas emissions, Mr. Speaker, or maybe, as 

The StarPhoenix said not very long ago, the editorial: 

 

Regardless of where this debate goes — and the smart 

money is on some progress finally coming to a province 

that has been held back for far too long — the NDP has a 

choice. They can either embrace a modern and sensible 

nuclear debate or slide back into earlier generations of 

political ignorance, expediency and Saskatchewan's 

eventual decline. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they do have a choice. I think the people of the 

province have made theirs, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 

 

New Environmental Protection Model  

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today marks 

the introduction of a new model for environmental protection 

for Saskatchewan. It is a model that will deliver enhanced 

environmental protection by focusing on the results that a 

company delivers. 

 

The current system is based on ensuring that developers and 

operators do what we tell them to do, exactly the way we tell 

them to do it. It is prescriptive, time consuming, and frustrating, 

and it does not even guarantee the best possible environmental 

protection because it is essentially a one-size-fits-all model. 

 

Under the new results-based model of environmental 

regulation, we will describe the environmental protection that is 



April 7, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2701 

to be achieved, but we’ll leave the how to those who run the 

plants, factories, and mines. They’ll have the flexibility to 

design effective environmental safeguards that make sense for 

their operation. The government’s job will be to ensure that 

they do what they promised to do. The result, Mr. Speaker, will 

be better environmental protection because the processes and 

tools will be custom-designed for the specific situation. 

 

The results will be more innovation as companies adapt and 

market those processes and tools for use in other situations. The 

results will be a more competitive climate in Saskatchewan as 

we finally move our environmental approvals and processes 

into the 21st century. 

 

The adoption of the new results-based model is based on a great 

deal of preparation. Last year we asked a consultant to provide a 

review of Saskatchewan’s environmental regulation which 

involved reviewing the current regulatory model, including a 

review of the current legislation; benchmarking our regulatory 

framework against the current models in Ontario, Manitoba, 

Alberta, and British Columbia; holding consultation sessions; 

and providing a recommended implementation plan. 

 

We now have the final report, which is available for all to see 

on the Ministry of Environment website. Over the past eight 

months, we have engaged industry, communities, 

non-governmental organizations, and Aboriginal organizations 

in discussions about the need to update and streamline our 

approach. 

 

During the fall and winter of 2008, Ministry of Environment 

staff and the consultants held 18 meetings attended by 74 

stakeholder organizations. We heard an endorsement of the 

move to a results-based model, while always ensuring that 

protection of the environment is our first priority. 

 

We have a clear plan, Mr. Speaker, for implementing 

results-based environmental regulation. That plan is also posted 

on the ministry website. We will begin by streamlining, 

consolidating, and modernizing our environmental legislation, 

starting with The Environmental Assessment Act, The 

Environmental Management and Protection Act, and The 

Forest Resources Management Act. 

 

We will develop a Saskatchewan environmental code that will 

set the framework for improved environmental management 

through clear statements of desired environmental outcomes 

and standards. We will modernize the operations of the 

ministry, providing an electronic platform for environmental 

information and program delivery, including web-based 

environmental applications and reporting. 

 

This will mean a streamlined application process and 

transparency in reporting results, and we will continue to 

engage the public, First Nations and Métis, and stakeholders in 

consultation as the design and implementation of the new 

regulatory framework moves forward. We will be holding a 

second round of consultations on the details of implementation 

of this new regulatory system. We also welcome input from the 

general public as we move forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is a remarkable place and the 

quality of our natural environment is second to none. The new 

results-based environmental regulatory framework is a major 

step forward in modernizing and improving our efforts to 

protect the environment and ensuring Saskatchewan stays a 

remarkable place for future generations. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 

to thank the minister for the advanced copy of the ministerial 

statement. A review is always a good thing, and the proof 

obviously will be in the action and the outcomes of the review, 

and the changes to legislation. 

 

The minister speaks about the fact that the information is 

currently online. And I received the ministerial statement 15 

minutes prior to entering into the House today and it was not 

yet online, so clearly I am looking forward to being able to 

review it again once I leave the Chamber, and perhaps by that 

point it will be online. 

 

I’m certainly looking forward to being able to review the 

legislation. Our province has been a leader in this area, and we 

should obviously continue to do so. Some of the concerns 

obviously would be that we have adequate staff resources and 

supports which need to be in place, prior to any changes being 

made, to ensure that those regulations can be properly enforced, 

and that we also have some concerns with respect to the media 

stories currently with respect to the federal rush to ensure that 

shovel-ready projects can hit the ground running. And there are 

concerns around that with respect to whether or not all the 

environmental concerns will be taken into account. 

 

Clearly the government does not want to hear what I have to 

say on this matter, so I will speak to you, Mr. Speaker, and 

make sure that at least you know what I’d like to convey to the 

residents of Saskatchewan. We look forward to obviously the 

next steps of public engagement and input because clearly this 

is something that is of great importance to the citizens of 

Saskatchewan, the residents of Saskatchewan. The minister and 

I can agree on a point most definitely, and that is that 

Saskatchewan is a remarkable place and the quality of our 

natural environment is second to none and should always be 

second to none. 

 

So I look forward to being able to review what’s going to be 

posted online. Hopefully it’ll be there, like I said, after I leave 

the Chamber, and I look forward to being able to review 

legislation that’s coming forward. 

 

We’ve already heard that there’s apparently been 18 meetings 

that have taken place. I certainly hope that there will be 

considerably more because of the importance of this matter, and 

that the government takes heed on the importance that they’ve 

given this matter, with respect to public consultations and the 

amount of time that they’re giving it, to be able to properly 

consult all the stakeholders when they’re doing their nuclear 

consultations with the residents of Saskatchewan, so they also 

get to have the same length of debate and the same length of 

input, and be allowed to put the same importance on that issue 

that they’re applying to the results-based environmental 



2702 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2009 

regulations. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am instructed by the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

to report Bill No. 69, The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders 

Amendment Act, 2008 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered in 

committee? 

 

I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I request leave to waive consideration in 

Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that the Bill be now 

read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice may proceed to move 

third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 69 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders 

Amendment Act, 2008/Loi de 2008 modifiant la Loi de 1997 

sur l’exécution des ordonnances alimentaires 
 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that this Bill do now be read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

that Bill No. 69, The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders 

Amendment Act, 2008 without amendment be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Committee of 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Standing Committee of Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 

Bill No. 50, The Missing Persons and Presumption of Death 

Act without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that 

the Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may move to proceed with third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 50 — The Missing Persons and 

Presumption of Death Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that this Bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved that Bill 

No. 50, The Missing Persons and Presumption of Death Act 

without amendment be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 



April 7, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2703 

Standing Committee of Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 

Bill No. 70, The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 

2008 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that 

the Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole. Is the 

Assembly agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to third reading. 

 

[14:30] 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 70 — The Summary Offences Procedure 

Amendment Act, 2008 
 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that this Bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

that Bill No. 70, The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment 

Act, 2008 be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answer to questions 329 through 338. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions through 329 through 338 are 

tabled. I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 

allow the work for the standing committees to proceed, I move 

that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that in order to facilitate the work of committees, this House do 

now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. This Assembly stands 

adjourned until tomorrow afternoon at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 14:32 p.m.] 

 



 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2691 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2691 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2691 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2691 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2691 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2692 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2692 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2692 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2692 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2692 

  Taylor ................................................................................................................................................................................................ 2692 

  Broten ................................................................................................................................................................................................ 2693 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2693 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Prince Albert Parkland Health Region Volunteer Recognition Event 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2693 

 World Health Day 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2693 

 Paragon Awards 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2694 

 Moose Jaw Artist Exhibits Work  

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2694 

 Wakaw Couple Donates Ambulance to Congo 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2694 

 Profile of a Hockey Player  

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2694 

 Saskatchewan Internet Child Exploitation Unit 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2695 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Choice of Vehicles 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2695 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2695 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2695 

 Consultation and Study on Energy Sources 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2696 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2697 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2697 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2697 

 Development and Export of Electrical Power 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2699 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2699 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 New Environmental Protection Model  

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2700 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2701 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2702 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 69 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 2008 

 Loi de 2008 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur l’exécution des ordonnances alimentaires 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2702 

 Bill No. 50 — The Missing Persons and Presumption of Death Act 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2702 

 Bill No. 70 — The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2008 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2703 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2703 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 


