




















































Hansard: November 17, 2009


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 15B  TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 17, 2009, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3641 

 November 17, 2009 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 

Plan for Climate Change 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The debate before the House is a 

government motion. I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It 

is a delight to again rejoin the debate on this important 

government motion. I‟d like to take a few minutes if I can to 

recap, to review, because I know people are tuning in now after 

7 o‟clock. They‟re home from work and they want to know 

what‟s been going on in the House today, and so I‟d like to give 

a review of what‟s going on and then introduce some more of 

my points that I‟d like to bring forward in this debate. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we‟re here tonight talking about a 

government motion — the one that the Hon. Minister of 

Environment has put forward — and it‟s a three-paragraph 

motion. I won‟t read it, but I‟ll just summarize it if I may. And I 

know that several people tonight will actually have the 

opportunity to read it, to hear it. 

 

But the first paragraph talks about the Assembly supporting the 

government‟s plan to address climate change — for one, that it 

balances the “environmental protection with economic growth, 

thereby ensuring the well-being and future prosperity of 

Saskatchewan families . . .” 

 

But then they talk about in the next paragraph the Saskatchewan 

plan, that we should support it. It essentially talks about “direct 

offset payments into the Saskatchewan Technology Fund to 

fund research into the development of technology needed to 

help the world reduce and control carbon emission; and 

further,” and this is the crux of the matter in many ways, “That 

this honourable Assembly encourage the government to actively 

promote the Saskatchewan plan at the United Nations COP 15 

Conference in Copenhagen, in December of 2009.” 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I raised a couple of concerns with 

this motion right off the bat. I thought that this was an unusual 

motion because largely it could have been dealt with by the Bill 

or — you know, we‟ll talk a little bit about the plan — but the 

Bill that was introduced last May. I believe it was May 11th. 

Just before we ended the House and we went for summer break, 

it would have been. And then it died on the order papers, didn‟t 

even make it to second reading, unfortunately. Then we could 

have had a very good discussion. It could have been in 

committee, but instead it just died, and we‟re not sure whether 

that Bill will be reintroduced. 

 

We understand, we‟ve heard tonight or this afternoon that the 

intention is to reintroduce it sometime we understand, perhaps 

in the spring. Now we sure hope it‟s not again in May because, 

you know, the current government is halfway through its 

mandate, and if it goes into May, then clearly it may not be 

passed as well. And then we‟re into the last year of the mandate 

of this government, and that‟s really unfortunate because this 

government in its election did talk about a plan, a promise to 

reduce carbon emissions, and by a significant amount. And they 

broke that promise. The minister was clear that they were not 

going to do that, not keep that promise, and they broke it. And 

you know it‟s interesting because I‟ve heard other ministers 

break promises. This government does break promises at a 

fairly frequent rate. 

 

Sometimes they just ignore those promises. I‟m thinking in 

Social Services where we have a promise to recall the all-party 

committee on children who‟ve been exploited through the sex 

trade. It was part of the minister‟s mandate letter. That promise 

has been ignored. They have not even acknowledged the 

promise. And so clearly promises are an issue for this 

government. 

 

So this motion is odd. It should have been a Bill. The Bill 

should have been with us, and we should have been discussing 

it, debating it. But instead tonight we‟re debating a motion, and 

we have no idea what the plan is. There‟s just nothing there. 

 

The other point I wanted to make about the motion though, and 

I talked about it this afternoon, was how . . . I‟m not sure if the 

minister understands the purpose of her trip. I mean, not that I 

know or can tell her what the purpose of her trip is, but when 

you‟re going to a United Nations conference, you usually are 

part of a national team. You don‟t go as a provincial team. 

That‟s unusual. 

 

Now I can remember when we were in Montreal in 2005. 

Because it was in Canada, Saskatchewan did actually send a 

large contingent of people there, but it was in Montreal and 

there were other events at the same time. This is in Europe. This 

is odd. They‟re sending three people. And I‟m not sure whether 

the other two, who are from the department, are the top people 

in the department when it comes to climate change policy. They 

may be. I‟m not sure. I know there are significant people in the 

department who know an awful lot about this topic. I don‟t see 

their names on the list. I see a couple of names that I know their 

expertise is in other areas, but I‟m not sure if this is one of 

them. 

 

But it talks about promoting the Saskatchewan plan. But really 

the work that needs to be done at Copenhagen, and I know the 

hour is getting late for Copenhagen, is the idea is to reach a 

treaty because the Kyoto Protocol expires in 2012. And so this 

is very timely. This is the time. Time is of the essence, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, to get it right. And if we don‟t get it right now, 

then we have a problem. 

 

And I think that this is an odd motion. I mean she does 

recognize, the minister does recognize that there‟s a 

responsibility to the world. And she talks about needing to help 

the world reduce and control carbon emission. And so I suppose 

we should hang our hat on that phrase, but really there‟s much 

more to it than that. We have a moral obligation. 

 

My colleague from Regina Coronation Park talked at length 

about the global commitment we have, a moral commitment to 

our world. And he used the example of young people in Africa. 

I know that he and the member from Saskatoon Eastview had 



3642 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2009 

particular experiences in Africa because they did a 

parliamentary exchange to Africa. And so I think he knows of 

which he speaks. 

 

Myself, I raised the issue of what‟s happening here in Canada 

and in North America and whether it‟s the hurricane disaster 

that happened in New Orleans or whether it‟s what we see 

happening in the Arctic. We heard that today on the news that 

citizens in the Arctic are very concerned about the success of 

what happens in Copenhagen, and so they‟re pinning a lot on 

this. They‟re pinning a lot on Canada to take a leadership role. 

 

And it‟s not just a leadership role as if we want to be leader of 

the world. We want to be leaders with the world. There‟s over 

150, 180 countries being there. We want to work shoulder to 

shoulder with countries across the globe to solve this 

international issue. 

 

And so while we bring a Saskatchewan perspective, and that‟s 

very important because we‟ve done a lot of very, very good 

work here. And the carbon capture, the PTRC [Petroleum 

Technology Research Centre] over at University of Regina is a 

great example of that. We should be talking about that. 

Absolutely we should be talking about that. But we need to 

make sure that we get a treaty, and if not a treaty, a framework 

signed. 

 

And as I said earlier, that this was not a trade show. This is not 

a time to be thinking about new customers. This is a time to be 

thinking about how we‟re going to get it right in this world. 

 

As my colleague from Regina Coronation Park talked about, 

how do we look at our children? How do we look at our 

children‟s children if they know we had an opportunity to get it 

right, if we had the opportunity to get it right but we chose not 

to? 

 

Now we know that quite often the argument comes up about the 

economy versus the environment. And that is absolutely a false 

argument. They go hand in hand together. Absolutely they go 

hand in hand together. You cannot have one without the other. 

If you do not have a healthy environment, you cannot have a 

healthy economy, and vice versa. So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 

is a false argument, and I really think there‟s a problem there. 

 

So I think, like I said, before I go on to my new points for 

tonight, I wanted to make the points that first we have a real 

problem with the government motion. We think there should be 

a Bill. There should be a Bill. 

 

And of course the minister and her staff . . . As I was saying 

earlier, when I was minister of Environment, I actually did 

attend a United Nations framework conference on climate 

change. It was in Montreal in 2005. And I can tell you, it is a 

wonderful thing. It is a, in many ways, life-changing experience 

because you get the chance to spend time with leaders around 

the world. And you come back with a global perspective. But 

you know, when you‟re there you‟re talking about 

Saskatchewan. You‟re talking about things that you know of. 

 

And in Saskatchewan we have a lot to talk about, whether it‟s 

the grasslands sinks, carbon sinks that we have in the prairies or 

the boreal forest. We have a huge . . . well half our province is a 

forest, boreal forest, and that plays a huge role in terms of 

capturing carbon. And so people want to know about our 

experience here. We have some unique experiences that we can 

share with others around the world, and one of those is carbon 

capture. But that‟s not the only one. 

 

Think globally, act locally — huge, huge principle that I hope 

the minister takes with her, and that she actually brings to life in 

the Ministry of Environment. This is very important. 

 

But finally when I review the motion that . . . Where is the 

plan? Where is the plan? They talk about the plan and just want 

us to blindly endorse a plan that there doesn‟t seem to be any 

details. And clearly we need to have those details. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Premier gave quite a talk this 

afternoon about his views around climate change and what 

should be happening. And he raised the TD 

[Toronto-Dominion] report, the one that just came out. And of 

course that was commissioned by the TD group and was 

commissioned and carried out by the Pembina Institute and the 

David Suzuki Foundation. And we actually talked a little bit 

about that before. But I wanted to review this because we talked 

about how closely this government has tied its wagon to the 

federal Conservatives, the Harper plan, and clearly how goes 

the Harper climate change plan, so goes the plan in 

Saskatchewan. And they can‟t be separated, and we see that in 

so many different ways. 

 

And so I just wanted to raise a flag around some of the 

comments that the Premier said because when we have 

conversations and dialogue around this, we need to hear from 

all perspectives, all perspectives. We cannot have this fortress 

Saskatchewan where if the scaremongering around 

Saskatchewan . . . Will it hurt Saskatchewan? Will it hurt 

Saskatchewan? And then right away, up go the walls. 

 

We have to have a good, frank discussion about this. And I 

think this is an important topic to have. I think that when we go 

through, and if we do the right thing about climate change, it is 

going to impact us all. It‟s going to impact us in a positive way. 

 

And there will have to be changes that we make, no doubt about 

it. No doubt about it. But I think that we cannot, we cannot put 

our hands over our ears and say, we do not want to hear this. 

We do not want to hear this. And quite often I see that from the 

government side. They‟ll put their hands over their ears and 

their hat over their eyes and say, we don‟t want to hear any 

more of this because it‟s just going to hurt Saskatchewan. Well 

I don‟t know if it is. We have to have a frank discussion about 

it. And so tonight we have that. 

 

And so I just want to quote from, I believe it was The Globe 

and Mail, a Jeffrey Simpson column from October 29. And the 

headline is, “Once again, pie-in-the-sky promises Ottawa can‟t 

keep.” And I think this is a very good perspective that I think 

it‟s important that we hear. Do we have to agree with it? No. 

We don‟t have to agree with it, but we do have to hear it. We 

have to hear all sorts of voices on this so we can make a 

reasoned decision about how we should proceed. 

 

And so this is what the columnist Jeffrey Simpson said. The 

target, and I quote: 



November 17, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3643 

The target is a 20-per-cent reduction in Canada‟s 

greenhouse . . . emissions from 2006 levels by 2020. 

Forget it. That won‟t and can‟t happen — at least not the 

way the Conservatives are suggesting. 

 

It‟s hard to know whom the Conservatives are fooling 

with this target. Other countries‟ experts know it won‟t be 

achieved with the policies on offer. Canadian experts 

know the number is for headline consumption only. The 

government must know its own policies will fail. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have some questions. These seem to 

be the same numbers this government is using, and they‟re 

asking us on blind faith to adopt this kind of motion without 

details. And yet we read these kinds of articles in the paper, The 

Globe and Mail. And we read them in the Leader-Post, and we 

read them in The StarPhoenix. And we‟re supposed to accept 

that? Just accept that? I find that hard to believe. 

 

And so our job as members of the opposition is to be critical, is 

to ask for transparency, to ask for details. And so that‟s what 

we‟re doing tonight. That‟s what we‟re doing tonight. 

 

[19:15] 

 

Well here I just want to continue on the quote here, because this 

does talk about the study. And I quote: 

 

The study was financed by the Toronto-Dominion Bank, 

framed by the Suzuki Foundation and the Pembina 

Institute, and done by the country‟s leading 

climate-change-simulation company, MJKA of 

Vancouver. 

 

The study shows convincingly that the government‟s 

policies will not work and, as such, confirms previous 

studies done by other organizations. The bank, now 

housing the country‟s leading economic “think tank” (TD 

Economics), doesn‟t endorse the study, but finds its 

analysis and conclusions “robust,” which means highly 

credible. 

 

So they don‟t endorse it. They just think this is very worthwhile 

thinking about because, as they used the word, it‟s robust, 

which means it has an awful lot to offer. 

 

I‟d like to continue, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Put another way, there would be a small overall national 

. . . cost and significant interregional economic flows 

from fossil-fuel-producing Alberta and Saskatchewan to 

other parts of Canada. But, even after those interregional 

flows, Alberta would still experience the country‟s 

strongest economic growth, and Canada‟s overall 

economic growth would remain strong. (The cost of doing 

nothing is considerable, of course, in the long term for 

Alberta, Canada and the world.) 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at that point they‟re not referencing 

Saskatchewan. We can maybe assume that Saskatchewan‟s in 

the same boat as Alberta, that of course it would have an 

impact, but our economic growth would still be strong. But the 

cost of doing nothing is huge, is huge. So have they counted 

that into it as well? 

 

And I‟d like to conclude the quote here from this article and it 

goes: 

 

Once before, Canada went to a climate-change 

conference, at Kyoto, and made promises it could not and 

did not keep. It would appear a repeat performance is in 

the making. Or, to put things differently: new 

government, same script. 

 

So we have, at the federal level, real problems. And so we hope 

this government at the provincial level as part of a federal team 

can say, listen, let‟s get it right. Let‟s get it right. And, you 

know, it‟s interesting. I‟ve heard some people refer on the 

Internet to the Copenhagen conference as the Hopenhagen, that 

there is a lot of hope. People are feeling really positive, and 

people are out there with all sorts of ideas to get the points 

across. 

 

And one — I did a member statement about this a week or two 

ago — 350.org, talking about how different groups across 

thousands of organizations around the world, I think there was 

over 170, 180 countries that had different events symbolizing 

the number 350 where they are trying to get the point across to 

leaders to do something at Copenhagen. So let‟s really try to 

make sure something can happen in Copenhagen. 

 

Now what‟s going to happen at Copenhagen? Of course, this is 

the COP 15, the 15th Conference of the Parties. And of course 

it‟s the highest body of the United Nations Framework on 

Climate Change and consists of environment ministers who 

meet once a year to discuss the convention‟s accomplishments. 

And so this is an important annual gathering. And it‟s good that 

we will have some representation to ensure that our federal 

minister does the work that needs to be done. 

 

The goal of the conference is to create a global agreement to 

address climate change that will include all countries of the 

world. So why is it important? Well over a decade . . . And 

we‟re familiar with this, but just to make sure it gets on the 

record, most countries joined an international treaty, the United 

Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, to begin to 

consider what can be done to reduce global warming and to 

cope with the outcomes. So in 1997, a number of nations 

approved an addition to the treaty, the Kyoto Protocol, which 

has more powerful and legally binding measures. And of course 

we understand that Canada was part of that. 

 

In Bali, 2000, all parties agreed on the Bali Action Plan. And 

with that came the working conditions for negotiations that . . . 

for up to COP 15 in Copenhagen. 

 

Developments in the world since the Kyoto Protocol, which 

was negotiated in ‟97 shows that a new agreement is needed. 

And of course this is very interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

because a couple of things have emerged since in ‟97. It‟s 

amazing when we think of the past 12 years. The world seems 

to continue on. Are things at all very different? Well no, they 

really are different. Of course, we see the price of oil has 

soared. Really soared last year; it‟s come down. 

 

But the other thing that‟s been really noteworthy is the fact that 



3644 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2009 

China now has replaced the USA [United States of America] as 

the largest emitter of greenhouse gases. And of course, we 

know India can‟t be far behind. So the players are changing as 

well 

 

And so it‟s really time to think about, how can we do this? How 

can we make this happen? It‟s a different world since ‟97 and 

Kyoto, so Copenhagen is a significant time. And many accounts 

agree that Copenhagen conference represents more or less the 

last chance, the last best chance to achieve an agreement, and if 

the agreement is to be approved and ratified, for it to come into 

force before the Kyoto Protocol expires in 2012. 

 

Now it has been proven . . . And you know I have to tell you 

that when I was in Montreal in December of 2005, and it was 

quite an event actually, you think you know when you go to 

these conferences what the situation will be like. And every 

morning we would have greetings and messages from the 

different countries from around the world, and how they would 

be responded to. And you know that in the background in the 

different rooms that the different agreements are being 

hammered out. And in fact there was some 40 different 

agreements hammered out in Montreal. And I think to Canada‟s 

credit, that was a very good, very good conference. 

 

And so we have the same circumstance here where we can 

actually move things forward quickly if the governments decide 

that this is the thing to do. It can turn on a dime. The ministers 

of environment will be present and do have the authority to act. 

And so we need to make sure that our minister goes and says to 

the federal minister, make sure your ducks are all in a row 

because we want to see things happen in Copenhagen. We‟re 

not just going for a holiday. We‟re not just going for a trade 

show. We want this to be important. 

 

And I think that this would a huge feather, an impressive 

feather in the cap of all of the Canadian delegation if they go, 

and if they can show and work shoulder to shoulder with people 

right across the world to make sure this happens. So this is 

huge, what could happen in Copenhagen, because if we don‟t 

get it right, then the timeline of 2012 is looming right in front of 

us. And if there‟s not a commitment, not even to get a 

framework, then we have a problem. 

 

But there are problems, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And of course we 

know that Canada did sign on to the Kyoto Protocol, but it‟s 

failed to meet its commitments, and so it‟s rapidly losing 

respect on the international stage. And we know that in many 

ways, but I mean the most significant, the most significant 

event that showed this was apparently at the climate change 

talks in Thailand just last month, in October 2009. Eighty 

countries staged a walkout during Jim Prentice‟s speech. 

 

And Jim Prentice, the Minister of Environment of Canada, must 

have got the message — we expect more. When 80 countries 

walk out, you know, when you‟re at these events, people are 

very polite. They don‟t walk out just for nothing else to do. 

They must have been sending a clear, clear message. And so I 

hope that the Canadian government has heard the message. 

 

It‟s very important that, if we are to show the leadership that 

I‟m thinking that we do have, and people look to us as Canada, 

as a country that typically does have its act together and knows 

what the right things are to do. But Canada‟s reputation in this, 

in the international stage is really slipping. And we see this on 

many fronts, whether it‟s the United Nations work around 

climate change — and even now, when we get close to 

December, and I‟ll be talking about this more — around 

disabilities. 

 

You can name several, you can name several agreements that 

the federal government is walking away from. And that‟s really 

unfortunate because . . . And we know that this provincial 

government can do an awful lot to say to its federal 

counterparts, let‟s get our act together. Let‟s get this thing done, 

and let‟s get it done right because the world is looking to us to 

get it done, to get it done right. So Copenhagen, let‟s make sure 

this happens. 

 

So we understand that it, Copenhagen, there will be well over 

10,000 people. These are huge events, some 189 different 

countries. There will be the government officials who will be 

there. There will be the non-government, the NGOs 

[non-governmental organization] will be there to make sure that 

their voices are heard and that this is not a closed-door event, 

that people will be putting pressure on. And we should expect 

that and welcome that because that‟s how you get these things 

done right. 

 

So what do you think the message will be from Saskatchewan? 

Clearly, if you read the motion, they‟re going to be promoting 

their plan. But we don‟t know what the plan is because it hasn‟t 

been tabled. So where‟s the plan . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

She says you make it up. Are they going to make it up? They‟re 

going to write it up on the plane — the plan on the plane . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . He‟s going to call it in. 

 

Well we know what they‟ve said about the climate change, and 

we know that there‟s some issues. And here it was quite a week. 

In May, this is what the minister said. And I quote: 

 

I said all along that the position of our government is to 

balance the economy with the environment. And we have 

to consider making sure that Saskatchewan, while we 

currently are leading the country, Mr. Speaker, that we 

remain in a good position. And we will make sure that the 

decisions that we make keep Saskatchewan competitive. 

 

Now on one hand, how can you argue with that? Clearly we 

want to be competitive, but the world is much more complex 

than that. Being solely, only thinking about being competitive is 

what got us into this mess. There is some moral obligations 

here. There‟s some environmental obligations. And when you 

have a Minister of Environment talking about being competitive 

as the only benchmark she has, what kind of a minister is that? 

What kind of a minister thinks only of being competitive? I 

have some questions about that. 

 

Now I think it is time. Well we‟ll see. We‟ll see. I am hopeful. I 

am hopeful when she‟s going to Copenhagen, she‟ll come back 

much more with a world view. She will be acting locally, but 

thinking globally. And she will . . . Maybe we will get a Bill, 

after she comes back from Copenhagen, that has decent 

benchmarks. 

 

But then I want to go on and talk about what did the Premier . . . 



November 17, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3645 

I mean we‟ve heard him speak earlier today, and I think this is 

consistent to what he said. This is what he said on May 12. And 

I quote: 

 

. . . we moved away from NDP targets because we want 

to see the economic momentum of the province continue 

because it‟s that economic momentum that will pay for 

these carbon capture initiatives, that will pay for 

initiatives to make sure we are more environmentally 

sustainable in the future. 

 

And clearly again pretty upfront statement. And you can‟t see 

too much wrong with that except that, you know, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, you have to have that moral reasoning before. I mean 

the economic . . . We want to be the momentum that‟s 

happening, but at the same time there has to be an overall 

framework on this moving forward. I mean it‟s sort of like 

you‟re going to work really hard, make lots of money, and then 

you‟re going to make some plans. No, you have to have a vision 

beforehand. We want to know what that vision is beforehand. 

What is the plan? What is the plan? And we just don‟t see it at 

all. And there‟s so many more questions we have about that. 

 

But then they go on and say, well what did we do? What did the 

NDP actually do about this? And, Mr. Speaker, I am really 

happy to talk about some of the things that we did in the last 

little while. And of course they talked about some of the things 

we did under the former leadership of Premier Romanow. And 

he did an excellent job, especially around the carbon capture 

that was really a very important initiative over at the PTRC. 

You know, as a former minister myself, I was quite familiar 

with it. And very important, so I‟m very glad to see that that 

happened. 

 

But what is our record? What have we actually done? What 

have we actually done? Now they talked a lot about things that 

they will do. And now we know that they‟re well into their third 

year. They‟re past the second year mark, well into their third 

year. But we haven‟t really seen a lot of action — a lot of 

words, a lot of words, but not a lot of action. 

 

Well we built enough wind power capacity to provide 

electricity for 73,000 homes. Now they‟re saying they‟re going 

to build more. Well we‟re going to look forward to that, and we 

hope that actually happens. We haven‟t seen it yet, but we hope 

. . . Why did it take two years to get to an announcement? I am 

not sure. And we pioneered carbon capture and storage 

technology. And they acknowledged that, and that was very, 

very important. 

 

[19:30] 

 

But some of the other things we did, promoted energy 

conservation through programs like EnerGuide, which provides 

assistance for Saskatchewan families to retrofit their homes to 

be more energy efficient. And this is such an important 

program, and we‟re very happy that we could have been part of 

that and made that happen. 

 

We know with the rising costs, and of course we do have some 

concerns about the rising utility rates in this province from 

SaskPower and SaskEnergy. We‟re not sure what‟s going to 

happen with them. It‟s a bit of a shell game; they‟re reducing 

rates one month and then increasing them again. And so we‟re 

not quite sure what‟s going to happen over there. But this is an 

important program. 

 

And we heard earlier today some questions around the 20 per 

cent commitment that the Premier had made in Quebec. And 

we‟ve not seen any action on that. SaskPower says we can only 

do 9 per cent; 9 per cent is all we can do. And we don‟t see 

them pushing them to say, 9 per cent isn‟t good enough; it‟s got 

to be 20 per cent. The Premier made the commitment, and to 

me it almost sounds, you know what it sounds like to me? It 

sounds like a promise broken, yet another promise broken. And 

so this is important. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, one that I am very happy about, some of 

the things that we did around the Saskatchewan home energy 

improvement program where we were able to provide to 500 

low-income families each year for five years — and this 

government continued this; this is a good thing — a program in 

the fall where low-income families received about $200 worth 

of goods, whether that was low-flow faucets, plastic sealants for 

their windows, or whether it was some caulking, and some new 

lights, energy-efficient lights. 

 

But it was really an important event in the fall that happened 

with SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 

Technology] students in several communities throughout the 

province. I know there was at least a dozen, if not 15 or more 

communities that were involved in this. It was a five-year 

program, coordinated too through the Salvation Army. The 

Salvation Army would put forward the names from the different 

communities around the province, and we just went out there 

and blitzed them. 

 

And I‟m not sure if some of the members in the government 

side has done this. Many members on this side, when we were 

in government, had done it. And it was a lot of fun to go into a 

home and talk about energy efficiency and what you can be 

doing to promote energy efficiency. There you go, that the first 

step on that journey of energy efficiency and conservation 

begins in the home. And this was really worthwhile because 

many of the folks that I know in my riding, it‟s hard for them to 

take that first step, to spend the 50 bucks or the 100 bucks and 

see the return, but clearly they need to do that. Clearly they 

needed to do that. 

 

The other one that I wanted to talk a bit about was reducing 

PST [provincial sales tax] on energy-efficient appliances to 

encourage more Saskatchewan families to buy them, and 

provided more than 16,000 homeowners with rebates and grants 

for programmable thermostats, Energy Star appliances, and 

home upgrading programs. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have to 

say it was one of the first initiatives we did after the election of 

2003, in the fall of 2003, was to announce the rebates on 

energy-efficient appliances in the home. I believe they were the 

washers and the dishwashers and things like that and fridges 

and stoves. And it was a phenomenal thing how we were able to 

track how well, what kind of an impact this had on the 

environment. 

 

But yet it was an economic issue because people had to buy 

those appliances. And here they were buying the right 

appliances, and we were encouraging them. And in fact at some 



3646 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2009 

point I think we had figured out that the reduction in terms of 

the CO2 emissions had some phenomenal amount, in terms of 

coal that we did not need to burn. Our wind turbines, we would 

call them ghost wind turbines because actually we were saving 

the CO2 and the energy. And so it was a very good, very good 

program, and we‟re glad to see that that‟s continued on. 

 

And of course we set targets that would have achieved the 

highest per capita reduction in greenhouse gases of any 

province in Canada. The energy and climate change plan 

committed to stabilize the greenhouse gas emissions by 2010. 

That‟s next year. Are these guys on track for doing it next year? 

I don‟t think so. 

 

And reducing emissions by 32 per cent of 2004 levels by 2020 

and 80 per cent by 2050, now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, those are 

impressive goals. Their promises are there. We‟ve got their 

promises. We‟ll hear more about that. But I want to talk a little 

bit about how are we going to achieve, how are we going to 

achieve this because this is the question. We don‟t see a plan. 

We don‟t see a plan. 

 

We know they talk a lot about the carbon capture, clean coal 

thing. And I‟m familiar with that, and I think that‟s worth about 

8 megatonnes of CO2 emission, unless they‟ve got more, unless 

they‟ve increased it significantly, but that‟s the number we were 

used to hearing. But I want to talk a little bit more about our 

plan because there can be a plan, there can be a successful plan, 

a plan that people can be proud of here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now we also established a Green Initiatives Fund with 4.9 

million for programs, for support for sustainable communities, 

green technology commercialization, and green energy 

conservation. 

 

And then also, Mr. Deputy Speaker — and we‟d all be familiar 

with this — we established the $320 million Green Future Fund 

with proceeds from the sale of the government‟s share of 

NewGrade Upgrader. And we saw that 320 million disappear 

into the GRF [General Revenue Fund]. The Minister of 

Environment wasn‟t quite sure where it went, but that‟s where it 

went, and then it went into other things. But clearly they could 

have done so much more with that in terms of investing those 

profits in technologies that would reduce the CO2 emissions 

here in Saskatchewan. And of course the $40 million energy 

conservation loan program during the 2007 election, that would 

have paid for energy conservation and energy-efficient 

upgrades. 

 

So there is so much that we were doing, and of course it has 

been lost. But they are the government, and now we look 

forward to seeing what their plan is. But I wanted to talk about 

what can be in a plan because there has been a lot of good work 

on plans around the world. 

 

Now interestingly, when I was in Montreal at the United 

Nations Conference, I was able to have lunch, be sitting with 

some of the folks from BP, Beyond Petroleum from London, 

England. And they were very interested in our carbon capture 

program, and they were very familiar with it. 

 

But he told me about a really interesting idea, that if I may, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, take a few minutes to talk about. And I know 

many people would say, and I think this might be one of those 

times where a picture is worth a thousand words. But I can‟t 

show you the picture on this page, so I am going to have to 

describe it. And it may take me about a thousand words to 

describe it. But many of the folks would have this. 

 

This is from our green strategy energy and climate change plan. 

And it‟s a page out of that about how can you do a plan. But 

this is something now, when you see the graph and it‟s called 

Saskatchewan‟s emissions reduction wedge. And I‟m not sure 

where the concept came from. I had heard about it in Montreal 

from the folks at BP, Beyond Petroleum, formerly known as 

British Petroleum. They had this very interesting idea about 

how do you tackle a problem like CO2 emissions that are going 

up, going up like that. But how do you tackle a problem like 

that that seems to be insurmountable, particularly for 

Saskatchewan. How can you tackle that problem? 

 

Now the other people who did this type of graph are the people 

from Princeton, Princeton University. In fact if you go on the 

Internet and you type in Princeton wedges, you‟ll come up with 

a graph like that‟s on this page. And it‟s interesting because we 

have people in Princeton talking about this. You have the 

people in London, England talking about it. You have people in 

Montreal talking about it. And actually I think the people . . . I 

was not the minister at the time when they developed this 

graph, but I just think it‟s the greatest idea. 

 

But my colleague from Regina Lakeview became minister and 

took this on and did a great job. But I understand that it came 

maybe from the national council or the Round Table on the 

Environment and the Economy — the National Round Table on 

the Environment and the Economy. They had a meeting, and 

they talked about the wedges. How can you turn the corner on a 

problem? When you see a graph going straight up like that, at 

an angle, it‟s insurmountable. We should just give up. We 

should just give up and go home. Well we can‟t do that. We 

can‟t do that in this world. People are looking to us for 

leadership, and this is a really interesting idea. 

 

So what you do, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if you can visualize this. 

Your graph is going up like that, and you wanted at some point 

to turn that line and go down like that. So you‟re up like that, 

and you want it to turn around like that. So how do you do that 

on a fulcrum like that? Well you have a series of wedges, a 

series of triangles, and they all start out as very small pieces, 

but you have five or six of these wedges. And what can you do? 

And they all start out very small, but over the course of time, 

over the course of 20, 30, 40 years, you can have a significant 

impact on the problem you‟re trying to solve. 

 

So this is what we had — Saskatchewan‟s emission reduction 

wedge. And I think it‟s a very worthwhile diagram. And I hope 

the minister now, she has a copy of this. I know she often has it 

in the House, and she‟ll stand up and wave it actually — the 

report. I don‟t know if she‟s actually looked at this one. But I 

think it‟s worth looking at, and many of her folks will be 

familiar with it. 

 

So what are the five things that we were talking about doing? 

What were the five things? 

 

The first one, the first one was conservation and efficiency. We 



November 17, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3647 

know, and in fact actually we‟ve heard the committee, the 

Standing Committee on Crowns when they were talking about 

energy, the best kilowatt or the easiest kilowatt to produce is 

one you don‟t need to because you‟ve done good conservation. 

And so this is really important. Conservation and efficiency are 

important initiatives that we know we can do. 

 

And actually, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is an opportunity here 

for our province. This is really where the environment and the 

economy meet hand in hand. Because if you‟ve got people 

working on conservation and efficiency, then you really do 

have a triple bottom line of sustainable economic environmental 

growth. This is what it‟s all about, truly. So if you can master 

conservation and efficiency. 

 

And I talked about some of the initiatives that we had already 

done, and whether they were around energy efficient 

appliances, whether they were retrofitting your home, that type 

of thing. But we need to take a look at industry. How can they 

do it better? How can they do it better? And so this is truly a 

worthwhile wedge, and I think that it‟s important. But again, 

like I said earlier, the Premier had promised 20 per cent 

reduction in energy through the use of conservation. And we‟re 

just not seeing that. 

 

The other wedge was around carbon capture and storage in the 

oil and gas, electricity sector. So this probably does play into 

their plan a bit because we do recognize the importance of 

carbon capture and storage and the impact it can have in oil and 

gas and electricity sectors. That‟s really important that we do 

good work around that, that we just don‟t walk away from 

what‟s happening in the oil and gas and the electricity sector. 

So that‟s important. 

 

The third wedge was around increasing the use of renewable 

energy. And this is so important. Like, as I talked earlier, we 

had done enough to power 73,000 homes — 73,000 homes — 

and that‟s what‟s happening tonight here in Saskatchewan. 

They have talked about how they want to do much more, and 

we hope that does happen. And if that does happen, that will 

have a huge impact on CO2 emissions. 

 

Again the proof will be in the pudding because, you know, 

we‟ve seen many promises from the government side that have 

been quietly forgotten. Some have been small; some of them 

have been huge. And of course the biggest one has been the 

Minister of Environment, her own promise from the campaign 

where they had set a prior goal around CO2 emissions and then 

broke that promise. So is this also in that area? 

 

Now the other one that I think is important, the fourth wedge 

which is particularly important for Saskatchewan, promote the 

creation of natural carbon sinks. Now for Saskatchewan, that‟s 

a really innovative one. And I hope the minister has her people 

working on this, because whether it‟s a boreal forest — which 

we know, and the reports were coming out in the newspapers 

today and yesterday about how important the boreal forest is in 

the world, in the northern hemisphere in terms of carbon 

capture — it‟s a natural sink. And what are we doing to make 

sure we have healthy natural sinks here in Saskatchewan? 

 

[19:45] 

 

And of course we also have the grasslands, a very important 

part of Saskatchewan, and one that we cannot ignore in terms of 

what it can be, how it can be effective in terms of carbon sinks. 

 

The fifth wedge that I want to talk about is the one around 

reducing methane and other emissions from our oil, gas, and 

agricultural sector. And I think this is an important one because 

— and this is one that I would really like to hear the minister, 

when she is talking about her plan, talk about the role of 

agriculture — because we know that in Saskatchewan 

agriculture is a huge part of our economy, but it‟s also a huge 

part of our environment. And how do you connect the two? It‟s 

a significant challenge. And whether it‟s through tillage or 

whether it‟s through the inputs, this is an important area that 

Saskatchewan can show some real leadership. And I‟m hoping 

that again we can really show some real leadership around the 

agricultural sector, and of course from our oil and gas sector. 

 

So those are some components that you can have for a 

significant plan. You can have conservation efficiency. You‟ve 

got to keep the promise though. And you can talk about carbon 

capture, and that‟s a very good thing. You can talk about the 

use of renewable energy, another promise and we‟ve got to hear 

what‟s happening there. You can talk about the natural carbon 

sinks, and we have not heard the minister talk anything about 

that. And we have to talk about methane and the other 

emissions that come from our oil, gas, and our agricultural 

sector. This is a huge, huge thing. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, those are some of the challenges that 

we have. Yet they can be solved, but if only we heard about 

them. And I don‟t know whether the minister just got the 

information about going to Copenhagen, and that‟s why the 

motion came forward and we‟re not seeing a Bill. I would have 

preferred to see a Bill so we could actually have something we 

can hang our hat on. 

 

But I would be remiss if I did not talk about a couple of things 

before I wrapped up here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And that is of 

course the impact . . . And I hope the Minister of Social 

Services has been leaning on the Minister of Environment. I 

know they‟re desk mates, and they can talk about this. But in 

the world, climate change is having a huge impact on those less 

fortunate. 

 

And if we have an opportunity while we are acting locally, we 

should also think globally. It‟s very important, especially when 

we talk about the millennium development goals. And so we 

see the millennium campaign, End Poverty 2015. This is of 

course an international campaign talking about the impact that 

we have, that climate change has around the world, in 

particularly in the Third World. 

 

And it‟s an important one that hey, I mean, this is everyone‟s 

issue. This is everyone‟s issue, and so you cannot just say this is 

about industry. This is about poverty as well. And so I have 

before me a document to End Poverty 2015, the millennium 

campaign, The MDG Path to a Climate Change Solution. And 

MDG stands for millennium development goals, and the title is 

Seal A Just Deal. Seal A Just Deal. 

 

And I think when we go to Copenhagen, we should be talking 

about that. It‟s an interesting document. And of course, in many 



3648 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2009 

ways we think that doesn‟t have too much to do with us, but it 

sure does have an awful lot with us. And in fact I just want to 

read one aspect of it because this is so important. This is so 

important. The impact of climate change on the millennium 

development goals: 

 

Threat caused by climate change. 

 

. . . Climate change will have a direct impact on 

environmental sustainability by: fundamentally altering 

ecosystem relationships; changing the quality and 

quantity of natural resources and biodiversity; reducing 

ecosystem productivity. 

 

And goal 7 of the millennium development goals is ensuring 

environmental sustainability. And so while we can say, what‟s 

that got to do with poverty, it has everything to do with poverty. 

Because we know that, actually in Saskatchewan in rural 

communities, that those who are closest to the land actually 

sometimes don‟t have the highest income. And we know that to 

be a fact. We know that farmers many times are facing some 

real challenges. So the sustainability issues are huge. 

 

In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a couple of weeks ago when I was 

at the 350.org demonstration in Saskatoon along with my 

colleague from Saskatoon Massey Place, I ran into a professor 

from the University of Saskatchewan who works at the 

Saskatchewan Research Council, Dr. Elaine Wheaton. Actually 

I first met her in Montreal. And we had quite a discussion. I was 

telling her about the Princeton wedges because I think actually 

it can apply to many other problems we face in Saskatchewan, 

i.e., the foster care issue. You have . . . [inaudible] . . . foster 

kids going up. How do you turn that around? It‟s a problem 

faced by all Canadians, all Canadian governments. 

 

But she raised the issue around drought — and drought, and 

what we have. And we‟ve seen that one. We‟ve seen the 

Minister of Agriculture talk about the drought in the Southwest. 

These are real issues. These are real issues. These have issues 

on how well people can live their lives. It‟s a real challenge. 

 

But I do want to say to the minister that if she is, happens to be 

in Copenhagen, if she is in Copenhagen, I would recommend 

that she drop by a couple of other places in Europe if she‟s 

doing a European tour. 

 

The first place she should go to is Norway, in many ways an 

oil-producing country like our province, an economy that‟s tied 

heavily to the production of oil, and see the kind of things that 

they‟ve done. Here is a country that‟s met the Kyoto 

benchmarks. And they seem to be doing all right. In fact they‟re 

doing very, very well. They‟re one of the first countries to come 

out of the global recession because of precisely the kind of 

things they‟ve been able to do around Kyoto, and tying the 

economy and the environment together and saying, we want to 

have a sustainable economy. This is hugely important. 

 

The other place I would recommend the minister go when she is 

in Europe is she should go to Geneva. She should go to Geneva 

and drop in on the United Nations complex, particularly the 

ILO, the International Labour Organization. And maybe she 

wanted to take the Minister of Labour along. I think it‟s very 

worthwhile because the tie, the tie between working people and 

the economy and the environment is huge — is huge. It‟s not 

just a niche discussion we‟re having here. For working people 

around the world, climate change is important and the ILO has 

done some amazing, amazing work around sustainability. And I 

think this is an important issue. 

 

But I would encourage the Minister of Environment to really 

think about how they can link these things together. She should 

be talking to the Minister of Social Services around poverty, 

talking to the Minister of Labour around ILO and how this can 

all be part of the solution. How they can be part of the solution, 

and talking to people around the world. So I really do hope that 

she comes back, she comes back with a vision and a plan and 

really on fire in terms and comes up to the Premier — and 

maybe the Premier will be back from Washington — talking 

about how we can do things so much better here in 

Saskatchewan. We can do things so much better. 

 

I want to conclude on just two comments here. One, this is an 

article from the Calgary Sun. The Calgary Sun, and this is from 

the 15th of November. Not that long ago, Mr. Speaker. And this 

is what they were talking about in anticipation of what might 

happen in Copenhagen. The headline is “Climate talks nothing 

but hot air — Global warming conference in Denmark „doesn‟t 

look promising,‟ says environment minister.” 

 

But I am personally very glad that our minister, if she goes, she 

will champion the cause of the world and really tackle climate 

change. 

 

But this is what the quote is. And I‟ll quote here: “Earlier this 

month . . .” And I‟ll quote: 

 

Earlier this month, Michael Martin, Canada‟s chief 

climate-change negotiator, admitted [and I quote] “we are 

clearly a long way from a treaty.” 

 

[The story goes on.] A senior federal official puts it more 

bluntly, saying the only strategy occupying the war room 

these days is “how to get in and out of Copenhagen 

without being blamed for what‟s not going to happen.” 

 

Now, I hope, I hope if the Minister of Environment from 

Saskatchewan goes, she‟s much more positive than getting in 

and out of there without being blamed for what‟s not going to 

happen. No, I hope she‟s going to have spent some time in there 

talking to Mr. Prentice and saying, let‟s get this done right. 

Let‟s do this thing right, and get it done tonight. Let‟s do it. 

Let‟s make sure it happens. 

 

Now one of the most powerful things — and I just want to end 

on this, Mr. Deputy Speaker — is that one of the most powerful 

parts of the climate-change conference, and I‟m sure it will 

happen in Copenhagen, is that there will be youth. In fact I 

know that there will be one youth from Saskatchewan. In fact 

she has been at several of these, and this is Rosa Kossick Kouri. 

Many people would know Rosa. She will be in Copenhagen and 

she will be watching what our minister does. And she was in 

Montreal. In fact she was in Bali as well. 

 

And I think about this quite often. This was a very, very 

powerful moment — very powerful moment when the youth 

stood up and spoke to the thousands of delegates in Montreal. 



November 17, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3649 

And as there will be 10,000 delegates in Copenhagen, I hope 

the minister takes time to listen to what the youth has to say. 

Now the youth made an impassioned plea saying, do the right 

thing. Do not leave us an inheritance of a world that cannot be 

saved. The world is a beautiful place, the environment is one 

that‟s in tune, can be in tune with the economy. We can work 

this all together. 

 

But this is what their phrase was, and I‟ll quote: “Look into our 

eyes; stand with us.” And so I think this is very important. And 

everybody in the room — everybody, thousands of people — 

just stood up and clapped, clapped for the young people when 

they said, “Look into our eyes; stand with us.” 

 

And so with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would hope that the 

Minister of Environment listens to the youth, listens to the 

future, comes back with a plan. I will not be supporting this 

motion. Thank you very much. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I‟m 

certainly pleased to be able to enter into this debate on this very, 

very important topic, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Climate change, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a major, major issue 

that this world is facing. It is, as President Clinton described it, 

it is the defining challenge of the 21st century and how the 

world and we, as part of the world, deal with this will determine 

what kind of a world and what kind of an environment our 

grandchildren will have to live in. 

 

But it‟s also a very difficult challenge, Mr. Speaker, particularly 

for governments of the developed world, and particularly 

governments of Western Canada I would submit, because the 

effects of climate change are somewhere down the road. They 

may be 15, 20, 25, 40 years down the road. It all depends on 

how quickly the effects of climate change become evident. 

 

And so therefore for a government of Saskatchewan, in 

particular, to deal with climate change and to have the citizens 

of the province engaged in climate change is a major challenge 

because all one would have to do today is walk out on the steps 

of the Legislature and walk down in Wascana Park to see the 

beautiful day, the clear skies. We have no smog. We have really 

no evidence that other parts of the world are already 

experiencing. 

 

I can think of the people of Canada that live in the North and 

see the ice melting at a much more rapid increase, the longer 

open summers, the ice-free Northwest Passage that has occurred 

in recent years, which is unusual. Those are some of the things 

that scientists tell us are the forerunners of major and permanent 

changes to our climates. 

 

Also because of the lack of evidence and of tangible evidence 

of climate change, I believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that a 

significant proportion of our population in Canada, but more so 

in Western provinces — and particularly Saskatchewan, 

Manitoba I would submit, probably Alberta — are unaware or 

perhaps don‟t believe that it‟s a real issue. 

 

And so therefore it makes it exceedingly difficult for 

governments to deal with this issue. But it is an issue that our 

scientists are telling us that we as governments of provinces, 

states, countries around the world must deal with if we are to 

prevent some of the dramatic changes to our climate that our 

scientists, through scientific examination and discovery, believe 

and have documented will probably happen. 

 

[20:00] 

 

So this is the task that our governments of the day find 

ourselves with. There is confusion as to some of the definitions, 

of weather as opposed to climate. And I was reading a couple of 

books that I was able to get from the Legislative Library 

recently, and I came across the definitions that perhaps may 

help clarify the difference between weather and climate. 

 

Weather is defined as the statistics of the day. As an example, 

today in Regina here the sky was clear. The high was 15 or 17 

or whatever. It set a new record, and there was no precipitation. 

Climate, on the other hand, is the probability of major weather 

events happening. And quite often people who are not totally 

knowledgeable in the area get the two confused. 

 

Our scientists are telling us that we will be seeing some 

significant changes in weather. And first of all I should profess 

that I‟m certainly not a scientist. My knowledge is limited in 

this area. But what I have done and what I‟ve attempted to do is 

review the scientific literature that is available, and I‟m basing 

my comments on what I have learned by examining the 

comments of scientists and scientific literature. And scientists 

tell us that, as climate change progresses and it increases and it 

happens more rapidly, we will see more significant changes. 

 

One might point to today‟s record-breaking temperatures in the 

West, and in Saskatchewan in particular, and say this perhaps 

could be an evidence of climate change. Today‟s records that 

were broken in Saskatchewan, and there was a number of them, 

were broken not by a tenth of a degree or 1 degree, but they 

were broken by, in some cases, as much as 5 and 6 degrees. 

Now is that evidence of climate change? I‟m not a scientist. I 

don‟t know, but it does lend itself to what the scientists are 

telling us. 

 

The upcoming meeting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of the Conference 

of Parties 15 of the United Nations Framework Convention on 

Climate Change, I believe history will show is one of the most, 

will be one of the most historic meetings that our present-day 

world will have had. And history will unfold as it will, and it 

will record whether there was success in addressing this major 

issue or whether there wasn‟t, and whether there was a need and 

there will be a need to future meetings to address this major 

issue. 

 

But what is happening between December 7th and 18th is 192 

nations of the world will be gathering in Copenhagen to try and 

hammer out a new agreement, a worldwide agreement. A 

worldwide international treaty to address this major challenge 

that mankind has of climate change, and that will be the 

successor to the Kyoto Protocol which was adopted by the same 

United Nations group in 1997. It was ratified in February of 

2005 when enough of the signatories to the international treaty 

ratified it within their own countries and put it in effect. 



3650 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2009 

Canada was a signature to that international treaty, and Canada 

had agreed at that time to reduce its CO2 emissions by 6 per 

cent below the 1990 levels. Canada was one of the nations, I 

believe, that will have great difficulty in meeting that 

commitment. It‟s not the only nation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but 

it is one of the ones. There are some countries, particularly the 

European countries, that it is reported that will be able to meet 

their commitments under the Kyoto Protocol. 

 

So what the challenge is in Copenhagen is to come up with 

another international treaty that is much more aggressive. 

Because what the Kyoto accord did was by and large, if it was 

achieved, it would reduce but it would not . . . or at least 

stabilize the amount of CO2 emissions that the countries of the 

world were emitting, but it would really do very little to address 

the major problem. Now the countries of the world need to take 

the next step. This is what the scientists of the world are telling 

us, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And the two major challenges at Copenhagen are this. Number 

one, to set those higher targets for CO2 emission reductions so 

that the world makes meaningful progress on reducing CO2 

emissions. And secondly, the second major challenge is for the 

developed countries of the world to provide financing to the 

developing countries of the world to help them along the way, 

to help them be part of this. And that is a major challenge. And 

the leaders of the world will be grappling with those two major 

challenges, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

As I said, former President Bill Clinton said when he was here 

in Regina a number of years ago, when asked, what is the major 

challenge of the world in the future, the major medium- and 

long-term challenge? And he identified climate change. 

 

I think perhaps, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that a recent article by the 

columnist and historian Gwynne Dyer perhaps puts this in terms 

that we perhaps could identify. And I think what I would like to 

do at this time is probably read a portion of a recent column or 

article that he wrote dealing with climate change, and it‟s dated 

October the 29th of this year. And the title of the article is, 

J-O-I-D-E-S, “JOIDES research shows global warming will 

accelerate.” 

 

And I will read part of the article, because I think that frames 

the challenge of what the leaders of the world are facing in 

Copenhagen and in subsequent years. Gwynne Dyer writes, and 

I quote: 

 

The news is bad, and it‟s coming in fast. 

 

Turn tens of thousands of scientists loose on a problem 

for two decades, and the results will seem pathetic for the 

first few years, because it takes time to gather the data — 

even build the equipment with which you gather the data. 

But slowly the flow of data will grow, and [then] at the 

end of 20 years you can expect major new insights every 

month or so. 

 

That‟s where we are now with climate change. 

September‟s unwelcome news from the Hadley Centre for 

Climate Prediction and Research in Britain, was that if 

fossil fuel use continues on the present trend line, the 

planet will be an average of 4 degrees Celsius warmer by 

the 2060s. 

 

This contrasts with the prediction of the 

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, published in 

2007, that we might see 4 degree Celsius [increase], at the 

most, by . . . [2021]. 

 

This month‟s bad news came from the drilling ship . . . 

(Joint Oceanographic [That‟s easy for some people to 

say.] . . . Institutions for Deep Earth Sampling) which 

brought up cores from the ocean bottom containing 

sediments dating back 20 million years. 

 

And this I believe is some of the important part: 

 

Scientists reported that when carbon dioxide in the 

atmosphere was last at 450 parts per million, the average 

global temperature was 3 to 6 degrees Celsius hotter than 

[it is] now, and sea levels were 25 to 40 metres higher. 

 

I continue the quote: 

 

That is bad news because 450 parts per million is where 

we are hoping to halt the rise in carbon dioxide in the 

atmosphere this time around. (We are currently at 390 

parts per million.) 

 

All the world‟s major governments have agreed in 

principle that warming must never be allowed to exceed 2 

degrees Celsius, because beyond that we would risk 

runaway warming — and it was thought that 450 part per 

million would let us stop at that point. 

 

Not so, it would appear, or at least not for long. The 

leader of the JOIDES research team . . . from the 

university of . . . Los Angeles, put it bluntly: “What we 

have shown is that in the last period when CO2 levels 

were sustained at levels close to where they are today, 

there was no icecap on Antarctica and sea levels were 

25-40m higher.” 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, one can only imagine that if these 

predictions should come true . . . In fact I can‟t imagine what 

this earth will look like. This is I believe a very serious and dire 

warning, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And I know people question where these predictions and the 

science, as to where do they, you know, where do they come 

from? Is it sound? Is it skepticism? I‟ve heard speakers talk 

about some of the people who have taken up the cause, David 

Suzuki and some of the other organizations who, I believe, 

admit are not experts. But what they are doing is relaying the 

message from the scientists around the world who deal with this 

issue. 

 

And I think if one reads some of the material that‟s available, 

and you have to differentiate between some of the junk science 

and real science, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I believe one of the 

ways of doing that is to look at reports and try and get an 

understanding if this is true science or is it just merely an 

opinion. Because true science works on a peer-reviewed system 

where scientists, whether it be a physicist, whether it be an 

atmospheric or climate scientist, they do their work. They use 



November 17, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3651 

the scientific method, and follow age-old process of making 

sure that their science is sound. 

 

And then what they do is they will write a report of what they 

have found and publish it in scientific journals. And those 

scientific journals are reviewed by other scientists who are 

expert in that particular field. And they will review that and try 

and pick holes in this, to the process and the findings of the 

publication. And so, therefore, before these scientific reports are 

published in the journals, the authors and the scientists who 

have done the work do their very level best to ensure that they 

are working with sound science. 

 

And that is the process that, I believe, is used in dealing with 

climate change. This is what the literature has said. And we 

have a number of scientists on the Intergovernmental Panel on 

Climate Change who are from Canada, who are true scientists, 

who follow the honoured and the code of scientists, who use the 

scientific method, use the peer review method. So when they 

put something out there, they have done their very level best, 

and if it is bad science, other experts in the field will quickly 

point it out because that is the way science has evolved over the 

years. 

 

[20:15] 

 

And the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change is a 

committee of the UN [United Nations] body that has been 

tasked with getting a handle on climate change. And it‟s not 1 

or 2 or 3 or 4 or 10 or 20 or 100 scientists. It‟s thousands of 

scientists from around the world, from many, many countries. 

This IPCC [Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change] group 

has issued four major assessments of climate change. They have 

worked for many months — in fact maybe a couple of years — 

on these things. They undergo rigorous scrutiny before their 

reports are released. 

 

And as an example, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the most recent report 

of the IPCC will be released in Copenhagen. They met recently 

in Bali over a period of a number of weeks to gather all their 

data and come up with a report. It‟s a report that contains 

scientific study from 430 delegations from 23 countries around 

the world. This is just an example, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

One of the scientists, as I mentioned, from Canada that was a 

member of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change is a 

scientist from Victoria, a Dr. Andrew Weaver, who is a 

professor and Canadian Research Chair on climate modelling 

and analysis at the School of Earth and Ocean Sciences in the 

University of Victoria. He was one of only seven Canadian 

scientists who were lead authors on sections of the 2007 report 

of the IPCC. 

 

Dr. Weaver wrote a book which was recently published, in fact 

last year. It‟s called Keeping Our Cool: Canada in a Warming 

World. I would highly recommend anyone who wants to have 

an objective look and get a better understanding of this issue 

that we are talking about here today, climate change, to read 

that book. It is a real eye-opener. It is authored, as I said, by one 

of Canada‟s leading scientists on the issue. And I believe that 

it‟s a great help in understanding and framing the argument. 

 

Now I know there‟s a number of skeptics still in our province, 

in our communities and, I believe, about this whole issue of 

climate change. And it‟s not because they fundamentally 

disagree, I believe, with the whole concept that our climate is 

changing because of human activities and mainly burning fossil 

fuels. It‟s because they haven‟t had an opportunity to have 

access to the knowledge. 

 

And also another factor that is certainly making the role of 

government and making sound decisions on this issue much 

more difficult is because there is a whole cadre of people, the 

climate change deniers, who are now realizing that they have by 

and large lost the argument and are now attempting to delay 

action on this issue. 

 

It‟s not unlike what had happened a number of years back when 

the scientists and doctors were telling us that there was a direct 

link between smoking and lung cancer, and a direct link 

between second-hand smoke and lung cancer. There were 

vested interests that had a lot to lose, and they were powerful 

interests that funded campaigns to either deny or delay. And 

people have written on this that they see the same thing 

happening. 

 

Now I certainly don‟t profess to be an expert in this issue, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, but what I do is I have an open mind about the 

issue. And I‟ve read a fair bit of material on it and with an open 

mind. And I try to evaluate the information that‟s presented in 

the same context as I would analyze information about the 

H1N1 flu and pandemic that we are in the midst of. Now 

perhaps the pandemic may not turn out to be as severe as what 

was forecast. I believe the experts are telling us at the very least 

that it has potential to be quite severe. 

 

And I look to people like Dr. Don Low from the Toronto area, 

who was the Canadian lead on SARS [severe acute respiratory 

syndrome] when Toronto was faced with that SARS issue a 

number of years back. And Dr. Low spoke recently. I saw him 

on TV where he said, why wouldn‟t you have a vaccination? He 

says, this disease has potential to cause deaths, as it already has, 

unfortunately it seems like in our younger people and so on. 

And why wouldn‟t you have the vaccination? Science is 

showing that for the average person there isn‟t any great side 

effects and those sorts of things.  

 

So that‟s what I try to do, is look for those experts who have 

credibility and see what they have to say on the issue. And I 

believe Dr. Andrew Weaver from the University of Victoria is 

one of those experts, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Just a little bit about the science of the Intergovernmental Panel 

on Climate Change and how it‟s set up and the work it is doing. 

I already mentioned it‟s composed of thousands of scientists 

around the world from various countries, and Dr. Weaver‟s 

book explains this. There are three working groups. Working 

group I assesses the scientific aspects of climate systems and 

climate change. Working group II assesses the scientific, 

technical, environmental, economic, and social aspects of the 

vulnerability of climate change. And working group III assess 

the scientific, technical, environmental, economic, and social 

aspects of mitigation of climate change. And in layman‟s terms, 

group I describes the problem. Group II details its 

consequences, and group III tells us what are some of the 

mitigation things that we can do to lessen the issue. 



3652 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2009 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I found it a bit of an eye-opener last 

March when I had the privilege of attending the Commonwealth 

Parliamentary Association seminar in London, England where 

delegates from all across the Commonwealth gathered to study 

the Westminster style of government. And one afternoon we 

talked about climate change and the impacts and the 

consequences and what governments are doing and so on. 

 

We didn‟t get into a lot of depth because of time constraints and 

so on, but I think what I will always remember and what stood 

out from that discussion was the comments from some of the 

delegates, particularly from the African nations. Delegates from 

countries like Kenya, Ghana, and Oman were very adamant that 

the world needs to do something about this. They said that they 

are, in their opinion, they were already experiencing some of 

the effects of climate change. They as poor countries had little 

ability to actually make a difference. But what they said is they 

need to be involved because they have got to be effective in a 

dramatic way, and they needed our help. And I believe that is 

something that we certainly need to consider. 

 

We need to look at, around the world, as to how serious other 

countries around the world are taking this issue. And of course 

it‟s no surprise that in Europe we know that they already are 

leaders in the area of reducing CO2 emissions and working 

towards further programs and to deal with the issue. 

 

But also developing countries are doing some extraordinary 

steps to draw attention to the perceived effects of climate 

change. The Government of Nepal very recently held a cabinet 

meeting at the base camp of Mount Everest. And the purpose of 

that was, according to their Prime Minister, was to demonstrate 

and draw the world‟s attention onto how their country will be 

affected. 

 

The Government of Maldives, a South Pacific nation, within the 

last month or so held a cabinet meeting under water. This is a 

country that is only a few metres above sea level, and if the 

polar ice caps melt, they certainly will be dramatically affected. 

The country of . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Recognize the member 

from Last Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The country of 

India, one of the major developing countries which is very 

quickly becoming a major economic force in this world, is 

certainly is doing some things that I think we should take note 

of. A recent release by a world agency indicated that CO2 

emissions from the major cities of India are significantly lower 

than the CO2 emissions of some of the North American 

countries when you compare our cities . . . when you compare 

them to cities like New York or Toronto. 

 

The Government of India sees that there‟s also opportunity in 

addressing this major challenge. They see embracing green 

technology as a way to fight poverty in their country because of 

the opportunities that green technology presents. I was surprised 

to learn, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that India is the fifth largest wind 

power producer in the world, and that Suzlon, an Indian 

company, is the largest international wind energy company in 

the world. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in recent years, I believe that business 

leaders, municipal leaders are ahead of national leaders on this 

issue, and I think we should pay attention to what some of the 

business leaders are saying and what they are doing with 

regards to this issue. A recent conference of the insurance 

industry in Great Britain were very concerned about the 

sustainability of the insurance industry in that country as the 

effects of climate change manifest themselves. They‟re 

predicting that there will be higher insurance premiums due to 

major weather events, and in a number of cases, companies, 

individuals may not be able to buy insurance. 

 

Wal-Mart, the largest retailer in the world, back in 2006 took 

this issue seriously and set about a plan in place to dramatically 

reduce its CO2 emissions. Did they do it because they are good 

world corporate citizens? Perhaps. I don‟t know. I don‟t know 

what their motivation was, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But I do know 

one of the reasons that they did it, and they have since stated, is 

that it makes good business sense. 

 

And I think that idea was driven home in a major way, perhaps 

a small way, to me this summer when I had the privilege of 

being a part of the PNWER [Pacific NorthWest Economic 

Region] meeting in Boise, Idaho. One of the tours that delegates 

could take was to the Banner Bank Building in downtown 

Boise, Idaho. And when I saw that, at first I thought, well why 

would anyone want to go and tour a commercial building? It‟s a 

building that . . . I mean all you need to do is go in downtown 

Regina and you can see commercial buildings. 

 

And until I looked a little more closely, and the reason that the 

organizers of PNWER in Boise put this on the agenda is that the 

Banner Bank building is one of only 20-some buildings in the 

world that has achieved the LEED [leadership in energy and 

environmental design] platinum status. So I thought I would go 

just to see what this was all about. 

 

[20:30] 

 

As it turned out, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was very pleased to go. 

Because what the designers and the developers of this building 

did was they used current technology, but they used it in a way 

to achieve the smallest environmental footprint that they could 

when they built the building. 

 

And they explained it in this way. We had the good fortune to 

have the developer and the driver of this building, a Mr. 

Christensen, make a presentation to the group. And he said, to 

sum it up this way, he said, we didn‟t really invent any new 

technology. We used existing technology and we just put it 

together a little differently. But they achieved some pretty 

amazing results, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That building uses 40 per 

cent less energy than a comparable building in Boise that didn‟t 

use any of the innovative techniques that they used. 

 

And Mr. Christensen summed it up this way. He says, look, he 

says, certainly I have a concern for the environment. But, he 

says, I‟m a businessman, he says, and when I invest money I 

expect to have a return. And he says one of the most surprising 

outcomes of this design of this building is that he was able to 

achieve, on a year-over-year basis, a 37 per cent return on his 



November 17, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3653 

investment. 

 

In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the whole process of the Banner 

Bank building was so outstanding that a documentary 

filmmaker made a documentary of the process of building this 

building and the outcomes, and it was nominated for an 

Academy Award. I‟m not sure whether it won or not, and I 

don‟t think that makes any difference. But it has a rather 

intriguing name, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and the name of the 

documentary is Green is the Color of Money. And I think 

there‟s a message in that. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in conclusion what I‟d like to say on this 

topic is that, as I said at the beginning, this is a difficult topic 

and a difficult issue for governments to address for a number of 

reasons, as I outlined at the beginning of my remarks — that 

there is no immediate threat, at least in our part of the world, 

that we can point and say definitely this is one of the outcomes 

of the change to our climate. There‟s a fair bit of uncertainty 

amongst the people of our province and parts of our country. 

There is, I believe, a fairly high voter concern about this. And 

so therefore it‟s difficult for any provincial government under 

those terms, whether it be here in Saskatchewan, whether it be 

in Manitoba, whether it be in Alberta, whether it be in any of 

our Canadian provinces. I would imagine that the Maritime 

governments are struggling with this. 

 

I believe that the plan put forward by this government is a good 

start, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I believe that it‟s a sound plan that 

we are starting. I also believe that more will have to be done in 

the future. But the fundamentals of the plan are a strong 

commitment to carbon capture and storage, which I might 

comment on that just in the last day or so President Obama, 

when he was visiting China, discussed with the Chinese leaders. 

And I‟ll quote from a Globe and Mail article dated yesterday, as 

a matter of fact: 

 

Mr. Obama and his Chinese counterpart are expected to 

sign a series of deals to co-operate on clean energy and 

emission-reduction technologies, including capturing 

carbon dioxide from smokestacks and permanently 

storing it underground. 

 

So I‟m thinking, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if this is a big enough . . . 

if carbon capture and storage is good enough for the United 

States of America and China, the two largest economies in the 

world, I think it‟s probably good enough for Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

And one of the other major components of the Saskatchewan 

plan is to take the monies that will be levied against our large 

emitters for exceeding certain levels of carbon dioxide and 

keeping those dollars here in Saskatchewan so that we can 

develop the technology to deal and make meaningful changes to 

our carbon emissions. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in conclusion, I think what I would 

like to do is just make the members of this Assembly aware, 

and the general public, of another article that I came across in 

my research, and that was an article that I found on the Internet 

dated July 18th, 2007, and the title is “Nelson Mandela and 

Desmond Tutu Announce The Elders — A Historic Group of 

World Leaders.” 

Basically what the article tells us, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that 

Nelson Mandela and Bishop Tutu formed this group that they 

call the leaders, and the founding members of this leaders . . . of 

The Elders — sorry, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And some of the 

founding members or the founding members of this group, of 

course, were Nelson Mandela and Bishop Desmond Tutu; along 

with a former — and if I could pronounce the individual‟s name 

I would — but is the former foreign minister of China from 

2003 to 2007, so a very recent foreign minister of China; Mary 

Robinson, a former president of Ireland; another individual 

from Bangladesh who is a banker and economist, and his claim 

to fame was that he developed the microcredit concept to lend 

money to poor people in the world; Ela Bhatt who was the 

founder of India‟s Self-Employed Women; and Gro Harlem 

Brundtland, former prime minister of Norway. These people 

were the group that Nelson Mandela called The Elders and . . . 

Oh, I omitted one person. Sorry, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Former 

President Jimmy Carter is also a member of this group. And 

what this group of elders have done, they‟ve gathered together 

to draw attention to climate change. 

 

And another article in The New York Times, just very recent, 

October 31st, 2009, reports that this group took their 

grandchildren and young relatives to Istanbul, had a photo op, 

gathered the media of the world around to draw attention to 

climate change. And Archbishop Tutu‟s three-year-old 

granddaughter was puzzled at what took place. An older cousin 

of hers addressed the gathering, and she had an inflatable globe 

and she crushed it. And the young three-year-old said to her 

grandfather, she said, what‟s happening here? If the world is 

gone, are we going to go to the moon? And Bishop Tutu 

whispered into his granddaughter‟s ear. He says, I don‟t know. I 

won‟t be there. I‟m 78 years old. And I think that‟s part of it 

that sums up the issue. 

 

The article goes on, and I‟ll quote: 

 

At its core, that conversation about whether some of the 

first beneficiaries of the wonders developed during the 

last century — like electricity at the flip of a switch — 

have the means, or the will, to help their descendants with 

the consequences of burning vast quantities of fossil fuels. 

 

I think that‟s the challenge. I believe that‟s the challenge that 

President Bill Clinton was talking about. 

 

I have one more thought that I would like to put forward in this 

debate, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We‟ve all heard the story of the 

frog in the pan. If you put the frog in the pan when the water is 

cold, you can turn up the heat, and you can turn it up, and you 

can eventually boil that frog alive. If you put the frog in when 

the water is hot, he‟ll jump out. 

 

I talked to my granddaughter about this a bit and my grandson a 

bit about this whole issue. And I was surprised that they 

actually have a concept of what I was talking about — climate 

change and those sorts of things. And I talked to them a bit 

about Bishop Tutu and his granddaughters and the other world 

leaders and so on. And my grandson said to me, he says, 

grandpa, I think we should have Tenaisha — who is our 

granddaughter living with us who has unbelievable artistic 

talent — draw a cartoon that . . . well he didn‟t use the word 

encapsulize, but that would represent the issue that we‟re 



3654 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2009 

dealing with. He said, grandpa, it seems to me that if we had a 

cartoon where we had the world, and put a pot on top of it, and 

the frog in there, aren‟t we the frog in the pan? And as the 

world heats up, are we going to boil? 

 

I think that‟s a question that we need to think about very 

seriously. Because I‟m not going to suffer. I‟m not going to see 

many dramatic changes in climate, but my grandchildren are. 

And that‟s why I‟m here today, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And that‟s 

why I went to the Premier and said look, this is a major, major 

issue that we need to talk about, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And I think we all as legislators, we have a great deal of 

responsibility because one day . . . I don‟t know whether I‟ll 

live long enough for my grandchildren to come back and ask 

me, grandpa, you were there; why didn‟t you do more? But I‟m 

looking around in this Assembly and I see a lot of younger 

members and it may be their children, or if not, their 

grandchildren. I hope they don‟t have to answer that question. I 

hope that we collectively, not only in Saskatchewan, not only in 

Canada, not only in North America but around the world, 

realize the seriousness of this issue and that we find the 

intestinal fortitude and find the ways. Because there are ways. 

There are ways. 

 

Dr. Andrew Weaver said we need to look at all the alternatives, 

develop the new technologies, or at the very least look at those 

energy sources that do not emit carbon. And he identified 

nuclear. And he has a great quote, and if I had more time I 

would read it into the record. In fact I probably can‟t find it in 

my material, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But those are the issues that I 

believe we need to think about seriously and I believe we need 

to deal with, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Thank you very much. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[Applause] 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you to my colleagues as well. It‟s a 

pleasure to join in the discussion this evening, Mr. Speaker, on 

the government motion that has come forward and the motion 

that we have been discussing throughout the day. And it‟s 

important, Mr. Speaker, because as members before me have 

commented, the issue of climate change is an issue that has 

long-term implications for our planet and for the creatures that 

live on it — humans and all the other aspects of nature that live 

on the globe, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As the member before me just spoke, Mr. Speaker, what we 

decide today, what we talk about today will have implications 

for us all in the room certainly and for our families, but it‟s 

really the generations to come — and not really too many 

generations down the road, Mr. Speaker. So it‟s an issue now 

affecting people in very real ways, but it‟s an issue that has 

consequences down the road as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think, since there‟s been a number of speakers who have been 

talking on this issue and a lot of different aspects of the motion 

are brought up and discussed, it‟s important, Mr. Speaker, to 

keep the exact wording of the motion in mind, Mr. Speaker. 

And there‟s three main parts of the motion. 

 

The first paragraph is: 

 

That this Assembly support the government‟s plan 

addressing climate change, a plan balancing 

environmental protection with economic growth, thereby 

ensuring the well-being and future prosperity of 

Saskatchewan families; and 

 

This is the second paragraph, second section: 

 

That this Assembly support the Saskatchewan plan to 

direct offset payments into the Saskatchewan Technology 

Fund to fund research into the development of technology 

needed to help the world reduce and control carbon 

emission; and further, 

 

[20:45] 

 

The third part: 

 

That this honourable Assembly encourage the 

government to actively promote the Saskatchewan plan at 

the United Nations COP 15 Conference in Copenhagen in 

December of 2009 [Mr. Speaker]. 

 

So as myself and many other members here talk about all the 

different aspects to do with climate change, to do with the 

environment, it‟s important to keep what the actual motion is in 

mind. I wanted to read that for members watching at home so if 

they just tuned in now, just flipped to this channel and decided 

to stay a while on the legislative channel, that gives them an 

idea of what we‟re talking about. And, Mr. Speaker, my 

comments are going to address and talk about the three sections 

of the motion. 

 

However before we get into my comments on the three sections 

on the motion, I do want to make a few general comments, Mr. 

Speaker, that provide the framework or lays a bit of the 

groundwork, Mr. Speaker, to help understand, to help examine 

the motion as we need to as an Assembly. 

 

And all the members, Mr. Speaker, have gotten up, have talked 

about the issue of climate change. A great deal of what we in 

the global community know about climate change comes out of 

the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, the IPCC. Mr. 

Speaker, the IPCC is the leading scientific and 

intergovernmental body for the assessment of climate change. It 

was established 21 years ago by the United Nations 

Environment Programme and the World Meteorological 

Organization to provide a clear scientific view on the current 

state of climate change and its potential environment and 

socio-economic consequences. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we see by the establishment of the IPCC that 

this issue of climate change is one that has a considerable 

amount of scientific research behind it. It‟s an issue where there 

has been research. There have been conclusions and, Mr. 

Speaker, it‟s an issue that requires attention. 

 



November 17, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3655 

The IPCC, there are 194 countries that are members of the 

IPCC — including Canada of course. In 2007 the IPCC was 

awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for its efforts to “build up and 

disseminate greater knowledge about man-made climate 

change, and to lay the foundations for the measures that are 

needed to counteract such change.” 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we‟ve seen as recently as 2007 a recognition 

by the global community that the work that the IPCC does on 

climate change is worthy, that they excel in what they do, that 

the recommendations and the comments that they make do 

indeed have a great influence for what policy-makers around 

the world need to be doing. The most recent report by the IPCC 

concluded that: 

 

Warming of the climate system is unequivocal, as is now 

evident from observations of increases in global average 

air and ocean temperatures, widespread melting of snow 

and ice, and rising average sea level. 

 

And that‟s from the IPCC, 2007, page 2, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So there will be some individuals within society and sadly, Mr. 

Speaker, within this Legislative Assembly, who say that climate 

change is not a reality. Who would say that the issue of climate 

change is . . . the jury is still out. The verdict is not in, Mr. 

Speaker. But what we see from a dominant organization on this 

issue or an authority on this issue, an organization that has 

received the Nobel Peace Prize, an organization, Mr. Speaker, 

that has 194 member countries including our very own, Mr. 

Speaker, we see very clearly in their statement that they say: 

 

Warming of the climate system is unequivocal, as is now 

evident from observations of increases in global average 

air and ocean temperatures, widespread melting of snow 

and ice, and rising average sea level. 

 

So it‟s very clear, very conclusive. 

 

The scientific community has also largely accepted that human 

behaviour has significantly contributed to the observed global 

warming trend. The IPCC report also stated that: 

 

Most of the observed increase in global average 

temperatures since the mid-20th century is very likely due 

to the observed increase in anthropogenic greenhouse gas 

concentrations. 

 

And that‟s from page 5, Mr. Speaker. So a clear link that the 

warming that has been going on, that the IPCC says is a definite 

. . . in their opinion the very, very, very strong likelihood, Mr. 

Speaker, that humans are causing this by the release of 

greenhouse gas emissions through our activities here on the 

planet. 

 

According to the IPCC, the global average surface air 

temperature has increased by 0.6 degrees Celsius since the year 

1900 and is projected to increase between 1.4 degrees Celsius 

and 5.8 degrees Celsius by the year 2100, relative to 1990. 

Recent scientific studies indicate that an increase in global 

temperature of just 2 degrees Celsius would be a tipping point 

beyond which irreversible damage to the global climate would 

occur. 

Mr. Speaker, the point that there‟s a time, Mr. Speaker, where 

the change that has been caused by the release of greenhouse 

gases, when the temperature increases to such an amount that 

there‟s a tipping point which the damage that is occurring to the 

planet, Mr. Speaker, cannot be reversed. The damage is done. 

And it‟s really then, Mr. Speaker, how we as . . . the global 

community is able to respond and deal with the changes, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So we see in the general evidence about climate change, Mr. 

Speaker, from the IPCC, we see conclusive evidence, Mr. 

Speaker, that climate change is real, Mr. Speaker. We see 

conclusive evidence in their opinion, Mr. Speaker, that the 

changes that are caused in the climate are caused by humans, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And there‟s a worry, Mr. Speaker, a statement by the IPCC that 

when the temperature increases a certain amount, Mr. Speaker, 

the damage that occurs to the planet cannot be reversed. The 

damage that occurs to our climate means that the changes that 

are caused through the increase in the temperature, we will have 

to live with, Mr. Speaker, as a global civilization. 

 

So it‟s important, Mr. Speaker, to see the large picture, to see 

what the global community is saying about climate change. And 

it‟s also very important at the same time to see what the focus 

and what the impacts and the changes will mean to 

Saskatchewan, our province. Because, Mr. Speaker, while we as 

members, as Canadians recognize we‟re part of obviously our 

country, Canada; we‟re part of a global community, but we are 

members of the Legislative Assembly for Saskatchewan. So 

clearly when we look at an issue like climate change, it‟s 

necessary that we look at what it means for our constituents, 

what it means for our province, what it means for our activities 

in this legislature and how we respond through policies and 

decisions. 

 

And when we look, Mr. Speaker, at what‟s happening here in 

Saskatchewan when compared to sort of the global picture, I 

think that the change that we see in the province here is an 

alarming one and is a concerning one for anyone who‟s paying 

attention, Mr. Speaker. It‟s not one where we can simply say we 

like warmer winters and crazy statements like that. It‟s a much 

more serious issue and more complicated than boiling it down 

to not wearing a winter coat until late into the winter. 

 

Here in Saskatchewan we see that the Canadian Prairies are 

warming at a faster rate than the global average. According to a 

report entitled Saskatchewan’s Natural Capital in a Changing 

Climate: An Assessment of Impacts and Adaptation done by 

Sauchyn, Barrow, Fang, Henderson, Johnston, and Pomeroy 

earlier this year, we see, Mr. Speaker, that in fact since weather 

stations were first established in Saskatchewan in the year 1895, 

a consistent temperature increase has been recorded at every 

one of those weather stations. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as prairie people, of course, weather is 

something that everyone pays attention to. Perhaps it‟s our . . . 

For those of us that are still on the farm, of course we‟re always 

paying attention to the weather. And many of us are, if we‟re 

not from the farm, we‟re one or two generations removed from 

the farm and that‟s something that we always pay attention to, 

we always care about. 



3656 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2009 

We always are taking notice of how much rain is in the rain 

gauge and we‟re looking at the sky and wondering and taking 

note of the seasons and what that means for us. And if we‟re not 

on the farm, Mr. Speaker, perhaps we‟re golfers and we care 

about it in that way as well. So we know Saskatchewan people 

do care about the weather. And as early back as 1895 with the 

establishment of the weather stations, Mr. Speaker, we‟ve seen 

a consistent increase since that period of time, since the 

beginning of 1895. 

 

Since just 1960, the average daily maximum temperatures have 

increased by more than 3 degrees Celsius in both winter and 

spring. So while we do have the data going back in the province 

to 1895, we see since 1960 — almost 50 years, Mr. Speaker — 

we see that we have seen an increase of more than 3 degrees 

Celsius in both winter and spring. So we have data. We see 

changes that are occurring over a period of time. It‟s not a 

one-off thing. It‟s not a little blip. But we do have the longer 

data which academics and scientists, Mr. Speaker, can refer to 

and draw these types of conclusions in terms of how climate 

change is affecting us here on the Prairies. 

 

The Prairie Adaptation Research Collaborative published a 

study by Dr. Elaine Barrow entitled Climate Scenarios for 

Saskatchewan. Barrow‟s report looks at a range of global 

climate models based on various greenhouse gas emission 

scenarios. Under all of these models and emission scenarios, the 

projections are consistent — Saskatchewan will experience an 

increase in annual average temperature. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, if we look at the different models that have 

been developed from the data, if we project those into the 

reality here, it‟s clear, Mr. Speaker, that increasing temperatures 

here on the Prairies, and how that affects our climate overall, 

will be a reality for us here in Saskatchewan. 

 

For the period 2010 to 2039, the projections range from an 

increase of 0.5 degrees Celsius to 3 degrees Celsius. So from 

about now, 2010 to 2039, increase in temperature from 0.5 

degrees to 3 degrees Celsius. 

 

Beyond that, Mr. Speaker, for the period 2040 to 2069 — a 

ways down the road for many members in the Assembly to 

contemplate and consider — the projections in this period of 

time according to the models, Mr. Speaker, the projections 

range from 1 degree Celsius to 5 degrees Celsius. And, Mr. 

Speaker, for the period 2070 to 2099, Mr. Speaker, the 

projections range from 2 degrees Celsius to 6.5 degrees Celsius. 

 

So over these three bands of time that have been identified, Mr. 

Speaker, by the Prairie Adaptation Research Collaborative, we 

see in these three bands of time, from 2010 to 2039, 0.5 to 3 

degrees increase. From ‟40 to ‟69, the projections range from 1 

degree to 5 degrees Celsius. And, Mr. Speaker, from that last 

band, from 2070 to 2099, the projections range from 2 degrees 

to 6.5 degrees Celsius. 

 

So we see, Mr. Speaker, a ramping-up within each band. As the 

temperature increases in each of those bands, the increase 

increases. The amount of the increase is greater in each of those 

periods. 

 

These may not sound significant, but the projected effects of 

such climate change are not insignificant. So when we look at 

the forecast today or the weather report today on the evening 

news, and we saw these high temperatures — you know, large 

amounts of temperature outside the normal seasonal averages 

— what I said here in terms of 1 degrees to 5 degrees might not 

seem like a big deal to us. But when you look at the trend lines 

over the century and the implications for what this means to the 

overall climate, the effects are significant, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Here in Saskatchewan, some of the things that we will see with 

this change in temperature occurring here in the province, Mr. 

Speaker, increased water scarcity. Many days here in the 

Assembly we talk about the importance of water, whether it is 

to agricultural producers, whether it‟s to industry, whether it‟s 

to individuals living in our cities and towns and villages, Mr. 

Speaker. The recreation as well. That‟s part of our summer 

lifestyle and winter lifestyle as well, getting out on lakes. The 

availability of water and the quality of water is an issue for all 

people. 

 

We know that with temperature increases like this, Mr. Speaker, 

that increased water scarcity will be a reality. And we know that 

this will have a great implication for how we live our lives here 

in Saskatchewan, great implications for how we engage in 

commerce, great implications for how we have fun through 

recreation, great implications for how we use tourism to 

promote our province, Mr. Speaker. So clearly we know that 

water is a big deal here in the province. 

 

And we see these types of increases when we see these very 

reliable models that are created by researchers. And we know 

that they‟ll have great implications for water. That should cause 

all of us in the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, to be worried. 

 

Another issue, Mr. Speaker, that we will see with increased 

temperatures that the researchers tell us, the issue is more 

frequent and intense heat waves. So, Mr. Speaker, while all of 

us at times might appreciate a warm summer day, and while 

many people in Saskatchewan like a brief escape to a warmer 

climate in winter, we‟re not talking about that. We‟re not 

talking about a day that might be a little more comfortable. 

We‟re not talking about simply making life a bit warmer for us. 

These are extended heat waves, Mr. Speaker, that will have 

great implications again for how we live here on the Prairies. 

 

[21:00] 

 

In the same way that the availability of water, obviously the 

availability of water is tied to the heat waves as well. But these 

heat waves will have great implications for Saskatchewan 

people — how we live here, how we make our livings and how 

we enjoy our livings, Mr. Speaker. So whether that‟s 

agricultural producers who now have to deal with extended heat 

waves for their crops, whether that is increased power 

consumption that heat waves might cause, clearly, Mr. Speaker, 

just as water scarcity will be a big issue, so too will the frequent 

and intense heat waves. 

 

With the longer heat waves come the dry spells. And I touched 

on that, Mr. Speaker, how that will affect agriculture, will affect 

the way of life that we know and are familiar to here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 



November 17, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3657 

Decreased snowfall. And while many individuals here might 

not have a problem with shovelling the driveway less often, Mr. 

Speaker, the reality is that we need that moisture. And it‟s 

important that the snowfall that comes down, it‟s part of the 

entire ecosystem. And it‟s part of the moisture in the winter that 

we need to ensure that we have a good spring and a summer 

that is not too dry. 

 

More extreme events, Mr. Speaker. So more instances where 

what was once complete one-offs that people might talk about 

once in a lifetime or some type of extreme weather event that 

would maybe be passed down through the generations, we will 

see extreme weather events at a greater frequency. 

 

This makes me think of a situation in my own constituency in 

Saskatoon Massey Place in the neighbourhoods of Westview 

and part of Dundonald, Mr. Speaker, where there was a great 

deal of flooding in basements, Mr. Speaker. I went to the 

community consultations that were organized by the city 

because the damage that occurred to the homes had to do with 

the sewer system backing up, and it had to do with the 

stormwater system getting into the sewage system and then it 

getting all mixed up and coming back into the homes. I 

remember, Mr. Speaker, when the city engineers gave their 

reports and they plotted the extreme weather incidents over the 

last 100 years, Mr. Speaker. That summer, where we had a 

number of these quick instant flash floods almost, where the 

amount of water coming down was so great that the stormwater 

system could not handle it, when you saw that on the map or on 

the graph over the years, Mr. Speaker, they truly had been at 

one time very extreme. 

 

But we were in a situation where it occurred a couple of times 

— in July I think it was, and one in August. And members 

opposite will know that, through the assistance that was 

provided by the government in terms of the disaster relief 

through Corrections and Public Safety, I believe, the program. I 

remember helping a constituent with his claim. This is the type 

of greater frequency that we‟ll see of these types of incidents. 

 

And so it has implications for homeowners. We‟re not removed 

from these extreme weather events, whether we‟re a 

homeowner in Westview. It truly does matter when the extreme 

weather events are happening more often. And as we saw in 

that one example of these flash floods a couple summers ago, as 

we saw, it has implications for government as well because it 

meant that the program that was in place to help with the relief 

and the disaster assistance had a greater demand and needed to 

respond to individuals faster and more effectively, and those 

changes needed to occur. 

 

So we can just imagine, when we have that one example, is a bit 

of foreshadowing of what we can expect when extreme weather 

situations happen at a greater frequency in increased parts of the 

province more often. 

 

Drought as well obviously, Mr. Speaker, obviously tied to the 

issue of heat wave and availability of moisture and less 

snowfall. But droughts will be a reality as well. And that of 

course has implications for everyone, but to agricultural 

producers who need the rains to come, and a drought over a 

number of growing seasons, how that adds up. And, Mr. 

Speaker, clearly that too will have a big impact on 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

Increased peak wind events. So it‟s not only the downpours of 

rain that we‟ll see, but researchers also say that we‟re going to 

have increased peak wind events. And anyone who‟s been in a 

windstorm and trying to secure something in their yard or their 

house or their farm during a windstorm knows that the power of 

wind is great. And a lot of damage can be done by peak wind 

events. So again, implications for how we organize our 

communities, how we organize our homes, and the government 

programs that might be in place to respond to those types of 

disasters will be called upon more often, and we‟ll need to react 

more effectively. 

 

And I touched on rainfall and flooding, Mr. Speaker. So these 

were some of the projected effects of climate change here in 

Saskatchewan according to the Prairie Adaptation Research 

Collaborative, some of the realities projected that we will face 

by the increased temperatures that we‟ll experience, or by the 

changed climate we will experience here in Saskatchewan. 

 

It‟s incredibly simplistic to think climate change will simply 

mean milder winters, which would probably be welcomed by 

many Saskatchewan people. It‟s important to look at the full 

range of projected effects and to consider how climate change 

will affect Saskatchewan people in important sectors like 

agriculture and forestry. So a few of the examples I gave were 

about agriculture, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Forestry as well, I mean, forestry has been an issue of 

considerable debate here in the legislature over the past months. 

And the state of the forestry industry at present is not strong, 

and we‟ve certainly had debates here in the legislature in terms 

of who is responsible and who is preventing a re-emergence and 

a strengthening of the forestry industry. 

 

That‟s not the debate tonight, Mr. Speaker. But we do know the 

forests that we have in this province, the forests that we 

treasure, I think that all people would consider a very important 

part of Saskatchewan. Looking at the flag, Mr. Speaker, beside 

you, we see the green for the North and all of the trees and the 

forests. It‟s a huge part of Saskatchewan, and it‟s something 

that we all treasure, certainly because of the economic benefits 

but also for all the cultural and the social meaning that forests 

have for people. It is more than simply the economic value that 

it might have, Mr. Speaker. But we know that a changed 

climate, we know that the types of droughts that I referenced 

and extreme weather events will have implications for forests. 

We know that rising temperatures will have implications for 

forests as well. 

 

And we‟ve seen this in other parts of the country quite clearly. 

We‟ve seen in parts of British Columbia the spread of the 

mountain pine beetle. Now, Mr. Speaker, the mountain pine 

beetle is an animal that attacks pine trees in the forests here in 

Canada, and it‟s an animal that‟s been around for some time. 

But the difference between then and now, Mr. Speaker, that in 

the past we‟ve had cold enough winters to kill off the pine 

beetle. There is a certain number of days where the temperature 

needs to be below a certain level in order to kill off the larva 

and the pine beetles themselves. 

 

And when that doesn‟t occur, Mr. Speaker, when we have 



3658 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2009 

warmer winters, what it allows is the pine beetle to multiply and 

attack the forest and spread further and further. So as we see the 

pine beetle spread from BC [British Columbia] into Alberta, 

and then as it will inevitably become more and more of an 

issue, here and across the entire forest across the country, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

It‟s a big deal because it‟s about economics, but it‟s also about a 

way of life. It‟s about all the other important attachments we 

have to forests. And I‟ve seen this first-hand myself, Mr. 

Speaker. I tree planted many years in northern BC. And I can 

recall going, the first time I went down a mountain valley where 

I saw where the pine beetles had been very active over a couple 

of winters. And it truly was shocking because it looked, when 

you looked at the mountainside down this valley and you just 

saw a carpet of red. And it looked like almost like the photos 

that you might see of fall in eastern Canada where you have all 

the different trees changing colours. The contrast was so sharp 

between the dead, red pine trees up against the fir and the 

spruce trees, the other trees that were on that slope.  

 

So while we might not . . . And even driving through the 

community of Prince George, you can see how it‟s changed the 

landscape of that community so much by the complete absence 

of pine trees. 

 

So we already see, Mr. Speaker, how a changing climate has a 

direct implication and has direct effects on our landscape, on 

the things that we hold near and dear to us as a province and as 

a people, and has a direct implication to our economic strength 

and well-being. Well, Mr. Speaker, I wanted to touch on that 

little intro and comments on climate change in a global 

perspective, as well as what it means for us here in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, because I think it‟s important to 

have that mindset when we examine closely what the 

government motion that we‟re debating is all about. 

 

And as I said earlier on in my comments, the government 

motion talks about balancing environmental protection, 

economic growth, and talks about the Saskatchewan 

Technology Fund. And it talks about the work that is planned, 

the conference in Copenhagen. But, Mr. Speaker, too often 

we‟ve heard comments in this Assembly by members opposite, 

comments that would call into question the scientific research 

and underpinnings all around the issue of climate change. 

 

Now I appreciated the comments made by the member who 

spoke before me from Last Mountain-Touchwood, a member 

who gave a very thoughtful speech, talked about his own 

reading that he‟s done, his own concerns for his family. Talked 

about his experiences in meeting people, and how the issue of 

climate change is truly one that we should all be concerned 

about because we obviously all care about the generations that 

will come after us. 

 

The member didn‟t talk a whole lot about what their 

government isn‟t doing. And I understand how a government 

member can‟t get up and talk about the failures and the broken 

promises that the other side is engaged in. But he certainly did 

give a thoughtful overview and presentation of the issue of 

climate change, and talked a lot about the science behind it, Mr. 

Speaker. But sadly, what we‟ve seen over the years here in the 

Assembly for members opposite is a lot of doubting about the 

science, a lot of doubting about the validity of climate change, a 

lot of naysaying about whether or not this issue is an important 

one. 

 

There‟s one quote, Mr. Speaker, and it says, “Scientists don‟t 

agree. They can‟t assure us that there is a trend to global 

warming.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the individual who said that is the current 

member from Estevan who . . . I‟m not making these up. I‟m 

not pulling them off of non-credible sources. These are coming 

straight out of Hansard, Mr. Speaker. The member from 

Estevan calling into question whether or not scientists agree on 

this issue at all, and whether one should even be concerned 

about it. 

 

Well I think when we saw the initial comments, and when I 

talked about the IPCC — the 194 member states, the consensus 

in the global community about the issue of climate change, Mr. 

Speaker — I think for the member to question the consensus 

around this issue, to question the validity of what scientists 

might be saying about it, Mr. Speaker, is certainly 

disconcerting. 

 

Another comment, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about those who 

might doubt whether or not this issue of climate change is a 

concern, we can look to, Mr. Speaker, the current member from 

Thunder Creek, who said in Hansard: 

 

. . . not that the scientific community can even agree as to 

whether or not any global warming is occurring outside of 

normal cyclic temperature swings or, if so, if it is man 

made or caused by natural events. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, again my comments earlier on in the 

evening where the IPCC received the Nobel Prize for its work 

in stating that there is consensus among the vast majority of 

scientists that temperatures and climate change has been 

occurring. There is consensus, Mr. Speaker, that these changes 

are due to human actions due to greenhouse gases. So to have a 

former cabinet minister, Mr. Speaker, make that kind of a 

remark, to me calls into question the commitment of the cabinet 

and the commitment of the government to fully tackle the issue 

of climate change and to come forward with a plan, to come 

forward with an approach that addresses the issue. 

 

Another member, Mr. Speaker, of the Sask Party: 

 

I‟m beginning to wonder, Mr. . . . [Speaker], if this whole 

idea of the ozone layer and the environment is not one big 

hoax that we‟re all getting caught up in . . . 

 

. . . one of the things we hear about is global warming. 

Well, if we‟ve got global warming, it certainly was nice 

to have a nice winter this past winter . . . 

 

[21:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, a sad statement that talks about whether or not the 

issue of the ozone . . . I didn‟t know the ozone was up for 

debate. But the issue of whether greenhouse gases are in fact 

causing an issue here on the planet, whether global warming is 

real — additional statements by members, Mr. Speaker, that 



November 17, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3659 

climate change is likely not a reality in their opinion. 

 

Another member, Mr. Speaker, the current member from 

Biggar, Mr. Speaker, who said, “There‟s also significant debate 

within the scientific community about the validity of the 

conclusion that made greenhouse gas emissions, that man-made 

greenhouse gas emissions are causing climate change to global 

warming.” 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, all of these quotes from Hansard. All of 

these quotes from sitting Sask Party members who would now 

like us to believe, Mr. Speaker, who would now try to convince 

us, would now try to convince the Saskatchewan people that 

this government motion that came forward addressing these 

various issues on climate change, Mr. Speaker, that they would 

now have us believe that their commitment to addressing 

climate change is sincere. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have denials from members opposite that 

climate change is real. We have denials from members opposite 

that the scientific community agrees that there is a thing called 

climate change. We have denials from members opposite that 

this is anything more than just better winters, Mr. Speaker, 

anything more than the opportunity to leave that parka in the 

closet a little longer, and not actually do something about it. 

 

So you can see, Mr. Speaker, my initial skepticism, where it is 

rooted and how I think it is well-founded. When we have sitting 

members of the Sask Party government, individuals who have 

sat in cabinet, individuals that have prominent positions within 

the Sask Party caucus, Mr. Speaker, individuals who denied that 

climate change was a reality, individuals who said it was a 

hoax, individuals who said that it‟s a man-made-up idea, Mr. 

Speaker, these are the same individuals now that would tell us 

that this motion that they‟ve put forward is a sincere one. It‟s a 

motion that is urgent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, they were deniers about climate change. 

They were deniers about the majority of scientific opinion on 

this issue. And now suddenly, Mr. Speaker, they would have us 

believe that they are sincere in their commitment to address this 

issue. Well, Mr. Speaker, I think as I go on in my speech, we‟ll 

see by their actions, Mr. Speaker, that I think there is an 

absence among members opposite to fully appreciate the 

severity of the situation, the seriousness of the situation, and 

how this will have implications for Saskatchewan people. 

 

And so when we see these types of statements being made, and 

I know they‟re shocking to me. And I‟m sure they‟re shocking 

to many other members in the Assembly and likely members on 

the opposite side as well — members on the other side who do 

believe in science, members who do believe in the majority of 

scientific opinion, members who do think that this is a concern. 

But sadly we see, Mr. Speaker, those voices on the other side 

are silent. Well I shouldn‟t say that. The member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood certainly talked about the seriousness of 

the issue and how this is an issue of concern. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to statements made by 

individuals who — on the other side — can really do something 

about it, I don‟t see the evidence that there‟s a commitment 

there. And we see that, Mr. Speaker, come out in their actions 

now currently. And the Sask Party‟s environmental record is 

extremely bleak. And that‟s why, Mr. Speaker, the member‟s 

speech before me talked about a lot of great things, but you‟ll 

note that it didn‟t talk about their record to any great extent. 

 

They clawed back hundreds of millions of dollars that were set 

aside to help our province meet the climate challenge. They 

shut down the Office of Energy Conservation and the Climate 

Change Secretariat. They broke their promise to reduce 

greenhouse gas emissions and didn‟t even express any regret 

doing so. And I‟ll get to a quote, Mr. Speaker, that talks to the 

cavalier fashion in which the minister broke that election 

promise. 

 

They purchased brand new, gas-guzzling SUVs [sport-utility 

vehicle] for cabinet ministers to drive around in. And, Mr. 

Speaker, members opposite might say, oh what‟s the big deal? 

It‟s just a Jeep. But, Mr. Speaker, and in fact some of the 

members said, well actually we could have bought Hummers. 

You know, the mileage on a Hummer would be even worse 

than the Jeep Patriot. You know, it‟s better off than the Jeep 

Patriot. But clearly their actions on the small things, Mr. 

Speaker, don‟t add up. So we see the breaking of large election 

promises, and we see the breaking on the small issues as well. 

 

They‟ve also, Mr. Speaker, they‟ve sided with Ed Stelmach in 

Alberta every step of the way, even when the rest of the country 

was trying to actually do something about climate change, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also saw the axing of the $320 million Green 

Future Fund. Mr. Speaker, we know in recent months when 

we‟ve seen the fiscal mismanagement, Mr. Speaker, and how 

money is being clawed back all over the place and how cuts are 

occurring in various departments, Mr. Speaker, we understand 

why they would want to get their hands on that fund as well, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Shut down the Office of Energy Conservation that was created 

in 2002 to develop, encourage, and support cost-effective 

energy conservation, activities that can be implemented by the 

public and industry. 

 

The Climate Change Secretariat was announced in June 2007 as 

part of the Saskatchewan energy and climate change plan. The 

aim of the secretariat, which was located within the Crown 

Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan, was to be a central 

agency dedicated to climate change. It coordinated and oversaw 

government‟s climate change agenda in the Crowns and 

executive government, Mr. Speaker. So what we‟ve seen by the 

Sask Party government is the elimination of both the Office of 

Energy Conservation and the Climate Change Secretariat. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, while we‟ve seen these cuts and we‟ve seen 

the grabbing of these funds, the most alarming broken promise, 

Mr. Speaker, that we‟ve seen, one of the most alarming broken 

promises that we‟ve seen, Mr. Speaker, is in the 2007 election. 

The Sask Party promised to meet the greenhouse gas emission 

reduction target set out by the previous NDP government. 

 

And here‟s what the Sask Party said. And I quote from the Sask 

Party‟s 2007 platform under the heading “Meeting 

Saskatchewan‟s Greenhouse Gas Emission Reduction Targets” 

and it says: 



3660 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2009 

A Saskatchewan Party government will invest in 

environmental innovation and energy conservation 

measures while working with industry and the province‟s 

Crown Corporations to meet the province‟s greenhouse 

gas emission reduction target to: 

 

Stabilize greenhouse gas emissions by 2010 [very soon 

approaching]; 

 

Reduce greenhouse gases by 32 per cent from current 

levels by 2020; and 

 

Reduce greenhouse gases by 80 per cent from current 

levels by 2050. 

 

Mr. Speaker, but in the spring, the Minister of the Environment 

announced the Sask Party was breaking that promise, Mr. 

Speaker. And it was a very clear statement, a very clear 

admission that they were breaking the election promise, Mr. 

Speaker, a very clear indication to the people of Saskatchewan 

that they were turning their backs collectively on this issue, Mr. 

Speaker, and that instead they were going to do what was 

convenient to them. 

 

In The StarPhoenix on April 29th, 2009, a columnist wrote: 

 

Were Heppner‟s admission at least a regretful-sounding 

one with the faint hope of one day doing better, it might 

be palatable. But the environment minister was not 

exactly sounding regretful . . . or frankly, much like an 

environment minister at all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a quote from one individual within the press who 

commented on the attitude, the tone of the breaking of this 

promise, the retreat from a clear commitment in their election 

platform, Mr. Speaker. An approach where it was, you know, to 

me would indicate that it‟s just simply a shrugging of the 

shoulders and saying, well we broke it. Let‟s move on. Let‟s try 

to forget about it. Let‟s pretend it didn‟t happen. Let‟s find 

something else to talk about. Let‟s look for a photo op. Let‟s 

just do anything else but focus on this issue as it needs to be 

focused on and addressed — the broken promise that we made, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Premier also has taken the opportunity to defend Alberta‟s 

environmental record and continually sides with the premier 

there, Premier Stelmach.  

 

In June of this year, several US [United States] governors and 

Western premiers gathered in Utah. One of the speakers at the 

Western Governors‟ Association meeting was President 

Obama‟s Energy Secretary, Steven Chu. Secretary Chu is a 

Nobel prize winning physicist. According to the June 17th issue 

of the Calgary Herald, Secretary Chu told the delegates: “The 

news has been getting scarier.” 

 

The article goes on to say: 

 

Chu . . . said the entire world must do more. 

 

Half of the northern polar ice cap has been lost during the 

last decade, a rate “significantly faster” than what 

scientists predicted, Chu said, while sea levels have risen 

five times faster over the last 20 years than initially 

believed. 

 

Pine beetle proliferation is destroying lush forests and 

producing more forest fires, he said, noting 40 per cent of 

the pine in B.C. is dead, with 80 per cent expected to die. 

What‟s more, “severe water stress” is predicted for the 

western U.S. in the first half of the century. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, many of the things that I touched on earlier in 

terms of what the implications will be for Saskatchewan people 

in dealing with climate change, whether it‟s things like the need 

to fight forest fires more because our forests will be dying at a 

greater rate and level, whether it‟s the extreme weather 

situations that we‟ll have to deal with as well, Mr. Speaker, 

clearly what Mr. Chu was talking about is a reality here on the 

ground. 

 

The article then quotes Chu as saying this: 

 

The most scary thing in my mind is the (scientific) 

observations. People can be entitled to opinions, but 

they‟re not entitled to their own facts. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, from Mr. Chu, really siding with the majority 

of public and global opinion on this issue, Mr. Speaker, saying 

that, you know, it‟s fine to have your own views, but you can‟t 

just make up random stuff. You can‟t just have opinions 

because they might be convenient to you at the time. It needs to 

be better founded than that. One needs to look at the science. 

And based from the comments from members opposite, Mr. 

Speaker, we see a clear reluctance on their part to do that. 

 

What did the Premier do after listening to the US Energy 

Secretary, a Nobel prize winning physicist, express serious 

concerns about climate change and the need for the world to do 

more? I quote from the Calgary Herald of June 17: “Wall, 

however, defended Alberta‟s environmental efforts . . .” 

 

The Premier defended Alberta‟s environmental efforts, not 

Saskatchewan‟s environmental efforts and not even Western 

Canada‟s environmental efforts. No, the Premier defended 

Alberta‟s, Mr. Speaker. And we see that because what we‟ve 

seen here on the ground, Mr. Speaker, is a retreat from the 

election platform, a retreat from their own action or claims of 

their own action, Mr. Speaker, on the environmental front. So 

when the Premier‟s put on the spot of talking about climate 

change, just reverts to defending Alberta‟s actions as opposed 

to even mentioning Saskatchewan‟s. The unfortunate reality is 

that under the Sask Party government, Saskatchewan has not 

had environmental efforts to defend. 

 

Perhaps it‟s not surprising that the Premier would jump to 

Alberta‟s defence. After all the Premier has repeatedly chosen 

to stick close to Ed Stelmach in Alberta. In fact the July 26, 

2008 issue of the Leader-Post says this, and I quote: 

 

Saskatchewan and Alberta are increasingly the “odd men 

out” in the climate change debate currently raging in the 

corridors of power across the country. 

 

That much was painfully obvious at the three-day Council 

of the Federation meetings in Quebec . . . last week. 



November 17, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3661 

The article goes on to say: 

 

Messrs. Wall and Stelmach can boast all they want about 

carbon storage and clean coal technology. But these are 

useful tools and techniques, not comprehensive policy 

solutions, to the problem of man-made climate change. 

 

And, like they say, if you‟re not part of the solution, 

you‟re part of the problem. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we see that Saskatchewan‟s record under the 

Sask Party government is not a proud one. We see that our 

actions by the government on the issue of climate change has 

been a retreat, has been an abandonment of their election 

platform. And I think that that‟s concerning to many people 

here in Saskatchewan. 

 

A Canada West survey last year found over 62 per cent of Sask 

residents say reducing greenhouse gas emissions is a high or 

very high priority — 62 per cent, Mr. Speaker, a very large 

percentage of the population. Only 5.8 per cent say it‟s a very 

low priority. The survey went on to show that 80 per cent of 

Saskatchewan residents think climate change is a very serious 

or serious problem, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So on the one hand, while we see Saskatchewan people viewing 

climate change as a real concern, on one hand we see 

Saskatchewan people wanting action on climate change, on the 

other hand, Mr. Speaker, we‟ve seen a record of the Sask Party 

government, one of failing to live up to their commitments, one 

of abandoning the targets that they ran on. One of not having 

much to hang their hat on, Mr. Speaker, whether it‟s speeches 

of members opposite who can‟t really provide a whole lot of 

examples of the things they‟re doing, or whether it is the 

Premier‟s fondness and default position to simply defend the 

position of Alberta as opposed to defend the actions that have 

occurred in Saskatchewan. To me, Mr. Speaker, that is a 

troubling issue. 

 

[21:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, so we‟ve provided a bit of an overview of climate 

change as an issue for the planet, touched on what this will 

mean for people in Saskatchewan, what this will mean for us 

here, how this will change our lives, Mr. Speaker. And we‟ve 

seen, Mr. Speaker, how the Sask Party will say one thing in the 

election campaign but then, when given the opportunity to 

deliver on what they want to do, we see, Mr. Speaker, that they 

haven‟t done a good job. In fact they‟ve abandoned their 

targets. 

 

And when the Premier is out of province he has to defend 

Stelmach‟s position. And increasingly it‟s Wall and Stelmach 

against everyone else, Mr. Speaker. So when we look at . . . I 

think that‟s the mindset or the framework, I think, Mr. Speaker, 

that we need to look through when examining this government 

motion that was put forward on the environment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As I mentioned earlier, there‟s three main components to this 

government motion. The first part, and I‟ll talk about that now, 

Mr. Speaker, the first part of this motion. And this part of the 

motion reads — it‟s the first paragraph: 

 

That this Assembly support the government‟s plan 

addressing climate change, a plan balancing 

environmental protection with economic growth, thereby 

ensuring the well-being and future prosperity of 

Saskatchewan families. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, you know, whenever we read something, 

Mr. Speaker, there‟s certain words that jump out at us, certain 

words that speak to us. And when I read this motion, Mr. 

Speaker, when I read the first part of it, the words that really 

caught me was “a plan balancing,” a plan balancing, Mr. 

Speaker. And a plan balancing is the language that all the 

members opposite have worked into their speeches. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, at face value maybe members might think a 

plan balancing is okay language. And maybe members might 

think that yes, this makes good sense. But then it got me 

thinking and it reminded me, Mr. Speaker, of when else I‟ve 

heard about their plan balancing. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what it turned my thoughts to were a number 

of the debates we‟ve recently had here in the Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker. It got me thinking about the recent debate we had on 

the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, and really how I addressed in 

an earlier speech, Mr. Speaker, how the Throne Speech really 

was for the most part empty of tangible aspects that the 

government wants to do moving forward. Yes there were some, 

but we saw in this Throne Speech 50 aspects looking back, 

talking about their record, and about 10 looking forward. 

 

And it‟s my opinion and position, Mr. Speaker, that that Throne 

Speech was nothing more than a channel-changing document, 

nothing more than an attempt by members opposite to draw 

attention from what is a primary concern right now in the 

province to something else. 

 

And something else on any given day falls under a number of 

different patterns. You know, one day it‟s cakes. One day it‟s 

balloons. One day it‟s moustaches. One day it‟s this; one day 

it‟s that. Whatever the flavour of the day is, Mr. Speaker, that‟s 

what they would draw attention to. 

 

But what they were drawing attention from, Mr. Speaker, was 

their horrible, horrible record, Mr. Speaker, in managing the 

province‟s books; their horrible, horrible record, Mr. Speaker, 

in having a fiscal plan; their horrible, horrible record, Mr. 

Speaker, in achieving a plan to balance, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have seen very clearly, and I think on Thursday, I know on 

Thursday, Mr. Speaker, we will get a clearer picture of the 

provincial finances. But it‟s obvious to all members at this point 

in time — and there has been some hints delivered by the other 

side, Mr. Speaker — that the plan balancing that they had for 

the provincial books, Mr. Speaker, didn‟t work out so well. It 

was not a good plan. It was not well thought out, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It did not do a great job of balancing because now, Mr. Speaker, 

we learned that here in Saskatchewan we are in fact in deficit. 

We learned, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are spending 

more than they‟re taking in and we are in deficit. And now the 

province is facing some very serious consequences and some 

very serious decisions, Mr. Speaker. 

 



3662 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2009 

So you can see my concern. You can see my reluctance when I 

read this motion, when it talked about a plan balancing, Mr. 

Speaker. The last time I heard about a plan balancing, Mr. 

Speaker, by members opposite, it didn‟t turn out so well. And 

we don‟t know how ugly it is yet exactly, Mr. Speaker, but we 

know it‟s bad. Mr. Speaker, we know that. 

 

You know, we heard recent news that certain individuals might 

not be around for the Thursday update, Mr. Speaker, because it 

might not be a nice photo op. We want to find a nicer photo op, 

Mr. Speaker. We want to find something that doesn‟t draw 

attention to the horrible plan of balancing. We want to find 

something, Mr. Speaker that is lighter, you know, whether that 

be a moustache, whether that be a cake, whether that be a 

ribbon, whether that be a balloon. That‟s what we want to put 

our attention to, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So when I see the talk from the other side about a plan to 

balance I‟m worried because, Mr. Speaker, we‟ve seen the track 

record; we‟ve seen the evidence. And the balancing has been 

pretty lopsided and the balancing is to the side of deficit. It‟s 

not in favour of Saskatchewan people. It‟s not in favour of our 

economy. It‟s not in favour of our environment. 

 

The plan has not been a balanced one. It‟s been a very skewed 

one. It‟s been one that has been hard on Saskatchewan people. 

So when they talk about this balanced plan, I simply have 

trouble believing it and I simply have trouble thinking that this 

will bring the results that members opposite want us to think it 

will bring. 

 

So that‟s the first section, Mr. Speaker, of this motion and 

that‟s, Mr. Speaker, the first concern I have with this motion is 

that when members opposite talk about balancing anything, 

alarm bells go off for me because they‟ve proven so far by their 

track record that they‟re not up for the job, up to the job. 

 

The second section, Mr. Speaker, of this motion is: 

 

That this Assembly support the Saskatchewan plan to 

direct offset payments into the Saskatchewan Technology 

Fund to fund research into the development of technology 

needed to help the world reduce and control carbon 

emission. 

 

And that‟s the end of the first section, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this ties into the earlier comments I read by 

one of the journalists talking about some of the initial 

short-term measures that members opposite may have done. 

And we can certainly have a discussion about the Saskatchewan 

Technology Fund and how that has importance for 

Saskatchewan, and I think that would be an interesting debate. 

But it‟s not, Mr. Speaker . . . In my view it might be one 

important part of a larger plan. It might be one important part of 

a larger strategy. It might be one important part of a larger piece 

of legislation, Mr. Speaker, but it is not a strategy. It is not a 

global plan. It is not something, Mr. Speaker, that will in my 

opinion address the concerns about the environment, about the 

climate, address the action that needs to take place here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So it might be one aspect of the plan, but it‟s not a plan, Mr. 

Speaker. And members before me have talked about, well 

where is the plan? Where is the plan? And, Mr. Speaker, we had 

one plan that was presented by members opposite and that was 

the plan in the election platform, but sadly, Mr. Speaker, 

they‟ve admitted that they‟re breaking their promise on that 

plan. So we can‟t rely on that plan, Mr. Speaker, because that 

plan, by their own admission, is a broken promise. That plan 

does not hold water, Mr. Speaker. That plan will not address the 

concerns of Saskatchewan people, the concerns of the high 

percentage of individuals who want action on climate change. 

That plan, Mr. Speaker, is a broken promise. 

 

So the Technology Fund could be one important part of an 

overall strategy. And it would be great to have that debate, Mr. 

Speaker, but so far what we‟ve heard from members opposite is 

simply an admission that they‟ve broken their promise, that 

they‟ve retreated from the targets that they agreed to. And now 

the Saskatchewan people are in a place where they can‟t trust 

them. 

 

And I bring up the issue of trust, Mr. Speaker, because that‟s a 

very important one. And the members opposite would like us to 

believe. They simply want to say to us, well trust us. We have a 

plan, and trust us. We‟ll get that plan implemented. Trust us. 

We‟ll introduce that legislation in the spring. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, where is that legislation? The legislation they did 

introduce, Mr. Speaker, died on the order papers. The 

legislation that they were proud of, Mr. Speaker, has not been 

passed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So members opposite, they‟re the government. They have the 

majority. They control what legislation is brought into this 

House other than private member Bills, Mr. Speaker. It‟s within 

their means if they care about something. It‟s within their 

means if they are concerned about something. It‟s within their 

means if they actually want to pass some legislation, if they 

actually want to show that they have a plan for the 

Saskatchewan people, for this province, Mr. Speaker. It‟s 

within their power. It‟s within their ability. It‟s within their role 

and their responsibility, Mr. Speaker, to introduce that 

legislation. 

 

And members opposite don‟t want to introduce that legislation 

or they haven‟t introduced it or they did introduce it but they 

didn‟t have their act together, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that the 

legislation would actually be passed. So now we‟re in a limbo 

state, Mr. Speaker, where we‟ve seen some legislation. We‟ve 

seen an election platform that was a broken promise. And we 

have a promise now, Mr. Speaker, in the future — even though 

they‟ve broken the one promise — we have a promise in the 

future that they‟re going to bring in some comprehensive 

legislation that will show the whole plan that will be clear to the 

Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well you can see why I might have trouble believing that, Mr. 

Speaker, or that I can be comfortable simply taking members 

opposite at their expression of, trust me; it‟ll all work out in the 

end — don‟t you worry. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we‟ve seen an election platform that was 

introduced, targets that were adopted, and we‟ve seen the 

broken promise and the abandonment of those targets. We‟ve 

seen legislation that was introduced by a majority government, 



November 17, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3663 

a majority government that has the ability to pass the legislation 

that it wants to pass. If it‟s a priority, if its act is together, it can 

surely get it done. And now, Mr. Speaker, we have a promise. 

We have an IOU [I owe you]. We have a future pledge that, Mr. 

Speaker, at some point in time in the future, we‟ll introduce 

legislation. Just trust us, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well you can see, Mr. Speaker, why I might have problems 

with this notion of just trusting them because we can all recall, 

around budget time, when all the rhetoric from members 

opposite, all the over-top talk was about the best budget in the 

whole universe and how things were just great, Mr. Speaker, 

and how they had a plan to balance the books. They had a plan 

to take care of the resources. They had a plan to take care of 

fiscal management. After all, Mr. Speaker, the members 

opposite who supposedly are good at business, members 

opposite who supposedly have this great track record at 

investment, members opposite who supposedly can run 

businesses, members opposite who were going to just whip this 

province into shape, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And what have we seen? Well we‟ve seen a huge train wreck 

with the books, Mr. Speaker. We‟ve seen a financial mess-up 

with the budget, Mr. Speaker, time back, mess-up that we 

haven‟t seen since 1986. 

 

So when members opposite say, just trust me on the 

environment; when members opposite just say, oh I‟m going to 

introduce some legislation, just trust me; when members 

opposite say, I‟m going to have a plan of balancing the 

environmental protection and economic growth, Mr. Speaker, 

we can see with their brutal track record on the economy, we 

can see with their brutal track record on their fiscal know-how, 

we can see on their brutal track record on taking from the rainy 

day fund, their brutal track record of stripping in the Crowns, 

Mr. Speaker, we can see how I don‟t trust them when they put 

forward a motion on the environment where they talk about a 

plan for balancing environmental protection with economic 

growth and then goes on to talk about other things. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, instead of providing a comprehensive plan, 

instead of introducing legislation — legislation that was within 

their ability, legislation that is within their right, legislation that 

supposedly is within their know-how, legislation that should 

address the issue of climate change — we don‟t see anything. 

We‟re on day 14 — what‟s the day now of the session? — 14, 

15, something like that and no legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

A motion, a motion that was written perhaps by the Premier on 

a Saturday afternoon. Maybe he called up the Environment 

minister and said hey, not only did I have some great ideas on 

potash, not only did I have some great ideas about the budget, 

but I also have some great ideas on the environment. And I 

think, before we send you off to Copenhagen, we should pass a 

little motion in the House. 

 

And I have these ideas that we could talk about. You know, we 

could talk about balancing because Saskatchewan people like 

balance. They certainly like a responsible government. I know 

they haven‟t had it from us. I know we‟ve mangled the books. I 

know we‟ve done a horrible job of managing the resources, but 

let‟s throw in the word balancing because that could be a good 

idea. 

And you know, let‟s talk about Saskatchewan Technology Fund 

because that could make it sound like we actually have a plan. 

That could make it sound like we‟ve actually thought this 

through. That could make it sound like we actually know where 

we‟re going. That could make it sound like we‟ve done some 

concrete things other than simply break our promises on this 

issue, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I could see how this motion could come to pass. I could see 

how it could come into being, Mr. Speaker. My problem is, I 

can‟t trust the members opposite. When they say, just trust me. 

We‟ll bring in the legislation. Trust me. We‟ll bring in the plan. 

The evidence has not been there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[21:45] 

 

We‟ve seen it with the Finance minister talking about the 

budget, saying, well trust me. You know, I‟ve got a rock. I‟ll 

build my province upon this rock. I‟ve got a Fiscal Stabilization 

Fund. Everything will be fine. Just trust me. Well, we‟ve seen, 

Mr. Speaker, in recent days how that fund has been gutted. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s an indication, it‟s an indication, Mr. Speaker, 

of the approach of the mindset that members opposite are 

encouraged to use. Not just members opposite, Mr. Speaker, but 

the approach that cabinet ministers are encouraged to use. We 

can think of, you know, this whole approach where the Finance 

minister said everything‟s under control. Trust me. Trust me. 

I‟ll balance the books. Trust me. I‟ll take care of the resources. 

Trust me. The Sask Party is great at business. We do really well 

at business. You can trust us. We know how to balance a 

chequebook. We know how to do things responsibly. 

 

You can see, Mr. Speaker, that when that type of rhetoric is 

encouraged by the Premier, when that type of rhetoric is 

encouraged by the Premier for his ministers to state, when 

they‟re encouraged just to say trust me on everything. Just take 

my word on it. It‟s all going to work out. Hurry, hurry, we‟ve 

got a photo here to gather for. Let‟s just make sure we‟re at this 

photo op on time. Let‟s just make sure we have enough 

balloons. Let‟s just make sure we‟ve got three ribbons, not one 

ribbon. I want three ribbons at the next photo op. When that‟s 

the greatest concern, when the rhetoric over the top is always 

about just trust me, Mr. Speaker, you can see how I‟m a little 

worried. 

 

So we‟ve seen how the Premier has encouraged this approach 

with the Finance minister. I can only assume, Mr. Speaker, that 

that same approach has been encouraged to the Environment 

minister, because this appears to be the MO [modus operandi] 

for members of cabinet, to simply say, trust me. The details are 

going to work out in the end. Trust me. I know how to balance 

the books. Trust me. I know how to run the province. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we‟re starting to see the chickens come to 

roost, or the crows as they say in the North, Mr. Speaker. And 

we know, Mr. Speaker, that the reality that we see in the 

province now on the ground is not. But sadly we continue to see 

the Premier who encourages his cabinet ministers, whether 

that‟s the Minister of the Environment, whether that‟s the 

Minister of Finance, to simply say, trust me. 

 

Now members opposite, I don‟t think they‟re totally buying this 



3664 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2009 

argument. I don‟t think they‟re buying the trust-me argument. I 

can see why, Mr. Speaker, because members on my side are 

encouraging me to sing the trust me. I‟m not willing to sing the 

trust me, and I‟m actually not even willing to make a poem 

about it, Mr. Speaker. Because the issue of trust me, while we 

can have some fun about it, it‟s also a very serious issue. It‟s 

also an issue that cuts right to the credibility. It cuts right to the 

moral authority the members opposite have to speak to issues. 

 

So I‟ve talked about the Finance minister and how this 

approach clearly must have a spillover to the Environment 

minister. We‟ve also seen it from the Minister of Corrections, 

Public Safety and Policing. Mr. Speaker, we‟ve seen the same 

trust me approach used by the minister of CPSS . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Mr. Speaker. Thank you. Members opposite 

are helping me out with the acronym. 

 

We‟ve seen this same just trust me. And the issue, Mr. Speaker, 

I‟m talking about are escaped individuals or individuals who 

have been let out early from our correctional system. And 

when, Mr. Speaker, there were a number of instances where 

there have been individuals who have been released from jail 

early or individuals who have escaped, for whatever the reason 

might be that individuals are unlawfully at large. 

 

We saw this with the previous minister of Corrections. We saw 

a clear statement from the ministry that the public was going to 

be notified. Trust us. We‟ll notify the public. Trust us. When 

something bad happens, we‟re going to let you know. Trust us. 

When a convicted sex offender is on the loose, Mr. Speaker, 

we‟re going to let you know. That‟s government policy. You 

can trust us. The public, believe me, when something like that 

happens, our position as government will be to notify the 

public. That‟s what they told us. The mantra for cabinet 

ministers opposite — trust us. Trust us. Whether it‟s the 

economy, whether it‟s policing or whether it‟s the environment, 

just trust us . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Exactly. 

 

So we‟ve seen, Mr. Speaker, from the approach that the Premier 

has taken to all his cabinet ministers . . . And this is why I‟m 

alarmed by this motion that talks about the Saskatchewan 

Technology Fund. This motion that talks about, well trust us, 

we have a comprehensive plan. We haven‟t seen any 

legislation. We‟ve seen a whole lot of breaking of promises, but 

please trust us. 

 

With the Minister of Corrections, Policing and Public Safety, 

what we see is the Premier condoning behaviour, the Premier 

condoning behaviour that has very dire consequences for all 

ministers within his cabinet, including the Environment 

minister, including the minister that has brought forward this 

motion. 

 

We see from the Minister of Policing and Corrections and 

Public Safety, when asked his very first question in question 

period, Mr. Speaker, his very first question as a minister on an 

issue, he was asked whether or not there was someone 

unlawfully at large. He says, I‟m not aware of that. Not aware 

of that, no. I know we have a policy — well he didn‟t say this, 

but he must have thought this — I know we have a policy about 

notifying the public. I know we have a policy about being 

upfront and stating what the situation is, Mr. Speaker. But did 

he do it? No. He said, I‟m not aware of anything. 

And it was only, Mr. Speaker, through further questioning, it 

was only, Mr. Speaker, through further questioning that the 

public was informed about an early-release sex offender, Mr. 

Speaker, at large. 

 

It was only through additional questioning that the minister was 

actually . . . lived up to the commitment for full disclosure to 

the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And this example 

that I use, Mr. Speaker, about the Minister of Policing and 

Corrections and Public Safety, how his behaviour is condoned, 

Mr. Speaker, by the Premier, how his behaviour was 

encouraged by the Premier . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I ask the member to stay on topic 

with the discussion of the motion. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think if 

members opposite can just bear with me while I explain this 

case, Mr. Speaker. We see a clear track record with one 

minister, one member of the Crown, Mr. Speaker. And it causes 

me concern because it‟s a pattern of behaviour among cabinet 

ministers, including the Environment minister — the individual 

that brought this motion forward, Mr. Speaker.  

 

We see a clear pattern of condoning behaviour, condoning 

behaviour that says upfront to the people of Saskatchewan. 

Trust me. Trust me. Everything will work out in the end. I have 

your best interest at heart. But when it comes down to the proof, 

when it comes down . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — What is your point of order? I 

recognize the member from Cannington. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

believe in this House that when you‟re in debate on a motion, 

that it needs to be somewhat relevant with the motion. And the 

member opposite has rarely touched the motion, Mr. Speaker. 

So I would ask that you rule, Mr. Speaker, that the member 

address the motion. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To speak to 

the point of order, Mr. Speaker, there‟s been a long-standing 

tradition in this House to allow latitude when speaking about a 

motion or about a topic, Mr. Speaker. In this particular case, if 

you‟re listening very carefully, the member is relating the 

credibility of the intent to past actions of the government in 

saying that those actions are relevant to this motion. Mr. 

Speaker, I think it‟s very clear. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I‟ve listened to both the point of 

order and to the member voicing his concern on the opposition. 

I know that in this House there has been some latitude, but I 

would also . . . which we‟ve given in debate on the motion. But 

I also warn members to, you know, to stay within the relevance 



November 17, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3665 

of the motion. I recognize the member from Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we‟ve seen from the 

motion, we see in the motion, Mr. Speaker, there‟s been three 

sections to this motion. And, Mr. Speaker, we‟ve seen from this 

motion, I initially talked about how, when looking at this 

motion, I have a hard time taking members opposite seriously 

because on every given opportunity with . . . Well not on every. 

The norm on the other side, Mr. Speaker, has been in the past to 

doubt the validity of climate change, has been to doubt the 

consensus among the scientific community that climate change 

is real. And the actions by members opposite have been 

contrary to the majority opinion in Saskatchewan that climate 

change is real and that action needs to occur. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I‟ve stated earlier that it‟s important to take 

that mindset and look at this motion, Mr. Speaker, because I 

think when we look at these three sections of the motion, the 

plan to balance environmental protection with economic 

growth, when the members opposite have done any balancing in 

the past, when members opposite have done some balancing 

with the books, it‟s turned out ugly. And on Thursday we‟re 

going to see just how ugly it actually is, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We‟ve seen with their Saskatchewan Technology Fund, their 

support of this position, the second section of the motion, Mr. 

Speaker, we‟ve seen how members opposite have tried to pass 

this off as a plan. We‟ve seen how members opposite have just 

said, trust me, I have your best interests at heart. Trust me. It‟ll 

all work out in the end. Trust me. We know how to do things 

well because you‟ve seen how well we‟ve managed the books, 

and you‟ve seen how well we‟ve notified the public about 

escaped sex offenders. Trust us on the environment; we‟ll get it 

right. 

 

Mr. Speaker, so my opinion, we‟ve seen how the second part of 

the motion that tries to pretend there‟s a real plan, but it simply 

asks for a blank cheque. Mr. Speaker, in my opinion, not a plan. 

In my opinion, Mr. Speaker, it‟s not a part of the motion I could 

support. 

 

The last part of the motion, Mr. Speaker, that I would like to 

address is: 

 

That this Honourable Assembly encourage the 

government to actively promote the Saskatchewan plan at 

the United Nations COP 15 Conference in Copenhagen, 

in December of 2009. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the interesting part that caught my attention 

and eye in the third part of this government motion, Mr. 

Speaker, is the talk of the Saskatchewan plan. Because, Mr. 

Speaker, the second part of the motion clearly shows that there 

is no plan. The second part of the motion indicates that they 

have some ideas. The second part of the motion indicates that, 

well we had an election promise and we broke it. The second 

part of the motion indicates, well we introduced some 

legislation, but we didn‟t quite get our legislative act together to 

actually pass it. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about the Saskatchewan plan, 

what is this plan, Mr. Speaker? And what we‟ve seen, Mr. 

Speaker, about the Saskatchewan plan is that it‟s really the 

Harper government plan. It‟s not so much about Saskatchewan. 

It‟s more about appeasing and being in ideological agreement 

with our Conservative cousins in Ottawa, or in our backyard as 

it may be, or in our caucus as it may be, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So what we see is, we saw a transition, Mr. Speaker. After the 

promise was broken, the promise that they committed to in the 

election platform, we saw a migration to the federal targets, Mr. 

Speaker. We saw a transition to supporting the federal Tories. 

 

There‟s a quote, Mr. Speaker, from an article on May 12th, 

2009. And it says: 

 

It‟s bad enough that Premier Brad Wall‟s government 

now has to break its own election promise to appease the 

federal government, but Wall must also again deal with 

the perception his government is too closely tied to that of 

Prime Minister Stephen Harper. And about the last area in 

which the Sask. Party government should want to be tied 

to the federal Tories is the environment and greenhouse 

emissions. 

 

Also, they‟ve been tied to the federal Tories on this issue 

for months now. They just haven‟t been especially 

forthright about it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there was talk about, trust me, we have a plan. 

There was talk about, you know, we did break our promise, but 

I think in the future we might introduce some legislation that 

could have some bearing on this issue. Just trust me. Please 

write me a blank cheque. Everything will be okay. But what we 

see, Mr. Speaker, is that the language that has been used by the 

Sask Party government, this language about balancing, this 

language about taking care of a number of things at one time, is 

the same topic we see coming out of the federal Conservatives 

in Ottawa. 

 

From an article, “Canada to push „balance‟ in Copenhagen,” 

“The Canadian government defends its „balanced approach‟ to 

fighting climate change while not jeopardizing its economic 

growth.” And it goes on to say, “Canada will undertake efforts 

to meet our global responsibilities in a way that balances 

environmental protection and economic prosperity for 

Canadians . . . ” 

 

Mr. Speaker, so this third part of the motion, this part of the 

motion that talks about a Saskatchewan plan, we haven‟t seen a 

Saskatchewan plan yet, Mr. Speaker. We‟ve seen some 

Saskatchewan ideas. We‟ve seen some Saskatchewan broken 

promises. We‟ve seen some Sask Party ideas. But we have not 

seen a Saskatchewan plan. We‟ve seen a Harper plan. We‟ve 

seen a plan, Mr. Speaker, that‟s been convenient for them in the 

short term, but not a plan that addresses the issue. 

 

[22:00] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with that I will conclude my remarks. With 

that, Mr. Speaker, I will simply say members opposite have 

been doubters about climate change. Their actions haven‟t lived 

up to their supposedly new-found conversion to a concern about 

climate change. This motion, Mr. Speaker, this motion, Mr. 

Speaker, is not about government commitment to climate 



3666 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2009 

change. Mr. Speaker, this motion is about a blank cheque to 

help out with a trip to Copenhagen. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting this motion. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Before I 

begin my remarks, I want to recite a little poem which I think is 

apropos for tonight‟s motion. 

 

Copenhagen, Copenhagen, here I come 

A climate change plan to find. 

I know I have no clue what I want 

But I am sure no one will mind. 

Trust me, just pass the motion 

On climate change now. 

Trust me, it doesn‟t matter how. 

It‟s meaningless regardless. 

It‟s only my feel-good motion. 

As for climate change 

It really is a good notion. 

But I‟m in it for the trip. 

So let‟s all get a grip. 

Let me go, let me go 

Let me go to Copenhagen. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we have a motion that‟s before the House 

and I‟ve been thinking about this motion. Why would the 

government introduce a motion today talking about climate 

change? Well we learned earlier this week that that the minister 

and a couple of her staff are off to Copenhagen at a cost of 

$24,700 — well one staff from her office and one ministerial 

staff. 

 

We also know that the federal government needs a province to 

line up with them because there really aren‟t many governments 

in the Western world that has Canada‟s position. So we have a 

government, a Sask Party government that‟s very friendly with 

the federal Conservatives. They‟re all going off to Copenhagen. 

They need some legislature someplace in Canada to support the 

federal government. So we have this motion. 

 

Now it‟s fascinating. Last spring the Minister of the 

Environment issued a press release saying that she was 

introducing legislation into the House, and it was going to be a 

piece of legislation that was going to reduce greenhouse gases. 

 

And we did see a Bill. That‟s true. We saw a Bill. But the Bill 

died I guess last spring and we haven‟t seen a Bill since. Now 

the government says it has a plan, and this plan was contained 

in the Bill that hasn‟t been reintroduced. So we need a motion. 

We don‟t really have a plan because we don‟t have any 

legislation at present. We have this framework, but it hasn‟t 

actually been actualized. It means nothing. 

 

So before the Minister of the Environment can go off to 

Copenhagen, she needs a motion to justify the $24,700 dollar 

expense because she‟s going to go off and cheerlead one 

Stephen Harper and his “response to global warming” which 

none of the industrialized countries in the world support. 

 

But let‟s talk about the plan that they have. Now their plan was 

to have The Management and Reduction of Greenhouses Gases 

Act. Now what this was supposed to do was establish the policy 

and regulatory framework in the province of Saskatchewan for 

reducing greenhouse gas emissions, and this was a 

made-in-Saskatchewan plan apparently. Now they said in the 

legislation that they were going to have these provincial targets 

to reduce greenhouse gases by 20 per cent by 2020, and they 

said that they have an agreement in principle on efforts to 

address climate change. This is an equivalency agreement that 

apparently they signed with the Harper government. 

 

Now they also said that as part of this greenhouse plan that they 

were going to set up a technology fund. Well we haven‟t seen 

the technology fund yet. And they also said that they were 

going to set up a climate change foundation which was to 

support research and development. And we haven‟t seen the 

climate change foundation. And they also put on the Internet 

this thing called the framework for the management and 

reduction of greenhouse gases and adaptation to climate change. 

 

Now what we‟re supposed to see in the province, which we 

don‟t see, but according to this piece of paper they‟ve got a 

thing called The Management and Reduction of Greenhouses 

Gases Act and regulations, but we really don‟t have that. We‟re 

supposed to have a climate change advisory council, but we 

don‟t have that. We‟re supposed to have an office of climate 

change which is to be involved in the regulation and monitoring 

and verification and policy and planning and offsets admin and 

adaptation and education and awareness, but we don‟t have that. 

 

Then apparently we‟re supposed to have a technology fund, 

which we don‟t have, and this technology fund is supposed to 

have something to do with the climate change foundation. It‟s a 

lovely little drawing and we should all be happy, but it‟s 

meaningless because it hasn‟t been implemented. So that‟s why 

we have the motion. 

 

So for all of the listening public who think we have a climate 

change plan, we don‟t. What we have is we have a piece of 

paper. You can go onto the Internet to the Ministry of the 

Environment, it‟s dated May 11th, 2009, and it‟s a lovely plan. 

But we‟ve had June, July, August, September, October, 

November — six months. Now I think six months represents six 

months of their four-year government and they have done 

absolutely nothing. And in fact when you think about it, they‟ve 

been in office for two years and they have done absolutely 

nothing. But we‟re going to pass a motion so that the minister 

can go to Copenhagen for a cost of $24,700 and be a 

cheerleader for the Stephen Harper government. 

 

And we all know that the Stephen Harper government position 

when it comes to global warming is not supported by any, by 

any government in the industrialized world, but it will be 

supported by the Saskatchewan Party government. But they 

have a motion. But they have nothing to support this motion. 

They have absolutely nothing to support this motion. Well they 

laugh over there. You know, global warming is a real issue in 

this world. It really is. It‟s a real issue. And you know what? 

There are a number of people that would like to see something 

done about it. And why do they want to see something done 

about it? Because they travel the world; they watch television 

and they see what‟s happening to the climate. And they would 



November 17, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3667 

like to see some concrete action taken by a government. 

 

Oh and the member says, well what have you done for 16 

years? Well the reality is that we have the highest greenhouse 

gas emissions in the country, and I think that we should all take 

responsibility for that and we need to do something. And this is 

a government that has an opportunity to do something, but they 

want to pass a motion that is meaningless because they‟ve had 

two years to start the process and they‟ve done absolutely 

nothing. They‟ve said, trust us. 

 

Now the legislation isn‟t in the House. We don‟t have any kind 

. . . We have a target apparently, but we don‟t have a plan on 

how we‟re going to do this, how we‟re going to meet this 20 per 

cent reduction in greenhouse gas emissions by 2020. 

 

They‟ve got a lovely framework. They‟ve tossed about the 

legislation. They‟ve talked about regulations. They‟ve talked 

about . . . The Minister of the Environment apparently is 

responsible for this and her deputy, but they don‟t have a 

technology fund. They don‟t have a coordinator for climate 

change. They don‟t have a climate change advisory committee 

— I‟m not sure, maybe they do. They don‟t have an 

inter-ministerial climate change committee. Now they don‟t 

have regulations. The policies, if you go onto their website, we 

don‟t see policies. We don‟t see how they‟re going to . . . about 

reducing emissions. We don‟t know how they‟re going to deal 

with adaptation. We don‟t know how they‟re going to deal with 

offsets. 

 

And they talk about education and awareness. Now I do know 

that there certainly is awareness. But I think what the public 

would like to see is a concrete action plan in terms of how 

we‟re going to deal with something that is top of mind for the 

public, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now the minister will go off to Copenhagen and I know she 

will support the federal Conservatives in their plan. But what‟s 

really fascinating is that this is the government that in their 

election document, in the 2007 election, said that they were 

going to do a number of things in the province of Saskatchewan 

to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and that they were going to 

be green leaders. They were going to be green leaders in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now some . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . It‟s not the 

Roughriders we‟re talking about. We‟re talking about green 

leadership in government. Today we‟re going to ensure that 

there was environmental education which would be taught in 

our schools as part of the curriculum. They were going to work 

with municipalities and institutions across this province to 

ensure that new public buildings in the province are constructed 

to the Model National Energy Code. And here‟s a funny. Here‟s 

a real funny. They were going to ensure that all new vehicles 

purchased by the provincial government are a hybrid or high 

fuel efficiency vehicles. 

 

Well we know what that has led to. We see some Jeeps that 

aren‟t high fuel energy efficiency vehicles. And, Mr. Speaker, 

get this — they were going to ensure that all government 

departments follow the lead of Crowns in establishing 

measurable goals and targets to reduce their . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. There‟s starting to be a few 

more conversations going on other than the member that has the 

floor. I recognize the member from Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — And, Mr. Speaker, they were going to 

establish measurable goals and targets to reduce their 

environmental footprint and report publicly. Now, Mr. Speaker, 

we haven‟t seen much reporting publicly by our good friends 

across the way. 

 

Now we know that they will . . . We do know this, that they‟re 

off to Copenhagen, that they‟re going to support the federal 

government. No one in the industrialized world is supporting 

the federal government, but they‟re going to support the federal 

government. And we do know that they have a piece of paper 

that we can all get on the Internet, but it means absolutely 

nothing, because they have a framework but they don‟t have 

legislation. And they haven‟t begun to implement any of the 

things that they say in this document. 

 

Now I know that the members opposite are a bit touchy on this, 

but you know we do have a news release dated May the 11th 

and it was a big announcement by the Government of 

Saskatchewan that they were introducing greenhouse gas 

legislation. Now they said that this new legislation was going to 

“. . . establish a made-in-Saskatchewan plan for reducing 

greenhouse gas emissions to meet provincial targets and 

promote investments in low-carbon technologies.” 

 

Now you know, Mr. Speaker, I haven‟t seen the legislation 

passed. I haven‟t seen the legislation in this sitting of the 

legislature. And you know what the minister said? You know 

what the minister said? “The time for talk is over.” That‟s what 

the minister said. The minister said, “Our government is taking 

real action . . .” Yes. Now this was in May. This is six months 

ago. “The time for talk is over.” “Our government is taking real 

action to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.” Very interesting. 

 

And the minister said this: we‟d be adopting the federal target 

of 20 per cent, and she said that she‟d “. . . signed an 

Agreement in Principle to negotiate an equivalency agreement 

. . .” And this is what she said: “An equivalency agreement with 

the federal government is key to Saskatchewan retaining 

compliance payments in the province for investments in low 

carbon technologies.” 

 

And maybe that‟s why we‟re having the motion. Maybe they 

. . . Who knows? Maybe we‟re having the motion because the 

only way we can keep the compliance payments is to pass a 

motion. Because we certainly don‟t have legislation, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[22:15] 

 

Now the time for talk is over. The time for talk is over, but we 

don‟t have any legislation. We don‟t have this Technology 

Fund. We don‟t have the Climate Change Foundation. Now 

they did announce the new parameters for the Go Green Fund. 

You know, they did announce that. Now I don‟t know what that 

means. 

 

I did go on to the Internet and I did pull some things off. Now I 

don‟t know what go green means, but there are a number of 



3668 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2009 

programs which I think were certainly in action before they 

came to government. You know, things like the EnerGuide for 

Houses, things like the PST . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Absolutely nothing. I think I was the minister when it was 

brought in. Absolutely nothing. I was the minister. So you 

know, nothing wrong there. But I think that‟s something that 

the NDP did. I think that net metering was also something that 

the NDP did, but it‟s not what I call a plan to reduce greenhouse 

gas emissions in the province. But the time for talk is over. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the other thing that the members opposite 

said that they were going to do is that they were going to help 

skating rinks in the province of Saskatchewan become more 

energy efficient. Now I haven‟t seen a lot of assistance for rinks 

in the province of Saskatchewan. In fact we daily get calls from 

communities that they can barely afford to keep the power and 

lights on because of escalating costs. 

 

Now the other thing that they said was that they were going to 

do, have some sustainable community initiatives, including 

local recycling programs. Well I live in Saskatoon, and I‟ve 

been waiting for a recycling program for some time. But you 

know, maybe that‟s part of their go green. Maybe someday we 

will have a recycling program. Maybe they can figure it out 

over in Copenhagen. I‟m not quite sure. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the other thing that the Sask Party said is 

that they‟d extend the current provincial initiatives to improve 

energy efficiency in homes and businesses for another five 

years. Well that‟s nice. But, you know, before they came to 

government, there were low-interest loans for people to install 

Energy Star furnaces. There was the rebating of the PST for 

purchases of Energy Star appliances. And you know what? 

There were energy efficiency initiatives for low-income people. 

 

Now the one thing that they did say is that they were going to 

help Saskatchewan drivers go green on the road. They were 

going to lower the cost to register and insure a 2006 or later 

model hybrid or high fuel efficiency vehicle. Now apparently 

this was going to save the travelling public about $200 a year. I 

do think, though, that SGI [Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance] rates just went up. So I‟m not sure how this 

particular promise of the Sask Party is working at the moment. 

 

But apparently they wanted to increase the percentage of green 

cars and trucks on our roads over the next four years. Now I 

have noticed that there are some, I guess you‟d call them jeeps, 

on the road — lots of those. I‟m not sure they‟re green though. 

I‟m not sure they‟re green even though they said that they were 

going to have high fuel efficiency programs. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, they want to reduce, they want to reduce 

their environmental footprint. Now I was really pleased to see 

that, when the minister is going off to Copenhagen on her trip to 

support Stephen Harper, that apparently she is going to make 

sure that her environmental footprint is negligible. And you 

know, good for her. She has contacted some group and she‟s 

paying some sort of green fee to fly over to Copenhagen to 

support Stephen Harper, who isn‟t being supported by any other 

government in the industrialized world. 

 

But we‟re going to spend $24,700 to fly over to Copenhagen. 

But we‟re, you know, we‟re okay because we‟re not leaving a 

footprint because we‟re going to pay for this flight over so that 

it‟s all environmentally good. But you know what? The plan 

that Canada is going to talk about in Copenhagen isn‟t 

supported by countries in the industrialized world . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Pardon me? Oh, I can keep going about this. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, so we know this: the Minister of the 

Environment is going to Copenhagen. I‟ve never been to 

Copenhagen and I‟m sure it‟s a lovely place. The Minister of 

the Environment is going over to Copenhagen to support 

Stephen Harper‟s plan which none of the other governments in 

the industrialized world support. 

 

The minister needs to go with something. She doesn‟t have her 

legislation. It didn‟t pass. She doesn‟t have her climate change 

office. She doesn‟t have her Technology Fund. She doesn‟t 

have her legislation. She doesn‟t have her regulations. She 

doesn‟t have anything. Even though she says the time for talk is 

over, she has nothing. So the way she‟s going to get over to 

Copenhagen — with I guess some semblance of support — is to 

have the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan pass a motion. 

 

And the motion will indicate that this Assembly supports the 

government‟s climate change plan, even though we don‟t know 

what it is. That this Assembly supports the Saskatchewan plan 

to direct offset payments into the Saskatchewan Technology 

Fund, even though we don‟t have a Technology Fund. And this 

fund apparently is to do research into the development of 

technology needed to help the world reduce and control carbon 

emission, even though we don‟t have a Technology Fund. And 

that we are supposed to encourage the government to actively 

promote a plan that we don‟t have at the UN COP 15 

Conference in Copenhagen in December 2009. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I go back to my poem. I go back to my 

poem. I want to read it again: 

 

Copenhagen, Copenhagen, here I come 

A climate change plan to find. 

I have no clue what I want 

But I am sure no one will mind. 

Trust me, just pass the motion 

On climate change now. 

Trust me, it doesn‟t matter how. 

It‟s meaningless, meaningless, meaningless regardless. 

It‟s only my feel-good motion. 

As for climate change 

It‟s really a good notion, 

But I‟m in it for the trip. 

So let‟s all get a grip. 

Let me go, let me go 

Let me go to Copenhagen. 

 

This motion is about a trip to Copenhagen, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And with that I‟ll adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m very 

pleased tonight to be able to enter into the debate. Mr. Speaker, 

we have before us a motion talking about climate change and 



November 17, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3669 

we have the minister bringing forward what she calls a plan. 

And, Mr. Speaker, if you do an examination of the actual 

motion, what it talks about is a plan, but there is no plan. 

 

We don‟t have anything comprehensive to identify, Mr. 

Speaker, what the government will do to reduce greenhouse gas 

emissions. We don‟t have any concrete plan showing what the 

government‟s intent is other than a 20 per cent reduction when 

their own Crown corporation, SaskPower, indicates between 

now and 2017, at most they‟ll be able to reduce about 9 per cent 

— more likely 3 per cent but certainly not any greater than 9 

per cent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have the government, we have the 

government asking the opposition to pass a motion without any 

substance, without providing enough substance that we in fact 

can look at this motion with any assurance or surety of what the 

future means if we agree to this motion. 

 

So the minister will go off to Copenhagen where this issue will 

be discussed with leaders from around the world. But we don‟t 

know what our position will be when she goes to meet with 

those leaders around the world. 

 

We know that this government‟s very closely tied to the federal 

Conservative government and the position of the federal 

Conservative government is one that is outside the parameters 

of the other nations of the industrial world. It‟s outside the 

European Union. It‟s outside of the position of the United States 

today. Mr. Speaker, they‟re an island to themselves basically in 

their position. 

 

Mr. Speaker, so this motion before the House is a motion asking 

us to support a plan without any substance or concrete steps to 

achieve that plan, without any firm direction from the 

government as to how they intend to achieve that plan. 

 

Now last fall, Mr. Speaker, we had a few glimpses of what a 

plan might be in a proposed piece of legislation, but that 

legislation was never implemented. And, Mr. Speaker, we don‟t 

see any intent today, or in this session of the legislature, to 

implement that piece of legislation or any piece of legislation 

that would give a clear framework or direction to move forward 

with. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that‟s alarming because we‟re now in our 15th day 

of the sitting of this fall portion of the session, Mr. Speaker, and 

we‟ve had ample time for the minister to reintroduce that piece 

of legislation if that was her intent. And, Mr. Speaker, we have 

had ample time to have debate on that piece of legislation had 

she introduced it. Now, Mr. Speaker, we‟re 15 days into the 

session. We don‟t see a piece of legislation. What we see 

instead is a motion saying, we have a plan — like out of the 

blue, they picked a plan out of the air — and support our plan. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, without any substance to that plan, without 

any clear understanding of what the steps are to implement that 

plan and how it will affect both the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan, our environment, and our economy, Mr. 

Speaker, because they‟re all three key, key elements of the 

well-being of our province, Mr. Speaker. Without 

understanding the impact on the environment, without 

understanding the impact on the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan, and without understanding the impact on the 

economy and the business people of our province and the 

economic engine of our province, Mr. Speaker, how can we 

support something that doesn‟t have any substance from which 

we can judge whether or not this plan (a) means anything; two, 

will either hurt our environment, hurt the people of 

Saskatchewan or hurt our economic well-being, Mr. Speaker? 

All that is a mystery, and we haven‟t had the government 

provide us with any direction in the form of legislation or 

concrete steps to actually address the issue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we do have is a government who had an 

environmental plan to deal with climate change in the last 

provincial election in 2007, a plan they took to the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan, a plan the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan judged this government on, elected this 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And what did we see shortly after that election? We saw the 

government say, no we‟re not going to keep that promise, Mr. 

Speaker. No we‟re not going to keep that plan and, Mr. 

Speaker, we‟re going to jump to the federal plan. Bang, we‟re 

going to jump on the same bandwagon as our federal cousins in 

Ottawa. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, so what do we believe or what do we expect 

moving forward, from this government? Well we don‟t know 

because they laid out a plan, they made a promise to the people 

of the province of Saskatchewan, and then they decided not to 

keep it. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, now they‟re asking us to support a motion 

without substance. They‟re asking us to support something 

without knowing what it means. Mr. Speaker, that‟s like buying 

a new car without looking at the car, without understanding 

what options that are on the car, Mr. Speaker, paying for the 

car, taking it home, and finding out it‟s got no headlights, no 

tail lights, and no motor. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This House will now stand adjourned 

until 1:30 tomorrow afternoon. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 22:30.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 Plan for Climate Change 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3641 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3649 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3654 

  D’Autremont (point of order) ................................................................................................................................................ 3664 

  Yates (point of order) ............................................................................................................................................................. 3664 

  The Deputy Speaker (point of order) .................................................................................................................................... 3664 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3666 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3668 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium Development 

Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

 Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

Government House Leader 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. James Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Capital Commission 


