




















































Hansard: March 25, 2009


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 39A  WEDNESDAY, MARCH 25, 2009, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2527 

 March 25, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you and to all members of this Assembly, seated in 

your gallery, Mr. Speaker, are two fine gentlemen: Mr. Darren 

Wilcox and Mr. Bernie Eiswirth. And they were kind enough to 

dress up for the occasion today. 

 

Darren Wilcox is a 23-year member of the Regina Police 

Service and is currently president of the Regina Police 

Association. Bernie Eiswirth is executive officer of the 

Saskatchewan Federation of Police Officers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these two gentlemen and part of their larger 

organizations look after police officers — in times of difficulty 

ensure that there is proper benefits, adequate benefits to support 

police officers and civilian members in doing their job. 

 

I’d like all of you to give a warm welcome to these two 

individuals that are here today to enjoy the festivities and . . . 

through their Legislative Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On behalf 

of the official opposition, I’d also like to join with the member 

opposite in welcoming Bernie Eiswirth and Darren Wilcox to 

their Assembly. 

 

We in this Assembly all value the important work that the 

police do within our communities and our society, Mr. Speaker. 

So on behalf of all of us, thank you once again for coming to 

your Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

introduce two gentlemen in the west gallery. To you and 

through you, Mr. Rodney Gopher and Mr. Leo Paul. And as you 

would know, Mr. Speaker, it’s quite rare that gentlemen or 

school groups come from my part of the world all the way to 

Regina. So it’s particularly a pleasure to welcome these 

gentlemen who battled the icy roads to get down here. So help 

me welcome these gentlemen. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, I rise to introduce an inspiring group of young 

people. These individuals are founding members of the recently 

formed organization, Ready Set Vote for Change. I ask each to 

stand when I recognize and introduce them: Ms. Lori Walker, 

faculty adviser; Ms. Chantelle Ryerson and Ms. Karissa Angela 

Jolly. Their goal is to engage and involve young people in the 

democratic process. And, Mr. Speaker, they’re succeeding with 

over almost 400 Facebook members and delivery of an 

excellent event last weekend. 

 

I ask all members within this Assembly to welcome these 

guests to our Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you, I 

would like to introduce a guest in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, 

Mr. Darryl Folkerson. Darryl is in his fourth year of journalism, 

and he actually has only two more weeks and he’s going to be 

finished his class. And he is writing a story for The Nipawin 

Journal which is up in Carrot River Valley constituency — may 

I mention the best constituency in Saskatchewan — and he is 

writing a story on there. 

 

And he’s writing a story about following an MLA [Member of 

the Legislative Assembly]. He’s been following me around all 

day to see what MLAs actually do, and it should be quite 

interesting. Mr. Speaker, I bought him lunch so he would give 

us a good story. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose. 

 

Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 

and through you to this Assembly, I’d like to introduce in the 

west gallery a group of students from Outlook, in my 

constituency of Rosetown-Elrose. They’re the grade 12 class 

from the Lutheran Collegiate Bible Institute, along with 

teachers Rick Delainey and Phil Guebert. I hope they enjoy 

their day at the Assembly and I look forward to speaking with 

them later. Please ask all my colleagues to please give them a 

warm welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition that speaks to the housing market and 

how it has translated into challenges for renters, which includes 

senior citizens right across the province, and that more 



2528 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2009 

affordable housing options would significantly help 

Saskatchewan seniors cope with the cost of living, and 

especially for those on fixed incomes. The prayer reads, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to act as quickly as possible to expand 

affordable housing options for Saskatchewan’s senior 

citizens. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present on behalf of Moose Jaw residents. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 

present a petition on behalf of rural residents of Saskatchewan 

who question why the Sask Party government is leaving them 

behind when it comes to providing safe and affordable water. 

Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to financially assist the town of Duck Lake 

residents for the good of their health and safety due to the 

exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency, and that this government fulfills its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by the good citizens of Duck Lake, 

Rosthern, and Hepburn. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

pleased today to rise to present a petition in support of 

affordable housing for The Battlefords. The petitioners note that 

the vacancy rate for rental accommodation in The Battlefords is 

very low. They ask: 

 

. . . the Legislative Assembly to call upon the Government 

of Saskatchewan to invest in an affordable housing 

program that will result in a greater number of quality and 

affordable rental units to be made available to a greater 

number of people throughout The Battlefords and across 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petitioners are all from the city of North 

Battleford. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 

stand again today and present a petition in support of fairness 

for students in Saskatchewan through the expansion of the 

graduate retention program. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately expand the graduate retention 

program to include master’s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are 

students from the University of Saskatchewan as well as 

students from the University of Regina as well as a number of 

health care professionals working here in the province who 

have master’s degrees. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

repairing Highway No. 135 that runs through Pelican Narrows, 

Saskatchewan. This petition is signed by the leadership and the 

community members of Pelican Narrows First Nations, the 

village of Pelican Narrows and area. The prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to pave the 7 kilometres of Highway 135 

through the community of Pelican Narrows, as committed 

on August 24, 2007. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by the good citizens of Pelican Narrows. I so 

present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Rock the Vote 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It was my 

pleasure to speak to an inspiring crowd of young people at Rock 

the Vote, on March 21 at The Distrikt right here in Regina. I 

was joined by my colleagues from Regina Elphinstone, Regina 

Dewdney, and with NDP leadership candidates Dwain 

Lingenfelter, the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow, and 

Yens Pedersen. 

 

This event offered a forum for political speeches from a 

non-partisan perspective aimed at discussing the importance of 

the young generation’s involvement in politics. Ready Set Vote 

for Change hosted this event. This group was created by U of R 

[University of Regina] professor, Ms. Lori Walker, and a 

steering committee of inspiring students that includes Ms. 



March 25, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2529 

Chantelle Ryerson, Ms. Laura Willcocks, Ms. Teagan Kuhnie, 

Ms. Karissa Angela Jolly, Ms. Jamie Oakenfeld, Ms. Victoria 

Patzwald, and Ms. Jillian Wilmot. The ultimate goal of this 

group is to eliminate political indifference among young people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would contend that our young generation is 

incredibly well prepared for political involvement. I reject the 

view that young people have no interest in politics. And I 

believe it is incumbent to embrace and encourage their 

participation, and for this younger generation to make their 

mark on the future public policy of our province. 

 

I ask all members of this Assembly to join with me and 

recognize the important work of this meaningful group whose 

mantra of We are Change and Let’s Get Political is something 

that we should all encourage. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

2009 Canada Cup of Curling 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With the 

sponsorship of SaskEnergy as the official champion of 

volunteers and Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport investment of 

$50,000, the city of Yorkton was full of activity from March 18 

to 22 as the city played host to the 2009 Canada Cup of Curling. 

 

Yorkton has an outstanding reputation for hosting highly 

successful curling events, including the Brier, Olympic trials, 

and the Tournament of Hearts. At this year’s event, fans 

watched Kevin Martin extend his winning streak, winning 13 

straight at the Tim Hortons Brier and his second consecutive 

win at the Canadian men’s championships. 

 

He made the trip to Yorkton where he opened a three-straight, 

come-from-behind wins before Thursday night’s narrow 

victory. On the women’s side, we watched Shannon Kleibrink 

become the first female skip to win the Canada Cup of Curling 

twice. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is the first time the Canada Cup has been 

hosted in our province. We should all be proud of Yorkton and 

this great opportunity to showcase Saskatchewan to the rest of 

Canada and the world. 

 

To quote Shannon Kleibrink: 

 

“Having it (the Canada Cup) in a small town like this, the 

whole community gets behind it. It was an amazing crowd 

every single time we stepped on the ice . . . even the 

morning draws. We’re not used to that. It was a great 

experience for us. [And] We loved it.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask members to join me in thanking the 

more than 200 volunteers who shared their time, energy, and 

spirit to make this event a huge success. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Saskatoon Bridge Club 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Saskatoon Bridge 

Club, located in Saskatoon Eastview, is an important part of the 

Saskatoon community. The club offers lessons for anyone who 

is interested in learning the fascinating game of bridge. 

 

The club conducts lessons in a learn-while-you-play approach 

that takes place in a relaxed atmosphere that focuses on 

enjoying bridge in a social environment. Community members 

are always welcome to join in on the fun. It costs $5 for a game 

that lasts three hours, which is comparable to any entertainment 

out there. Club members support one another to ensure that 

each member enjoys the game while learning a new skill. 

 

Attendance at the Saskatoon Bridge Club does more than 

enhance your ability to play bridge; it builds personal 

relationships between community and club members that can 

last a lifetime. 

 

The Saskatoon Bridge Club is able to teach new members how 

to play bridge because they have such skilled bridge players 

within their membership. They are a very active club that 

encourages people of all ages and abilities to learn the game. 

 

Indeed this game keeps your mind active, as the club has many 

members that are still playing bridge in their mid-90s. The neat 

thing about bridge is that it doesn’t matter what shape you’re in 

or what level of . . . your physical ability is, you can always 

enjoy a good game of bridge. 

 

Members participate in tournaments all over the Prairies. If 

you’re interested in seeing just how fun and exciting this game 

really is, the next local tournament in Saskatoon takes place 

from April 17 to 19. The hard work and dedication to the game 

is clearly evident when you get to witness a game first-hand. 

 

Thanks, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Elbow Celebrates 100th Anniversary 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My sincere 

congratulations to the community of Elbow on their 100th 

anniversary this year. Elbow was incorporated as a village in 

1909 when families from eastern Canada, the United States, and 

Europe settled on the surrounding farm land. It was a typical 

Prairie village nestled on the South Saskatchewan River until 

the 1960s when all that changed with the building of dams on 

the river. Irrigation suddenly became a new agricultural option. 

Tourists started coming to camp, fish, and boat with the 

development of Douglas Park. 

 

Today Elbow is a vibrant community that has become a 

well-known tourist attraction with its proximity to the unspoiled 

beauty of Lake Diefenbaker. With the development of Harbour 

Golf and Lakeside Marina, golfing and sailing have become 



2530 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2009 

major attractions as well along with camping and fishing. And 

thousands of tourists arrive each summer to enjoy the lake and 

the park. 

 

Yet with all the changes and modern advantages, Elbow 

remains essentially a quiet Prairie town where neighbours value 

each other and their way of life. Congratulations to Elbow and 

its residents on this, your centennial year. You truly deserve to 

be proud of your town and all your achievements. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Prince Albert Fights Racism and Discrimination 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, on March 20 I was pleased to 

attend the official signing between the city of Prince Albert and 

UNESCO [United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural 

Organization]. Prince Albert became the 30th community to 

join UNESCO, the Coalition Against Racism and 

Discrimination. Mr. Speaker, David Walden, secretary-general 

of the Canadian Commission for UNESCO, said that “. . . by 

signing this commitment, the city of Prince Albert is making a 

very public message that racism is not welcome here.” 

 

In January 2009, the Prince Albert City Council passed a 

motion recommending that the city become a member of the 

Coalition of Municipalities Against Racism and Discrimination. 

The city directed its race relations and social issues committee 

to undertake leadership in this area. By signing on to the 

coalition, the city has made a commitment to implement its own 

plan of action for the elimination of racism and discrimination 

and to report progress of its implementation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, by undertaking this commitment and developing 

unique plans of action for addressing racism and discrimination, 

municipalities are encouraged to adopt a participatory approach. 

This collaborative spirit is already in existence in Prince Albert. 

Governments alone cannot eliminate racism and discrimination. 

Participation is required from all sectors and individuals in a 

community, working together and planning ways in which 

racism and discrimination can be eliminated. 

 

[13:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join with me in 

congratulating the people of the city of Prince Albert for joining 

the Coalition of Municipalities Against Racism and 

Discrimination, and to the mayor and city council, the PAGC 

[Prince Albert Grand Council], and the FSIN [Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations] for taking leadership in the fight 

against discrimination. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Canora-Pelly. 

 

Better Business Bureau Torch Awards 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

the Minister of Enterprise and Innovation and I had the pleasure 

of attending the fifth annual Better Business Bureau Torch 

Awards held last night here in the Queen City. The gala event 

honoured a variety of businesses and individuals in 

Saskatchewan who have consistently demonstrated a 

commitment to outstanding ethical business standards. I would 

like to thank all of the many community sponsors of the Torch 

Awards. In particular, K-Line Maintenance & Construction 

deserve thanks for their continued support of this worthwhile 

event. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there were 123 Torch Award nominees in 2008, 

and 13 met the Better Business Bureau’s criteria of excellence 

for consideration. In the end, the following seven businesses 

were honoured last night in seven different categories: Gus’s 

Automotive from Prince Albert; Gaebels Brewhouse & Off 

Sale, Regina; K-Line Maintenance & Construction, Emerald 

Park; the Saskatchewan Safety Council, of course in all of 

Saskatchewan; Brown Communications Group in Regina, 

Foster’s Shoes in Regina, and J.A.B.A Construction Ltd. in 

Saskatoon. 

 

Guest speaker, Regina Mayor Pat Fiacco entertained guests and 

enthusiastically spoke about the theme of the Torch Awards and 

its celebration of positive business and community 

relationships. His Worship reminded all in attendance that each 

one of us can be a catalyst of change and that it is up to each of 

us to contribute to improving the quality of life in our 

communities. 

 

The Torch Awards recognize businesses and organizations for 

consistently doing what’s right and fair without compromise. 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in thanking the 

Better Business Bureau for recognizing Saskatchewan 

businesses and organizations that are working to improve the 

quality of life in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Social Work Student Recognized 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, National Social Work Awareness 

Month presents an opportunity to recognize the hard work and 

dedication of those members in our community who serve in 

the helping profession of social work. 

 

Today I wish to recognize Lindsay Holloway, a constituent of 

Regina Walsh Acres who is currently a social work student at 

the University of Regina. 

 

Lindsay decided to study social work to, in her words, “break 

down social barriers attached to income, gender, sexual 

orientation, race and age that prevent people from realizing a 

fulfilling life.” 

 

As part of her practicum placement, Lindsay is one of the social 

work students conducting research for the University of Regina 

Seniors Education Centre. Focusing on elder abuse, the research 

project involves the establishment of programs for seniors, 

health professionals, police officers, retirement planners, and 

the general public to further advance prevention and recognition 



March 25, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2531 

of harm to the well-being and safety of older adults. 

 

In addition to her ongoing contributions to this important 

research project, Lindsay has also received recognition for her 

work in the larger community as a former recipient of the 

Young Woman of the Year Award sponsored by the Gay & 

Lesbian Community of Regina. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in a society where marked disparity in rewards 

and opportunities prevent people from being at their best, 

aspiring, helping professionals like Lindsay Holloway 

encourage all to work in realizing dignity and justice for those 

mistreated and left behind. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Forestry Industry 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, last week the minister of 

forestry was asked by the media if he ever received a report 

from the task force led by the member for Batoche in 2007. His 

answer was, and I quote, “Yes, yes, yes.” And then the media 

asked for a copy of the report. He replied, “I don’t see why 

not.” 

 

So the minister says the report exists after all. If that is the case, 

why won’t he share the report with the public? What does the 

report recommend? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, the report certainly does exist. 

It was incorporated into the platform document of the 

Saskatchewan Party in the last election. It talked about a 

number of things to enhance forestry services, to look at 

value-added opportunities, to look at cogen, things of that 

nature that will help to make forestry more viable in 

Saskatchewan. We are indeed working with the forestry 

companies to work through that in terms of implementing the 

recommendations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — The minister of forestry likes to suggest an 

announcement is coming but never seems to have anything to 

announce. Last week he assured this House that there was work 

. . . that was working with forestry companies, and plants will 

be opening in the future. After 16 months, forestry workers and 

their families deserve details, not platitudes. To the minister: 

which forestry companies is he working with and what are their 

names? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 

are talking with virtually all of the forestry companies that I can 

think of in Saskatchewan on an ongoing basis with respect to 

the P.A. [Prince Albert] FMA [forest management agreement]. 

We were talking to them about redevelopment with respect to 

the pulp mill in Prince Albert. And we’re talking about how we 

can better utilize the forest that’s out there right now; how we 

can address the concerns that the industry has with respect to 

their operations and ongoing forest management services. There 

is discussions going on with virtually every forestry company 

and individual forest owner. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, the crisis in forestry has 

affected thousands of families in a number of different 

communities including La Ronge, Big River, Hudson Bay, 

Meadow Lake, Carrot River, and Prince Albert. Those families 

want to know one thing — when and if there will be jobs 

available in the forestry industry in or near their community. 

 

To the minister: the minister says that he has been talking to the 

forestry companies and plants are being opened. To the 

minister: where will these plants be opening? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we spoke just yesterday 

with a forestry company that is looking at operations in 

Saskatchewan here. I will wait for them to make the appropriate 

announcement with respect to the decisions that they have made 

on it. They’ve informed us as to what discussions are going on. 

They’ve also informed the department as to negotiations that 

are taking place with other existing forestry companies. But, 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t think it’s appropriate for us on the floor of 

the legislature to make the announcements that the companies 

will be making themselves. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Health Ombudsman 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In opposition the Sask 

Party continually ranted about the need for an independent 

health ombudsman. In fact, Mr. Speaker, this was a centrepiece 

of the health portion of the Sask Party’s 2007 election platform 

promises. The minister has had 18 months to put a health 

ombudsman in place. Why has he failed to do so? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 



2532 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2009 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’m glad to answer that question. Work is being 

conducted as we speak on where the ombudsman, health 

ombudsman will be housed. Whether it be housed in the current 

Ombudsman’s office or would be a separate ombudsman all on 

its own. 

 

But I will tell the member that it has taken us 16 months, and 

we’re still working on it. But in those 16 months, we’ve had to 

repair an awful lot of damage after 16 years of NDP [New 

Democratic Party] government. 

 

The very first piece is human resource shortage. We worked 

tirelessly for the first 16 months to try and correct 16 years of 

lack of recruitment and retention initiatives by that government. 

That was our priority number one, and I think we’ve done very 

well so far. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thought the work 

would have been done by now. The members opposite have 

been calling for an independent ombudsman since 1998. After 

nine years of Sask Party commitments on this topic in 

opposition, and now 18 months in government, what . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Or 16. What have the people of 

Saskatchewan got? A broken promise. And now the minister is 

trying to tell the people of Saskatchewan that he’s working on 

it, working on what it’s going to look like. 

 

If the minister thinks an independent health ombudsman is so 

important, why don’t we have one yet? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, yes we are 

working on it. And I think there’ll be an announcement in the 

near future as to how that will look. 

 

But let me also point out that the current Ombudsman handles a 

number of health care cases, people that have had trouble with 

the health care system. Oh I don’t know — the Bonderuds, for 

example, went to the Ombudsman. Even though it was an 

Ombudsman for all of government, he handles a number of 

health care cases. We want to highlight that piece and perhaps 

have a person specifically dealing with health care cases in the 

Ombudsman’s office. That work is being conducted, and we’ll 

be making an announcement in the very near future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Sask Party’s first 

budget says the creation of an independent ombudsman would 

cost $1 million annually. The 670,000 they blew on their 

ill-advised enhanced driver’s licence program would have 

almost paid for it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the independent ombudsman was one of the Sask 

Party’s key health promises to address problems within the 

health system. What has changed now so that the minister no 

longer sees the urgency for an independent health ombudsman? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Obviously that member didn’t listen 

to the first two answers. The work is being conducted. There’ll 

be an announcement in the very near future as to how that will 

look, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I can tell you that work within the health care system 

continues to go on. We have quality of care coordinators that 

deal with cases on an ongoing basis. The Ombudsman currently 

deals with cases on an ongoing basis. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we’re also conducting a patient-first review 

with Tony Dagnone who is also hearing issues. Mr. Speaker, 

the biggest ombudsman of the health care system right now is 

the patient-first review, something that that former government 

never would look into. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Drinking Water 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, many smaller communities are 

struggling with the high cost of providing safe water. The 

members opposite did quite a dance trying to figure out who 

was responsible for helping out the people of Duck Lake. First, 

it was the Minister of SaskWater, then the Minister of 

Environment, then the Minister of Municipal Affairs. Finally it 

didn’t matter because they just decided to blame the town. 

 

To the one of those ministers opposite: have they figured out 

who is responsible to Saskatchewan people for safe, affordable 

drinking water, and what has been done to help the people of 

Duck Lake? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you for the question. Mr. 

Speaker, I’m happy to talk about the provision of safe and 

reliable water to Saskatchewan communities. It is indeed a 

priority for this government. It is indeed something that 

previous governments have looked into. 

 

In fact in this specific matter that the hon. member mentions, 

the agreement was entered into under the previous 

administration in May 2006. Costs escalated between May ’06 

until 2008. Most of the escalation took place in early 2007, 

again under the members opposite — changes to the way that 



March 25, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2533 

the billing was done, Mr. Speaker. Costs have escalated and 

members opposite should be aware of that because it was done 

under their watch. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, perhaps he should check with the 

deputy mayor of the town who informs us that the information 

of the cost escalation was given to them in September or early 

October 2007. And if I recall correctly, they were elected in 

2007 . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I call members to order. I recognize 

the member from Regina Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — They were in government at the time the 

decision was made to keep those costs there. Mr. Speaker, Duck 

Lake is not the only community in the province with water 

problems. 

 

The town of Hepburn is located north of Saskatoon. Since the 

early ’90s, it has been growing steadily and now has a 

population of about 700 people. The town has been getting its 

water from individual wells and other private water sources, but 

recently traces of uranium and arsenic have been found in the 

water supply. And now they need an alternative source. 

 

To the minister: does he believe that he and the Sask Party 

government have a responsibility to help the people of Hepburn 

access safe and affordable drinking water? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, we are actually taking 

action on behalf of Hepburn. Under the NDP, they did some 

limited water testing of private wells within our province. We 

have actually increased the funding to address five additional 

communities who are working on private wells — one of those 

communities being Hepburn. The reason they know there’s 

arsenic and other things in their water is because the 

Saskatchewan Watershed Authority offered free water testing. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if the member opposite is so concerned 

about the water situation in Hepburn, perhaps she could explain 

why, under the NDP between 2001 and 2006, the NDP denied 

every single MRIF [Municipal Rural Infrastructure Fund] that 

Hepburn submitted. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, Hepburn has been denied the first 

intake of the Building Canada fund, and they’ve only received 

$57,000 from this $100 million booster shot from the provincial 

government. That’s not going to go very far. Mr. Speaker, the 

people of Duck Lake are on the hook for over $2 million for 

their water treatment plant and that has caused water rates there 

to spike from $32 a month to $167 a month or more. 

 

Now the mayor of Hepburn tells us that approximately $6 

million is needed to build a water treatment plant to meet the 

needs of their town. I’m sure those numbers will make it clear, 

even to the members opposite, that the town of Hepburn is 

going to need some help building that plant and getting access 

to clean water. And yet the Sask Party government has still not 

committed any funding. 

 

To the minister: the people of Hepburn need help. Why is he or 

she refusing them? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I am very proud to 

represent the residents who reside in Hepburn, and I have been 

asking questions and pursuing options for this community since 

I was in opposition starting in April 2007 when I posed 

questions to the NDP Environment minister. And he offered 

actually not a whole lot of support for Hepburn. I will continue 

my efforts to find resources for Hepburn. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to quote from a letter that I received 

on March 16, 2009. And I quote: 

 

Dear Nancy, 

 

Thank you very much for your support of our efforts to 

bring a clean, safe drinking water supply to the village of 

Hepburn. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again this side of the House will do what the NDP 

failed to do and help communities bring safe, clean drinking 

water to their towns. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, the people of Duck Lake and 

Hepburn are not alone in their struggle to access safe and 

affordable water. The fact is — and the members opposite are 

well aware of it — many Saskatchewan communities are facing 

the same critical issue. Here’s another fact: without government 

assistance, the future of those communities is at risk, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

To the minister: with a $10.2 billion budget and a 12 per cent 

increase in spending, why didn’t the Sask Party focus some of 

that spending to help Saskatchewan communities struggling to 

access safe and affordable water? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



2534 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2009 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, we have been standing in 

this House for the last few days discussing the second budget of 

the Saskatchewan Party government, and perhaps the member 

opposite hasn’t been paying any attention to the dialogue that’s 

been going on in here. Otherwise she would understand what 

this government has been doing for communities. 

 

We have an unprecedented two and a half billion dollars 

infrastructure funding that communities can access. We released 

$100 million in per capita funding for communities. We have 

entered into a long-term revenue-sharing deal with 

municipalities — something that the NDP never got around to, 

Mr. Speaker. There is Building Canada fund. And, Mr. Speaker, 

if the members opposite were so concerned about this situation, 

why did they not increase funding to municipalities to meet 

these needs when they had 16 years to address it? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Auction of Government Vehicles 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, the policy of the Government of 

Saskatchewan for years has been to auction off surplus vehicles 

on the SaskSurplus website. People would submit their bid 

online to the government site and the highest bidder would win. 

A fair process, Mr. Speaker. On February 25 of this year, the 

government completed a successful auction of government 

vehicles on the government website. 

 

To the Minister of Government Services: can he confirm that 

this is still the policy of the Government of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services. 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, we continue to auction off vehicles. But we’re also 

doing a pilot project, Mr. Speaker, looking at some other 

alternative means of doing auctions. 

 

We’re looking at doing live auctions, Mr. Speaker, to see 

whether or not we get a better return on our dollar. And we’re 

also looking at doing, Mr. Speaker, a live online auction to see 

if we get a better return, Mr. Speaker, for these government 

vehicles which have been very well looked after over their 

lifetime. But, Mr. Speaker, we’re looking at the method that we 

can get the best return for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, on December 2 of last year the 

government issued a tender saying, “The Ministry of 

Government Services, Purchasing is seeking competitive 

proposals to provide auction services or other sales method to 

dispose of 100 government vehicles.” 

 

To the minister: when did he change the policy around 

auctioning off government vehicles by the SaskSurplus 

website? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services. 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the notice that the member opposite is talking about is 

our first notice for our pilot project, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Government Services has about 5,600 vehicles, Mr. Speaker. 

We roll them over every year, Mr. Speaker, a certain portion of 

them. We replace about 700 vehicles a year, Mr. Speaker. We 

are looking at what method we can use that gives the best return 

to the people of Saskatchewan. Just because it was done that 

way before, Mr. Speaker, doesn’t mean it’s the best way to do 

it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, the devil is in the detail. Mr. 

Speaker, the tender was closed on December 18, but according 

to the tender site of the ministry, no contract was awarded. Mr. 

Speaker, to the Minister of Government Services: why was this 

tender closed without being awarded? How many people 

submitted tenders on this proposal? And what did you do with 

those submissions? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services. 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, what we’re looking at doing is providing the best 

returns for the people of Saskatchewan. The previous 

government’s method, most people didn’t even know the 

auctions were taking place within Government Services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we’re doing is going to allow people to have 

more access and more information. There’ll be more 

opportunities, not just for the people who happen to know how 

to find the government auction website, but for people across 

the province who are very used to doing live auctions. Mr. 

Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are very used to doing 

online auctions, Mr. Speaker, so the people of Saskatchewan 

will all have the opportunity. And the Government of 

Saskatchewan, the people, will get the best returns possible. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 



March 25, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2535 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, talk about open and accountable, 

we have a tender sent out, Mr. Speaker, it’s never awarded. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on March 12 there was an online auction of 100 

government vehicles. These vehicles were on display here in 

Regina at Suds Car Wash on the corner of Winnipeg and 

Dewdney in my constituency. But the auction was not 

conducted on the government website, like all other auctions, 

Mr. Speaker. This auction was conducted by Hodgins auctions 

of Melfort, run by former Conservative MLA Grant Hodgins. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why did the government get a 

Melfort auction company to do an online auction of cars on 

display in Regina? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services. 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, when you’re looking to maximize your return on the 

sale of old government vehicles, you want to use the best 

people possible. Hodgins auctions is well known across 

Western Canada for their ability to carry on online auctions, 

Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, they are the people that have the 

capability of getting the best return possible for the Government 

of Saskatchewan and for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have every confidence that these two projects, 

these two pilot projects, will give us the information we need as 

to whether this is going to be the best way to get the returns for 

the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Before I recognize the next speaker, 

there are periods in time when we’re trying to hear a question or 

trying to hear the response where it’s very difficult. And I’m 

sure it’s difficult for our guests. So I would ask members to be 

mindful of this and respect the right of people to place the 

question, the minister to respond. 

 

Member from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, we know that this process was not 

tendered properly. The tender was closed without being 

awarded. We know the government has successfully been doing 

online auctions for years on the SaskSurplus website. What we 

don’t know is why Grant Hodgins auctions is now performing 

this service from Melfort. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: if there was a change in policy, 

why didn’t he tell the people of Saskatchewan? If there was a 

fair and open tender process, why was the tender closed without 

being awarded? And why does the government need a Melfort 

auction company to sell cars in Regina? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services. 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You 

know, the amazing thing about online auctions, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — If members don’t want to pay attention, we’ll 

just cut into question period time. I recognize the Minister 

Responsible for Government Services. 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 

comments from the members opposite, perhaps they would 

have preferred that Eiling Kramer’s former auction mart got the 

tender contract, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you’re looking at an online auction, you’re 

looking at more than just customers surrounding the location 

where the vehicles are parked. That’s why you do it online, Mr. 

Speaker, to give everybody the option to make a bid, Mr. 

Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, you’re hoping to attract customers 

that live more than four or five blocks from the site where the 

vehicle is parked. 

 

Hodgins auctions is a well-known Western Canada auction 

mart. They do online auctions all the time. This is a pilot project 

to determine whether this is an effective and efficient way to get 

the best return for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Report on Forestry Sector 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I tell you, what this opposition 

and what the people of Saskatchewan would like from this 

government are some answers to some of the questions that are 

put to them. That’s what we’d like. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to go back over the course of this 

question period. We started out with a very pointed question to 

the minister who’s in charge of the forest industry in the 

province. I’m going to re-put that question because I did not 

hear an answer, and I’m not sure any other member did. 

 

The question was a very simple question. Recently that minister 

said to the media that he had received a report, a report from the 

member of Batoche on the forestry sector in this province. The 

member asked the minister, would he produce that report? 

That’s the question. We’d like to see, the people of 

Saskatchewan deserve to see the report that was provided to the 

minister by the member from Batoche. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated, the report was 

received. It was incorporated into the Saskatchewan Party’s 

platform document. It was a very good report in terms of 

discussions about operations of the forestry sector here in our 

province. The interesting thing that it did not include, Mr. 

Speaker, it did not include the NDP’s plan. 

 

The NDP’s plan was to put $100 million of taxpayers’ money at 



2536 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2009 

risk. Every single person in the province of Saskatchewan and 

analysts from all over Canada know very well that under the 

circumstances, under the forestry sector circumstances that 

we’re faced with, with a very, very significant downturn in 

terms of housing starts in the US [United States], every single 

dime that the former premier put at risk of the people of 

Saskatchewan would be gone today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Transparency in Government 

 

Mr. Calvert: — And, Mr. Speaker, the mill that they promised 

to open if they were elected is closed today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — The question is transparency, Mr. Speaker. 

The question’s a matter of transparency. The minister says he 

has a report. He says he’s incorporated the findings of that 

report into his policy, but he won’t show us the report. What’s 

in that report that he does not want us to see? 

 

At the close of the questioning today, and the minister 

responsible for the government vehicle fleet, he tells us there 

was no tender for this new auction process. There was no open 

process. We are asking, Mr. Speaker, for openness and 

transparency from this government, and it is failing. 

 

So my question is to the Premier: will he begin to create a more 

transparent and open government for the people of 

Saskatchewan which he promised? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think an important 

measure of transparency for a government is this: did they do 

the things that they said they would do during the most recent 

campaign? 

 

Mr. Speaker, members on this side of the House, and those 

candidates who were unsuccessful but I think could be 

successful next time around, took the platform of the 

Saskatchewan Party to the doorsteps of the province of 

Saskatchewan. They took them to small business women and 

men and said, here are the commitments that we make to you if 

we are elected the Government of Saskatchewan. I can’t 

imagine a process much more transparent than that. 

 

And do you know the net result of that, Mr. Speaker? The net 

result of that is after only 16 months, 100 promises in that 

platform — almost all of them kept. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — They have been kept. I believe this, Mr. 

Speaker, that the people of this province accept that this 

government, this government in 16 months has kept almost all 

of its election promises with respect to taxes, with respect to 

debt, with respect to infrastructure, with respect to supporting 

those most vulnerable among us, Mr. Speaker. Promises made, 

promises kept. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:15] 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Natural Gas Rates 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives 

me great pleasure today to rise to announce the largest decrease 

in natural gas rates in Saskatchewan . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan 

residents’ rates will decrease by 21 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s a savings . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Minister Responsible for Crown 

Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, that’s a savings of 

approximately $23 per household, on a yearly basis some $270. 

Mr. Speaker, worldwide commodity prices have been on a 

roller coaster for months, making forecasting a very difficult 

job indeed. Today’s lower rate is the lowest SaskEnergy has 

offered since 2003, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, everyone is aware 

that the rate for natural gas was increased last fall. Then the 

unexpected happened — the market price dropped considerably. 

Rarely have natural gas prices dropped in the winter, Mr. 

Speaker. While this sounded like good news at the time, we had 

already purchased our winter supply of gas at the higher price in 

order to put it into storage during the summer months. 

 

In light of the cost of natural gas declining, many called for a 

rebate or a rate reduction. But, Mr. Speaker, those changes 

wouldn’t reflect the reality of the day today and would have 

been a short-lived, ill-conceived subsidy, creating a false sense 

of economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with SaskEnergy’s gas cost variance account now 

in the black, they’ve applied to the Saskatchewan rate review 

panel for a reduction in rates. Even while the panel was doing 

its job, Mr. Speaker, the price of natural gas was continuing to 

fall, and the panel asked for an update. SaskEnergy’s update to 

the panel decreased to the even lower rate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now some individuals from outside of our province believe the 

rate setting system isn’t working. I beg to differ, Mr. Speaker. 

SaskEnergy’s gas price management strategy has helped 

Saskatchewan residents with the lowest natural gas prices for 

seven of the last ten years, Mr. Speaker. And it’s important to 



March 25, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2537 

note that in 2008 — yes, last year — Saskatchewan had the 

lowest rate in all of Canada. Mr. Speaker, the men and women 

at SaskEnergy are working diligently to provide safe and 

reliable service to Saskatchewan residents at the lowest possible 

cost, and they’re doing a good job, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have our 

fair-weather friends across the way — fair-weather friends who, 

when the temperature goes up, the price of natural gas that 

they’re charging us goes down. When the temperature goes up 

and we need air conditioning, the price of electricity is going to 

jump 13 per cent a month after this cruel April 1 joke. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we had one of the longest, coldest winters in 

Saskatchewan’s history. Stats Canada has done a study that 

shows that Saskatchewan led all of Canada in terms of cost of 

living increase. And this was done March 19 when they 

released it, so it’s hot off the press, so to speak. And they point 

out that Saskatchewan had the largest increase and they say, “In 

Saskatchewan, a major factor was a 22.4% rise in natural gas 

prices.” I add that they kicked in October 1 last year just in time 

for the cold, cruel winter heating season. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister bragged about seven of the last ten 

years, SaskEnergy having the lowest natural gas prices in all of 

Canada. I want to tell him, seven of those years, seven of those 

seven were under NDP administrations — and that’s the fact, 

Jack. 

 

The highest is under the Sask Party government last year. They 

claim lowest, but they conveniently count all 12 months. They 

count the natural gas price during the barbeque season, during 

the air conditioning season, but they don’t count it from 

October to April 1, which is the cold winter season. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is more than a little bit frustrating. The minister 

also says this is the lowest natural gas rate since five years ago. 

I want to remind that member, that minister, and all people of 

Saskatchewan, five years ago the buy purchase price of natural 

gas in the world market was close to $6 a gigajoule. Today it’s 

closer to $4 a gigajoule. They’re matching a $6 and a $4 price. 

It’s just bizarre. They’ve mismanaged it. 

 

For a government that had all of the answers before the 

election, they’ve proved that they’re nothing but fair-weather 

friends. Thanks a lot for this April Fool’s joke. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 84 — The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital 

Corporations Amendment Act, 2009 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 84, 

The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations 

Amendment Act, 2009 be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Enterprise and 

Innovation has moved first reading of Bill No. 84, The 

Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Amendment 

Act, 2009. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. When shall this Bill be read a second 

time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

Bill No. 85 — The Municipal Grants Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 

85, The Municipal Grants Act be now introduced and read a 

first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Municipal 

Affairs has moved first reading of Bill No. 85, The Municipal 

Grants Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Mr. Speaker, next sitting of the 

House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 86 — The Saskatchewan Financial Services 

Commission Amendment Act, 2009 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 86, 

The Saskatchewan Financial Services Commission Amendment 

Act, 2009 be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved first 

reading of Bill No. 86, The Saskatchewan Financial Services 

Commission Amendment Act, 2009. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 



2538 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2009 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill 

 

The Speaker: — When will this Bill be considered a second 

time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Standing Committee on Public Accounts 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I present the first report of 

the Standing Committee on Public Accounts, which I do now 

lay on the Table. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will be moving a motion that the report be 

concurred in at the conclusion of my remarks. I would just like 

to say that the report before us represents a deliberation by 

committee members since the establishment of the committee in 

December 2007, and represents a considerable number of 

meetings by the committee members. The committee has now 

considered all items before it, and I am informed that for the 

first time since 1999, the Public Accounts Committee is caught 

up with all of the work before it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have considered reports by the Provincial Auditor, 

including recommendations by the Provincial Auditor. The 

public accounts have been referred to the committee, and we 

have considered the Provincial Auditor’s business and financial 

plans for two budget years. We have considered and adopted a 

procedures manual, and we have participated in orientation and 

educational sessions. 

 

All of this work, Mr. Speaker, would not have been possible 

without the participation and support of many. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I think I speak for the members of the committee when 

I extend our appreciation to all deputy ministers and heads of 

agencies, who, along with their staff, met with us to answer our 

questions; to thank the Provincial Comptroller, Terry Paton, and 

his staff for their attendance and for being a resource to the 

committee; thank the Provincial Auditor, Fred Wendel, Kim 

Lowe, the principal from the Provincial Auditor’s office, and all 

other staff from the Provincial Auditor’s office for their 

attendance and presentations to the committee; thank the staff 

of the committees and staff of the committees branch, Hansard, 

and broadcasting for their support and assistance, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, a big thank you to the members of the 

committee and some substitutes for their diligence and 

participation, including some very good questions. These 

members are: the member for Carrot River Valley, the member 

for Cut Knife-Turtleford, the member for Meadow Lake, the 

member for Regina Lakeview, the member for 

Rosetown-Elrose, and especially, Mr. Speaker, the member for 

Moose Jaw North, who serves as Deputy Chair of the 

committee. And it is my great pleasure, on their behalf, to 

move: 

 

That the first report of the Standing Committee on Public 

Accounts be now concurred in. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Douglas Park has 

moved: 

 

That the first report of the Standing Committee on Public 

Accounts be now concurred in. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Gantefoer that the Assembly approves 

in general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 

proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. Van 

Mulligen.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a 

pleasure to rise and resume debate on the budget of this 

government for 2009-2010. Now members may recall that my 

remarks were preceded by an address from the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana last night. And as I remember it, things were 

going pretty well for her for a while, and then inexplicably she 

sat down and didn’t get back up again. Now I’m sure she 

intended to complete her address. I guess she just didn’t get 

around to it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yesterday we were recalling the fact that the 

proper context for a budget debate of this sort is to start by 

reviewing the comments in the press. These are the views of the 

public looking over our shoulders and judging our work. Here’s 

what the major dailies of Saskatchewan have said: 

 

First, to see a provincial government produce a budget 

with such aggressive spending and property tax cuts, yet 

still an honest, real $415-million surplus in such unsettling 

economic times everywhere else is, as financial officials 

have described it, rather phenomenal. Second, the Sask. 

Party has now addressed so many long-standing concerns 



March 25, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2539 

that one really wonders if the NDP has anything 

legitimately left to criticize. 

 

Well we also agree with that. 

 

Sadly the opposition Finance critic, the member for Regina 

Douglas Park, disagrees. And one of the objections that he’s 

raising, Mr. Speaker, is the following. He worries that 

Saskatchewan’s Crown corporations will be borrowing money 

to invest in upgrading and expanding aging infrastructure to 

meet the needs of a growing province. Apparently he’s unhappy 

that SaskPower, for example, plans to invest nearly $1 billion 

this year to provide electrical capacity for our growing 

population and our growing industrial base. 

 

Yesterday the Leader of the Opposition, the member for 

Saskatoon Riversdale, stated that the NDP had in fact made 

very substantial investments of this kind and cited a $960 

million infrastructure investment by SaskPower that they had 

approved in 2007. Well, Mr. Speaker, we checked the facts; that 

in fact is not true. The correct fact is that the NDP authorized a 

mere $280 million — less than a third of the amount claimed 

yesterday. That is exactly why we’re directing SaskPower to 

invest almost $1 billion today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, instead of tying the hands of our valued Crown 

corporations behind their backs, demanding exorbitant dividend 

payments, and ignoring their infrastructure needs, we are 

allowing the Crowns the latitude to properly plan for our 

province’s bright future. As reported in The StarPhoenix in an 

article about borrowing by the Crowns to accommodate growth, 

the best the former Finance minister could produce was a bit of 

overwrought hand-wringing and that he “. . . does himself a 

great disservice by feigning outrage . . .” 

 

The article then explains that the Crowns, “. . . like their 

counterparts in the private sector, need to make ongoing 

investments in plant and equipment required to stay in 

businesses and need to borrow capital funds . . .” 

 

The newspaper’s final verdict was, “If the NDP was interested 

in anything but trying to obfuscate reality and score cheap 

political points, it would have left this issue alone because it 

only draws attention to its own record in government.” 

 

Couldn’t agree more, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Enough about the NDP’s questionable understanding and 

strategy. Let’s get back to the budget itself . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . You’d like me to stay on that? Perhaps we’ll 

revisit it in a moment. 

 

[14:30] 

 

It’s an honestly balanced budget, Mr. Speaker, that achieves a 

surplus of well over $400 million — 424 to be exact — backed 

by a cash reserve of nearly $1.2 billion. It’s a budget that keeps 

a central campaign promise by delivering the largest education 

property tax savings for Saskatchewan residents in our history, 

while also providing a very large increase to K to 12 

[kindergarten to grade 12] education funding. All this in a 

two-step process that when completed next year will see the 

province paying fully two-thirds of the total cost, thereby 

ending a long, dark decade during which Saskatchewan had the 

dubious distinction of being the province where education was 

funded more on the backs of property tax payers than anywhere 

else in Canada. 

 

This is truly an historic achievement, and certainly one of the 

most remarkable facts about the program is how quickly it was 

developed. The excellent report summarizing stakeholder 

consultations and analysis of funding options prepared by the 

hard-working member for Rosetown-Elrose and made public on 

budget day was completed and presented for review in January, 

right on schedule. Within just two months we have turned it 

into a visionary program that will result in historic and 

immediate tax savings to residents and business owners all over 

the province. 

 

In addition to the obvious advantages of the tax savings 

themselves, Mr. Speaker, there is another very important, if less 

realized, benefit. For many years Saskatchewan’s municipalities 

have struggled to keep the municipal portion of property tax 

competitive with communities in neighbouring provinces, 

especially Alberta. Without adequate financial support from the 

previous government to address urgent infrastructure and 

operations expenses, it’s been a very tough job, to say the least. 

 

However, slowly but surely, they’ve done it. The independent 

annual property tax survey compiled and edited by the city of 

Edmonton certainly proves it. Given the enormity of the task, it 

is of noteworthy achievement indeed. However, when you 

factor in the education portion of the property tax, our 

communities dropped to the back of the pack, coast to coast, 

year after year. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, no longer; no longer at all. That 

unacceptable situation ends today. From now on, the combined 

municipal and education portions of property tax will be 

competitive with every jurisdiction in Canada. The result will 

be that Saskatchewan will be more attractive to new residents 

and new businesses then ever before. Say hello to more people 

coming to Saskatchewan to share in our unsurpassed 

opportunity and to help build our province’s future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this bold initiative is something the NDP should 

have carried out when they had the opportunity. In fact the 

concept was first promised by Tommy Douglas in 1944. For 

three generations and certainly all throughout their most recent 

16 years in government they said they intended to do it. They 

just didn’t get around to it. Well we did it in 16 months, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a budget that keeps another key campaign 

promise by delivering dramatically increased revenue sharing to 

Saskatchewan’s municipalities. At long last, our province’s 

cities and towns and villages, rural municipalities and northern 

communities have what they have been asking for since 1991 

— stable, predictable, and significantly enhanced funding based 

on the province’s own revenues in a way that grows with 

Saskatchewan’s economy. 

 

This milestone development changes everything, and for all the 

province’s residents, wherever they live, it will be better and it 

will be better immediately. For the first time, their community 

will have the proper resources for police and fire protection. For 



2540 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2009 

the first time, their community will be able to better address 

road repairs and snow removal, sport and recreation 

programming, park development and open space management, 

transit and paratransit services, access to arts and culture, in fact 

all of the other services residents depend on every single day. 

 

For the first time, their community will be able to confidently 

plan for the future in the sure knowledge that the government of 

the day will no longer cut funding on a whim, without 

consultation and without warning. 

 

Since the provincial election in 2007, Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard 

the opposition talk about revenue sharing; we’ve heard them 

talk about it a lot. The opposition critic for Municipal Affairs, 

the member for Moose Jaw Wakamow, has often said that their 

government was this close to a revenue-sharing deal before the 

election. Holding your thumb and first finger just a tiny fraction 

of an inch apart — we were this close, she often said. 

 

Is that so, Mr. Speaker? Municipalities see it differently. They 

know that the previous government had only sat down with 

representatives of the cities. Saskatchewan’s towns and villages, 

rural municipalities and northern communities weren’t even 

asked to be at the table. That’s not close, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the discussions that they had, had only advanced as far as 

to sort out what services were provided respectively by 

municipalities and the province. Talk of a provisional source of 

revenue and an amount never even happened. Mr. Speaker, 

that’s not close at all. 

 

The opposition had 16 years to get the job done. And I think 

they intended to do it. They didn’t get around to it. In fact the 

member from The Battlefords, the former minister of Municipal 

Affairs said here in this House, on April 18, 2005, “The 

municipalities have indicated they want a predictable and a 

sustainable revenue-sharing formula. So does this government.” 

They just didn’t get it done, Mr. Speaker. This government has 

completed the task they left unfinished. 

 

Now the dollars that are being provided as part of this new 

arrangement are themselves also historic. Based on the new 

budget’s allocation of money — equivalent to 90 per cent of 

one point of PST [provincial sales tax] revenues as recorded in 

the most recent audited statements — revenue sharing will total 

more than $167 million, an increase of almost 40 per cent since 

the new government came into office. 

 

Next year, when the allocation increases to the equivalent of a 

full 1 per cent of PST, the total amount of financial assistance is 

estimated to be approximately $215 million, a truly phenomenal 

increase over anything ever provided by the former 

government. 

 

How we got there is in itself an interesting story, Mr. Speaker. 

It begins with consultation, open communication, ongoing 

dialogue, and a lot of work by our municipal partners. Today’s 

results are in fact truly a testament to the power of this 

relationship and also a testament to the dedication and hard 

work of our municipal sector partners. They deserve our thanks. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let’s turn our attention now to infrastructure, and 

unfortunately we have to begin with a very sad history lesson 

here. Back in the 1980s, shortly after the revenue-sharing 

program was introduced, municipalities had a source of 

provincial funding that allowed them some flexibility in 

meeting their infrastructure needs. However during the 1990s, 

the NDP government shamelessly clawed back over two-thirds 

of $1 billion from the revenue-sharing pool. The inescapable 

result of this heartless policy was that the ability of 

communities to pay for much-needed infrastructure investments 

was crippled. That’s where the infrastructure gap facing 

municipalities came from, Mr. Speaker; the NDP created it. 

 

To put this relentless attack on the province’s communities into 

perspective, the opposition critic for Municipal Affairs, the 

member for Moose Jaw Wakamow, personally voted to deprive 

the residents of her own city of Moose Jaw of something like 

$20 million. In doing so she showed the people she was elected 

to serve that safe, clean drinking water for Moose Jaw families 

wasn’t as important as buying a potato business that ultimately 

failed. In doing so she proved that proper waste water treatment 

and an adequate landfill facility for Moose Jaw wasn’t as 

important as buying money-losing dot.com companies around 

the globe. And in doing so, Mr. Speaker, she proved that grid 

roads for the people of Moose Jaw weren’t as important to her 

as buying into poorly researched foreign businesses, that once 

again bled red ink. Mr. Speaker, what a shameful legacy — a 

shameful legacy indeed. I think she has some explaining to do 

to her constituents, and in fact to the people of this great 

province. 

 

As I mentioned a moment ago, Saskatchewan’s new provincial 

government has just provided communities with $100 million in 

new funding for infrastructure under the municipal economic 

enhancement program or MEEP for short. It’s the municipal 

portion of the $500 million economic booster shot announced 

by the Premier on February 2. And this $500 million is part of 

the unprecedented $2 billion invested by this government in 

important infrastructure projects, including $1 billion in the 

current budget. To put that into perspective, in their last five 

years as government — including the 2007 pre-election budget, 

with a deficit as big as our current surplus — the NDP only 

spent an average of $500 million a year. The difference, Mr. 

Speaker, is staggering. But there’s more, Mr. Speaker, there’s 

much more. 

 

Municipal leaders also told us they needed help to meet the 

challenges of unprecedented economic growth. They told us 

they were prepared to invest in their own communities to 

provide serviced lots for residential, commercial, and industrial 

construction. They told us they were ready to expand their 

utilities to plan for the future. What they asked for was help to 

make it a bit more affordable to make this investment possible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we responded and, together with the 

Saskatchewan Municipal Board, the Municipal Finance 

Corporation, and our municipal partners, we designed and 

rolled out the Saskatchewan infrastructure growth initiative or 

SIGI for short. This program provides municipalities with 

five-year, interest-free loans for lot development and related 

off-site infrastructure including water, sewage, and landfill 

facilities. 

 

Members of the opposition questioned the significance of this 

program by suggesting that municipalities were in such good 



March 25, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2541 

financial shape that they could fund their own borrowing costs, 

that SIGI was merely icing on the cake, Mr. Speaker. Well we 

disagree. Mr. Speaker, in the first year the program facilitated 

projects worth almost $80 million in 35 communities, and the 

new budget includes funding for a second year’s program 

during which we anticipate assisting with a further $78 million 

in project value which will be announced shortly. 

 

There is even more. As partners with our colleagues in 

municipal and federal government, we’re helping to finance the 

Building Canada fund. Already 46 projects totalling over $95 

million have been funded and approved for immediate 

construction in communities all over Saskatchewan. And a 

second round of applications is now under way with clear 

expectations that dozens more worthy projects will be funded in 

the coming months. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s just one more item that I’d like to mention 

from the budget and that’s paratransit. The paratransit program 

was frozen in 2002 by the members of the opposition, and they 

didn’t increase it in 2003 or ’04 or ’05 or ’06 or ’07, despite 

repeated requests from communities and individuals like 

myself. Every year we went to the provincial government and 

asked for assistance, and every year we were denied. We know 

that this delivers much-needed services to folks with disabilities 

in communities all over the province, and we’re delighted to be 

able to support it with more money in this year’s budget. High 

time, Mr. Speaker, high time indeed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget works because, as the member for 

Lloydminster so eloquently said, it is based on optimism, 

enthusiasm, and innovation. It works because it is guided by 

clear priorities including prudent financial management, 

managing growth carefully and responsibly, keeping 

Saskatchewan’s economy strong and steady, and keeping 

promises like historic reductions in education property tax 

along with unprecedented investments in health care, education, 

child welfare, and our province’s communities. It builds on the 

good work which preceded it, including eliminating nearly 40 

per cent of the provincial debt, the largest income tax in our 

history, returning $300 million per year to Saskatchewan 

residents, and dropping 80,000 low-income earners off the tax 

rolls altogether, along with the largest investments in 

infrastructure ever. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to conclude by summarizing the 

comments of the budget from our valued municipal sector 

partners. In a couple of words, they are: thank you for listening; 

thank you for acting. We are pleased. In fact we are excited. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m excited too, and that’s why I won’t be 

supporting the amendment. I will be supporting this province’s 

excellent budget. 

 

Now to conclude, Mr. Speaker, in a spirit of true bipartisanship, 

I extend the hand of friendship to my sisters and brothers across 

the aisle on the other side of the floor, and ask them to vote with 

their hearts. I know that there are a number of them that are 

thinking strongly of supporting this budget. The Leader of the 

Opposition will recognize that this budget includes the kind of 

capital investments that Crown corporations should have been 

making all along. I think he’s going to vote for the budget. 

 

The opposition critic for Finance . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

They’re not going to vote for it? Well I’m disappointed to hear 

that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I saw the member from Regina Lakeview get on 

his feet the other night and say that the budget made him 

uneasy. I know the problem. He’s thinking, should I vote for 

my party or should I vote for my constituents? Should I vote 

against the budget or should I vote for it? I think he’s probably 

going to come around and vote for the budget because he 

recognizes it’s the right thing to do. I urge all of the members 

on the opposition to come to that conclusion. Vote from their 

hearts. Vote for the constituents. Vote for the budget. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m honoured to 

be able to rise in this House today on behalf of the remarkable 

residents of Saskatoon Greystone, and speak in favour of the 

strong and steady budget that has been delivered by my 

colleague, the Minister of Finance. I deeply appreciate the 

ongoing support of constituents within Saskatoon Greystone — 

a dynamic, vital, and cosmopolitan constituency. 

 

It’s a pleasure to be able to enter the debate today regarding the 

’09-10 budget for the Ministry of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Labour. I appreciate the opportunity to discuss 

how the ministry I have the honour of serving, how this 

ministry’s budget will contribute to this government’s overall 

goal of a Saskatchewan that is both strong and steady. 

 

While there remains much to do, I am pleased with our 

government’s work in the accomplishments and successes that 

the ministry has to offer over the last year. We’ve made 

contributions to a Saskatchewan, a Saskatchewan that while we 

know is not immune from global pressures outside, still has a 

place of remarkable and resilient economic strength. 

 

While we recognize that we are not immune from those forces 

outside, the leading economists have been talking for months 

about Saskatchewan’s economic performance, both within and 

beyond in international context. Recent labour force survey 

numbers from Stats Canada demonstrate that Saskatchewan 

continues to post relatively strong employment growth. The 

numbers are as following: 14,500 more people working in 

Saskatchewan in February compared to a year ago — an 

increase of 2.9 per cent, the strongest rate of growth of any 

Canadian province. 

 

[14:45] 

 

A growing number of women who have joined our province’s 

workforce, that is making our workforce more inclusive. In fact 

women accounted for nearly all employment growth in 

Saskatchewan over the last 12 months, with the number of 

working women growing by 15,300, or 6.6 per cent. And First 

Nation and Métis employment is up 3,500 over the past 12 

months. That reflects a solid six-month trend of continuous 

employment growth for our First Nation and Métis 

communities. 

 

So while we continue to take a balanced and prudent approach 



2542 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2009 

to managing both the immediate and longer term needs of our 

economy and of our labour markets, of our communities, we are 

doing so from a position of relative strength. It is that very 

economic strength, both current and projected, which has 

enabled our government to bring in another balanced budget. 

And it is at the same time that strength that is driving our 

government’s long-term economic vision for communities and 

people in this province. 

 

Regarding the specific budget for the Ministry of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Labour: the ministry provides an 

overall lift of 79 million, or 10.4 per cent, for a total budget of 

$840 million. Addressing our talent challenge is one of the 

cornerstones of our ministry’s measured and balanced approach 

to a strong and steady Saskatchewan. We’ve talked a lot over 

the last year about how critical it is that we build a vibrant, 

skilled workforce and reinforcing communities that are equally 

vibrant and dynamic. 

 

I would also like to take some time now to discuss the balanced 

approach we are taking to help achieve our broader objectives. 

Regarding First Nation and Métis peoples, we are focusing on 

improving education and employment outcomes for our 

province’s First Nation and Métis peoples. Not doing this in 

isolation, Mr. Speaker, but working with other ministries, most 

especially the Ministry of First Nations and Métis Relations, to 

ensure that we have a coordinated, comprehensive approach. 

 

The ministry is developing a First Nation and Métis 

involvement and inclusion strategy. This will ensure that the 

investments we make, the partnerships we build, and the 

programs we support are strategic, coordinated, and above all, 

collaborative as we focus on effective outcomes. 

 

Budget ’09-10 also provides continued support for a number of 

important initiatives: $5.9 million in funding targeted to 

Aboriginal workforce development in support of First Nation 

and Métis employment initiatives; continued ongoing operating 

and program funding to the Saskatchewan Indian Institute of 

Technologies. This is in addition to the $2 million in capital 

funding that we announced recently for SIIT [Saskatchewan 

Indian Institute of Technologies] as part of last month’s $500 

million accelerated infrastructure booster shot. This funding to 

SIIT represents the first ever infrastructure support from the 

provincial government to this institution. 

 

Continued operating and program funding to the Gabriel 

Dumont Technical Institute, the Saskatchewan urban native 

teacher education program, and the northern teacher education 

program; continued operating funding for First Nations 

University as we continue to work with that university and 

other partners on issues of governance to ensure that First 

Nations University is better positioned to meet its full potential; 

continued funding for adult basic education, and skills training 

on-reserve through regional colleges and SIIT; and investments, 

both public and private, specifically federal and provincial, for 

ongoing training and skills development opportunities for First 

Nation and Métis peoples in northern Saskatchewan through the 

Northern Career Quest partnership. I’m pleased to note that I 

understand a new corporate partner will actually be coming on 

shortly, Mr. Speaker, to help further extend the benefits of this 

program. 

 

Our government and the ministry recognize the vital role that 

First Nation and Métis peoples play in ensuring Saskatchewan’s 

economic success. We will continue to take steps that will 

ensure people across this province, especially First Nations and 

Métis peoples, that these peoples have the enhanced 

opportunities to participate in and benefit from the economic 

growth that’s under way in our province. 

 

Regarding post-secondary education, of course we’re also 

focusing on post-secondary education as part of the continuing 

commitment to students and scholars, instructors and 

professors, and institutions. In the coming months, the ministry 

will be working with our post-secondary partners to help 

develop a new vision for post-secondary education in 

Saskatchewan. And while we’re working on that vision 

collaboratively, we will continue to invest in our province’s 

post-secondary education, institutions, and learners. This year 

we will be investing more than 600 million in post-secondary 

education and training programs and of that, 623 million 

specifically is going directly to Saskatchewan’s post-secondary 

institutions. 

 

I’ll come back to speak about the institutions, but I want to 

address specifically a question that has come up in this House 

regarding our tuition management strategy. Let me lay out some 

of the key elements of this, that is increased operating funding 

to Saskatchewan’s universities and other advanced educational 

institutions; as well, infrastructure renewal and expansion. You 

can see that within the budget. We’ve said there’s a 

commitment as far as reasonable rates of tuition. Mr. Speaker, 

this is consistent with what’s going on across Western Canada. 

The rationale for this is, it’s vital to support our students, but 

also to support our institutions. This is a much more holistic 

approach to helping meet those dual goals. 

 

Then we’ve added — and I’ll speak in more detail to this in a 

few minutes — enhancements to student loans, some of which 

for the first time since the 1990s. And the graduate retention 

program, we’ve seen an expansion and we’ve put in additional 

dollars. 

 

We’re making capital investments to ensure that post-secondary 

institutions have the facilities necessary to provide training 

opportunities to the people of our province. I recently 

announced $26.35 million in infrastructure funding for St. 

Peter’s College; Great Plains College; SIAST [Saskatchewan 

Institute of Applied Science and Technology], where there was 

$7.85 million to support the expansion of training opportunities 

in nursing, plumbing, carpentry, and other trades at Wascana 

and Woodland campuses. And as I’ve mentioned already, 

we’ve made an infrastructure investment, the first one of its 

kind, at SIIT. 

 

My colleague, the Minister of Social Services, recently 

announced a significant investment in student housing at the 

University of Saskatchewan. This is truly significant, as the 

former government did nothing on that campus. This was 

evident in the early 1990s, when I arrived on that campus, that 

there was plenty of work to do. Absolutely delighted that the 

Minister of Social Services, the member from Humboldt, made 

sure that this investment went forward. 

 

Budget ’09-10 provides a total of 60.8 million in capital funding 



March 25, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2543 

to renew, rebuild, and grow the province’s post-secondary 

infrastructure, including 25.1 million for universities and 

colleges for continued facility management for sustaining 

capital — a 12 per cent increase over ’08-09. Mr. Speaker, new 

funding of 1.8 million for regional colleges to address increased 

costs; 4.4 million for renovations to accommodate health care 

program expansions; 5.4 million to Cumberland Regional 

College in Nipawin for their renovations and to develop a 

centre of literacy, workplace essential skills, and adult basic 

education; $4 million, an increase for Carlton Trail Regional 

College to relocate into the new high school located in 

Humboldt; $9.8 million of capital funding from the ’09-10 

budget for the international vaccine centre at the University of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

In regards to our student supports — as I’ve highlighted before, 

this is consistent with our broader tuition management strategy 

— 23.5 million in new funding to enable universities to limit 

tuition increases to an average of 3 per cent, a modest increase 

by any measure when compared across Canada. In partnership 

with the federal government and private partners, we’re 

providing over $470,000 for the expansion of the Mathematics 

of Information Technology and Complex Systems, or MITACS, 

to allow for 21 students to participate through scholarships in 

this initiative. MITACS is a partnership program for graduate 

students and post-doctoral fellows to participate in applied 

research and development internships. 

 

We’re implementing as well the new Saskatchewan Scholarship 

of Honour, as has been raised in this Assembly previously; 2.8 

million to index the provincial training allowance for shelter 

and energy costs. 

 

$2.2 million in new funding for student loan enhancements to 

provide grants for low- and middle-income students in one-year 

programs and to low-income families with dependents, to 

increase the provincial maximum weekly loan limit to $140 per 

week of study, and to increase the Saskatchewan Student 

Bursary to maintain debt levels of $210 per week of study. 

These changes coordinate the Saskatchewan student loans 

program with the Canada student loans program, something that 

wasn’t done in 2005 and has not been done since 1994. We are 

listening to the needs of students and addressing their concerns. 

 

And on this note, I thought it may be worthy of addressing to 

help ensure that there’s a clear historic record because on 

November 27, 2008 the member from Saskatoon Meewasin 

rose in this Assembly and made reference to a student day of 

action held on February 28, 2008 at the U of S [University of 

Saskatchewan] campus. In reference to my own participation in 

this event, the member opposite charged, the Minister 

Responsible for Advanced Education did not attend; he did not 

attend. The member from Meewasin went on to say that the 

minister does not like to attend events where he has to answer 

questions. 

 

To clarify on February 28, 2008, the day in question, I was on 

the campus of the University of Saskatchewan. I spoke at the 

invitation of an instructor regarding public policy to a class. 

That day I fielded questions directly from students and faculty, 

including about housing, and there was none other than the 

Hon. Chris Axworthy in the audience who helped raise some of 

those very questions. Later that day, I met with members from 

the U of S Students’ Union to directly address their concerns 

where I asked for additional empirical support for the positions 

that the students were putting forward. 

 

To go even further, on February 2 of this year, I was again at 

the University of Saskatchewan where the Students’ Union 

presented a copy of the U of S student housing report. This 

report was then extended to His Worship, the respected mayor 

of Saskatoon, the honourable Don Atchison, and myself. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to report that within 48 hours the 

assignment was complete. My honourable colleague announced 

a $15 million contribution to a new student housing initiative on 

the campus. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Our government is not stopping at 

supporting our students at graduation. We’re helping them to 

succeed within our province. With this goal in mind, we have 

dedicated $18.5 million to rebate tuition costs through the 

expanded graduate retention program, 6.5 million of that is new 

funding for ’09-10, and $400,000 to the repayment assistance 

program to help students struggling with repayment after 

graduation. 

 

And we’re working to do even more by working with the 

federal government on two important fronts. First on the 

infrastructure stimulus that Ottawa has announced where we’re 

working with post-secondary institutions in preparing proposals 

for the new $2 billion knowledge infrastructure initiative, 

decisions about which the federal government will announce in 

the near future. 

 

And second, on additional employment and educational 

initiatives which will be announced in the coming months 

through the labour market agreement and the Labour Market 

Development Agreement. Those are both run through HRSDC 

[Human Resources and Skills Development Canada], regarding 

employment opportunities. 

 

Now let’s take a look at some specific program initiatives we’re 

undertaking to increase employment opportunities: $7.9 million 

in funding is targeted for training seat expansions for registered 

nurses, psychiatric nurses, medical diagnostic professionals and 

physicians in partnership with institutions and the Ministry of 

Health. 

 

The JobStart/Future Skills initiatives continue to be an 

important mechanism to address worker shortages. And budget 

’09-10 provides an ongoing investment of $19.4 million to 

support it. 

 

The budget also provides for the funding to allow us to name 

the $3.5 million mid-year increase for nearly 1,100 additional 

apprenticeship seats. We will also continue to deliver targeted 

initiatives for older workers to assist unemployed older workers 

to re-enter the workforce and deliver workplace essential skills 

— a Saskatchewan pilot — to provide funding for industry and 

post-secondary partners to assist job seekers and existing 

employees to build their essential skills and enhance their career 

development. 

 



2544 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2009 

We are also importantly supporting adults with disabilities 

through the employability assistance for people with disabilities 

program. We will do this by giving priority to students with 

disabilities and the Student Employment Experience program 

and the Canada-Saskatchewan student grant for the 

accommodation of students with permanent disabilities. 

 

At the same time, we will pursue new partnerships with sector 

groups and employers for workforce recruitment initiatives and 

explore improvements and enhancements to the saskjobs.ca. 

 

Attracting newcomers is another area of focus. During the next 

fiscal year, we will continue to attract newcomers and we’ll see 

more about this tomorrow. This year we are undertaking an 

immigration strategy and enhancement to help respond to the 

demographic and labour needs of the province and to help 

ensure that we’re building more diverse, dynamic, and 

cosmopolitan communities. 

 

As well, we’re also focusing on attracting additional economic 

investment to help build this new Saskatchewan. This includes 

an investment of an additional $2 million in ’09-10 with a focus 

on newcomers, with specific reference to immigrant 

entrepreneurship and to provide more opportunities to attract 

investors and newcomers to Saskatchewan. The new business 

immigration programs will include an Aboriginal immigrant 

investor initiative and business succession initiative. 

 

These programs will grow the province and create jobs by 

linking immigrant investors with First Nation and Métis 

communities. Other priority elements of the strategy include 

targeting 3,400 nominations for ’09-10, or potentially 9,600 

new immigrants through the Saskatchewan immigrant nominee 

program. 

 

[15:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me give some reference to that. Between 2001 

and 2006, under that last government, barely 8,000 people came 

to Saskatchewan through both federal and provincial programs. 

In 2009, Mr. Speaker, we anticipate that there will be 10,000 

people arrive in Saskatchewan through immigration. 

 

A new settlement and integration delivery model which will 

more effectively respond to increasing immigration. A new 

international education council to promote a coordinated 

approach to international education in the province. Working 

with partners to develop a sounder regulatory environment that 

better protects newcomers and ensures immigrant processes that 

are fair and transparent for our newcomers. 

 

Regarding community-based organization, we are also investing 

in community-based organizations which provide important 

services to Saskatchewan people. These CBOs 

[community-based organization] will see a further 3 per cent 

basic increase over and above the $5 million announced in last 

year’s budget and the September 2008, 7 per cent increase. 

 

Regarding the labour environment, our government continues to 

look at Saskatchewan’s labour environment. Part of attracting 

and retaining a skilled workforce and building stronger 

communities is ensuring Saskatchewan is attractive regarding 

work and investment. On the legislative side, we recently tabled 

amendments to The Construction Industry Labour Relations Act 

to expand the choices available to workers and employers and 

providing greater clarity for those involved in industry. This 

will help to ensure that our construction industry operates under 

fair, flexible, and effective labour laws. 

 

And while I’m on the subject, Mr. Speaker, I noted with some 

concern the meandering remarks from the member from The 

Battlefords during last week’s adjourned debate. Not only did 

the member struggle to comprehend the nature of the changes, 

but in a telling turn of phrase, the hon. member demonstrated 

his lack of understanding of the existing legislation that his 

NDP government put in place so many years ago. 

 

Last year we lowered the minimum age of employment in five 

sectors — hotels and restaurants, educational institutions, 

hospitals, and nursing homes — as a pilot to be reviewed this 

year. And we are currently engaged in the public and 

stakeholders through a consultation process to help inform that 

review. 

 

The ministry will also continue to foster occupational health 

and safety compliance and best practice strategies to help 

reduce injuries and increase productivity in all sectors. 

 

Workplace safety continues to be an issue of critical importance 

to this ministry and to this government. An increasingly focused 

effort will be brought to bear on both public and private sector 

initiatives to enhance the WorkSafe Saskatchewan partnership, 

an initiative to identify and address workplace hazards and 

eliminate work-related injuries and illnesses. 

 

Regarding service integration, beyond all of the key 

investments and initiatives I’ve already mentioned, Advanced 

Education, Employment and Labour is also undertaking an 

initiative to provide better service to the people of 

Saskatchewan. We are better aligning ourselves so that when 

clients come through our doors, they can get information about 

a number of different issues through one visit to one office. 

Through service integration, we’re making important progress 

on taking a common sense approach to client service by coming 

at it from the client’s perspective. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, as you can see within the balanced 

and prudent approach that we’ve laid out in this budget, this 

will be a year of solid investments and initiatives within our 

ministry and across our government. The funding and initiatives 

we have identified will not only build a skilled and talented 

workforce, they will help make life better for Saskatchewan’s 

people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we look forward to serving the province, and we 

look forward to ensuring that the benefits of our strong and 

steady Saskatchewan are shared right across this province. It 

goes without saying, Mr. Speaker, I support firmly and fully 

this budget. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very happy to 



March 25, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2545 

enter the debate on the budget today. I want to talk about the 

people in Eastview, people in Eastview who have continued to 

display their confidence in me as their MLA. This is the fourth 

term, and I’m happy to serve my constituents. 

 

To my constituency assistant, April Anderson, who runs my 

office so effectively, serving everyone in the constituency — 

people remark on how accessible and how effective she can 

deal with their issues. To my family who support me in the 

political arena, I want to say thank you: to my husband, Don, 

who lives the political life with me; to my son, Sean, and my 

daughter, Heather, and their families; to my grandchildren who 

make this life bearable, and always entertain me and keep me 

young. 

 

We often have to put our jobs ahead of our families, and I thank 

them for allowing me to do that, and to support me through all 

these years. I want to particularly thank my mother who’s 83 

years old and who campaigns with me. In fact sometimes she’s 

ahead of me, and has often said, you know, if I’m going too fast 

for you, I’ll slow down. But she continues to be one of my 

biggest supporters and I rely very heavily on her support as I do 

my whole family. 

 

My comments today are going to talk — since we’ve got a 

shortened time — my comments today on the budget are going 

to talk about how the budget is based on false assumptions. 

We’ve heard that from many of my colleagues. Some of the key 

messages in the budget, the things that we’re basing our 

assumptions on — the price of potash, some of the things that 

we hope to see in the economy, the predictions for economic 

growth — are not necessarily going to be there. So the budget is 

based on hope — hope that these things will happen. And all of 

us as citizens of Saskatchewan hope that they do happen. 

 

We’re happy to live in a province that has been insulated 

somewhat from the economic catastrophes that are befalling 

even other provinces around us. And a lot of that insulation has 

occurred over the years with strong and forward-thinking 

planning on behalf of our party when it was in government. 

We’ve set the stage; we’ve set some of the protections; we’ve 

set the economic climate. And time and money has allowed the 

Sask Party to put together a budget that they’ve shown last 

week. Not really much on philosophical, big changes. A lot of 

things have to do with money and the province has a lot of 

money. A lot of it to do with the initiatives and programs that 

were put in place by the NDP when we were in government. 

 

Being the Health critic, I would like to talk a little bit about 

what the impact of this budget has on health and the health 

system. A lot of the money going into the health system is 

going into infrastructure and, granted, the infrastructure in the 

health system, as it is across the province in highways and 

schools and many other things, has been deteriorating in this 

province as has most municipalities, most provinces across the 

country, simply because there was no money. 

 

All through the ’90s there was no money. Provinces were 

struggling to get out of debt and out of deficit budgets. There 

was no money. But interestingly enough . . . And I’m going to 

read this into the record because I’m really kind of tired of 

hearing about how we did nothing. And here’s what we did 

with nothing. We built — this is the NDP when we were in 

government — since ’91, from ’91 to 2007, built 30 long-term 

care facilities — 30 — with no money, struggling to make 

choices to give some tax cuts, to build some hospitals, to build 

some schools. 

 

For the Minister of Health and other people standing up saying, 

you’ve done nothing for long-term care, well that’s not true. 

Here is 30 facilities. This is from the minister’s office; I’m not 

making these up. These are from the minister’s office in their 

written question answered. 

 

I’m just going to read a few. Eastend, Wolf Willow Health 

Centre in Eastend. Assiniboia Union Hospital Integrated 

Facility in Assiniboia. Davidson and district health centre in 

Davidson. Unity & District Health Centre in Unity. La Loche 

Health Centre in La Loche. Parkland Place in Melfort. Foyer 

d’Youville in Gravelbourg. Providence Place in Moose Jaw. 

 

St. Joseph’s Health Centre in Macklin. La Ronge Health Centre 

in La Ronge. Riverside Health Complex in Turtleford. Mont St. 

Joseph Home in Prince Albert. Balcarres integrated health care 

centre in Balcarres. 

 

Long Lake Valley Integrated Facility in Imperial. Silver 

Heights Special Care Home in Raymore. Wynyard integrated 

facility in Wynyard. Moose Mountain Lodge in Carlyle. 

Galloway Health Centre in Oxbow. Tatagwa View in Weyburn. 

 

Kamsack & District Nursing Home in Kamsack. Yorkton & 

District Nursing Home in Yorkton. Sherbrooke Community 

Centre in Saskatoon. Coronach Health Centre in Coronach. 

Craik & District Health Centre in Craik. 

 

Grasslands Health Centre in Rockglen. Lady Minto Health 

Centre in Edam. Montmartre Integrated Health Centre in 

Montmartre. St. Mary’s Villa in Humboldt. St. Joseph’s 

Hospital in Estevan. Wheatland Lodge in Leask. 

 

This is something we’ve never done . . . [inaudible interjection] 

. . . Well these are from the minister’s office, answers to the 

question: how many facilities have been built? This is supplied 

by . . . The Sask Party gave us those answers. 

 

So what really bothers me about the budget, other than the fact 

that there’s false assumptions in there which should bother 

everybody, is that in the document — and I forget what this is 

called here — the budget summary ’09-10, in the green part, 

one vision for government, government’s goals says, “Keep 

Government’s Promises and fulfill the commitments of the 

election, operating with integrity . . .” 

 

Well I don’t see it. Frankly, when I hear comments made that 

are clearly not true, I wonder how you can possibly say you’re 

“. . . operating with integrity and transparency . . .” and you’re 

“. . . accountable to the people of Saskatchewan.” 

 

Well the people of Saskatchewan need to know the things that 

we hear are not true. When you talk about doing nothing, 

obviously I’ve read 30 communities who have got long-term 

care facilities. That’s just an example I picked to show that this 

is not dealing with the public with honesty and integrity and 

transparency. 

 



2546 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2009 

Another one which is particularly dear to my heart is the 

children’s hospital. And I know how much the children’s 

hospital is needed. There’s no disputing that. I’m an obstetrical 

nurse and a grandmother who had two grandchildren in the 

NICU [neonatal intensive care unit]. I understand how sick 

children can tear at your heart and what we need in this 

province. 

 

But I have news releases from May 2006, starting in May 2006, 

when the minister at the time, the member from North 

Battleford, announced the funding to start the planning of the 

children’s hospital. We’ve gone through May 2006, May 2005 

even, farther back than that. My colleague from Lakeview 

announced that this government, the NDP government at the 

time, supported building a children’s hospital. 

 

This was not something that the Sask Party thought of on 

budget day, and announced it. This was not something that was 

new. We’re talking May ’05 when this was announced. Then 

we’re talking May ’06, we’ve added more money in the budget. 

And April ’07, “Planning on the children’s hospital has 

progressed to the point where the preferred location and general 

parameters can be announced.” News release — not something 

I’m making up. “Plans are to have a project proposal that can be 

considered for the 2008-09 budget.” “The 2007-08 budget 

provides up to one million dollars . . .” 

 

And I hear the minister saying, you announced it but you had no 

plans to build it — simply not true. So when we look at the 

budget and there was announcements to put money for the 

children’s hospital, very good; we need that money in there. 

The plans have been ongoing. So nobody should be confused 

that this was an announcement that came out of the minister’s 

office on budget day. Nobody should be confused about that. 

 

We committed as an NDP government in ’05 to build this 

hospital, to build it as a tower or a pavilion, a hospital within a 

hospital. All those things were being considered as Saskatoon 

realigns its services. You can’t just plunk something out there, 

even though some of the promises and the money that’s been 

assigned has been sort of plunked out there. They’re surprising 

some communities with long-term care facilities that they never 

even knew they were going to get. 

 

But somehow or other you can’t pick an ombudsman without 

having a year-long review. You can’t look at HIV [human 

immunodeficiency virus], AIDS [acquired immune deficiency 

syndrome] without having a year-long review. But you can 

announce a hospital, a long-term care facility, without even any 

functional plan in place. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I wonder how people are going to see the 

budget when they look at how it’s been put together and how 

it’s been presented. There’s no doubt people want to have tax 

relief. There’s no doubt they want to see a children’s hospital. 

There’s no doubt they want to have other services enhanced. 

 

I don’t know how you’re going to see anything in health 

enhanced. From my perspective, looking at the budget, it’s a 3.6 

lift in health. Three point six is inflation — that’s going to get 

us nowhere. 

 

We don’t even have contracts. The unions are all at the table, 

except for SUN [Saskatchewan Union of Nurses]. Where’s the 

money for those contracts? A lot of people work in the health 

system. The health system runs on people. Infrastructure does 

not pay wages. Infrastructure does not operate a facility. We’ve 

got all this infrastructure money, and good. We can build 

things. Can we operate them? 

 

Maura Davies, the CEO [chief executive officer] from 

Saskatoon said, it’s barely going to meet the inflationary costs 

of the district. I can’t imagine any other district seeing anything 

different. But it’s very quiet out there, so I’m wondering, you 

know, some of the things I hear in the House . . . there’s 

intimidation going on. People don’t want to say anything too 

much because they’re afraid their funding will be cut. They’re 

afraid of retribution. And you can hear the talk in the Chamber. 

There’s a bullying element here that I think is out there in the 

community. People have told us they do not . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . A prime example, a prime example. 

 

[15:15] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Every member has the right to be able 

to speak in the Chamber without interference. And I know that 

debate causes members to want to respond, but I will ask 

members to hold their comments until they are recognized and 

given the opportunity to speak. The member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So the comments that 

come across the floor today as well as every day that I hear, a 

lot of them have a really undercurrent of meanness. And so I 

don’t disagree when people tell me in the community they’re 

afraid to say something. They’re afraid to speak out. That’s out 

there. I don’t think that’s going to bode well for a government 

that sees themselves having a future in government for much 

longer. One term is all I can see people are going to put up with 

this. You don’t get very far scaring people. It might work for 

awhile, but it’s not going to work for long. 

 

And before I have to sit down, Mr. Speaker, I do want to talk 

about the patient-first review which is going on right now. I 

look forward to hearing some of the things that are being found. 

It’s a little bit disturbing. Some of the letters that I see from 

people that have concerns in health, I get copies of them, or I 

get them sent to me directly, and then I get the minister’s 

response. Everybody’s being fobbed off with the there’s a 

patient review going on, so basically all your problems are put 

on hold while this review goes on. 

 

And I understand the review will probably be put forward . . . 

The findings, the recommendations will be put forward in the 

late spring. We won’t have an opportunity to critique it then in 

this House, which is unfortunate. But I think that there’s enough 

people waiting for it obviously — seeing the letters that I see — 

that they’re going to be watching to see what’s going to be in it. 

 

Most people’s problems in the health system aren’t solved by 

going down to one health district. The problems that they have 

in the health system are usually on a contact basis. Something 

has gone wrong when they have come in with either the service 

or the person. 

 

It’s not going to help to privatize housekeeping. That’s a whole 



March 25, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2547 

other story. If we’re going to talk about privatizing 

housekeeping, we’re going to talk about superbugs. And 

superbugs — MRSA [multi resistant staphlococcus aureau], 

VRE [vancomycin resistant enterococci], C. [clostridium] 

difficile — those things are deadly. You take housekeeping out, 

privatize it, take it out of the purview of the health district or the 

government, where are the standards? You’re going to see those 

superbugs coming out into the community, and they’re starting 

to come now. I see some mention of infection control in this 

budget which I certainly want to pursue because this is a huge 

issue. These superbugs are out there, and if we even think about 

privatizing housekeeping, we’re going to see an increase in that. 

 

So I’m quite interested in seeing what the patient-first review 

has, as is everybody, and seeing if there is a magic bullet. Does 

Mr. Dagnone have the magic bullet? I doubt that. If there was a 

magic bullet, I’m sure that someone would have fired it by now. 

 

We’ve had every review. We’ve had the system reviewed on an 

almost yearly basis. It isn’t that easy to fix. And raising 

people’s expectations, including some health districts who are 

somehow thinking that the patient-first review is going to save 

them money. They’re going to be disappointed. If they’re 

basing that on what they think is in their budget now and what 

the review will save them, that will keep them going, I doubt 

that they’re going to be kept going for long. I’m sure we’re 

going to be back in supplementary estimates, and we’re going 

to be looking for putting more money in the health system, 

bailing out districts or regions with deficits like there’s already 

been done this year from Saskatoon and Prince Albert and 

others. 

 

So I don’t think that the budget as presented is going to do the 

health system very much service. I think people are going to be 

disappointed. I think it’s going to be very hard for the districts 

to continue at the level of service they’re got now. And I, 

certainly given the fact that I talked about keeping the 

conversation honest and talked about integrity and transparency 

and accountability to the people of the province, I don’t see it in 

this budget. I don’t see it in the speeches. I don’t see it in the 

remarks of the various ministers. 

 

So, no I will not be voting for this budget. I don’t trust that 

those things are there. I will not be voting for this budget, but I 

will be supporting the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I really value 

the opportunity to rise in debate of the budget here today. It’s 

one of the treasured opportunities we have as a member to rise 

in this Assembly as part of our democratic process, and I thank 

this Assembly for that opportunity. 

 

I’m inspired by the words from the member from Regina 

eastview who just finished speaking, who highlighted the 30 — 

Saskatoon Eastview, sorry — who highlighted the many, many, 

many, many investments in health care facilities across rural 

Saskatchewan that the New Democrat government was 

committed to. It was great to see that. 

I’d like to specifically thank the good citizens and my 

constituents in Regina Rosemont who have entrusted me to rise 

in this Assembly and to speak and to engage in debate. Very 

good, very good people who remain very close, and we keep 

good communication. I always welcome and encourage their 

participation in the process. 

 

Just recently there’s some specific changes in Regina 

Rosemont, Mr. Speaker, and not to belabour the point, but 

we’re watching what’s going to go on with Government House, 

Mr. Speaker. It’s a treasure within our city and within our 

province and certainly within Regina Rosemont. It’s concerning 

to see the number of staff who have been laid off and how that’s 

going to affect service, and what that means for our 

constituency is something we’ll continue to watch. 

 

Certainly, Mr. Speaker, as well within Regina Rosemont, we 

have an incredible long-term care facility, Pioneer Village and 

Regina Village, that has recently been transferred to the health 

region, Mr. Speaker, and we see this likely as a positive move. 

And the reason it’s positive is we need some support in that 

facility on the infrastructure side of things and some 

improvements, and certainly we know that government and the 

Health ministry has the capacity and the responsibility to 

support those kind of changes. 

 

I would be remiss not to thank my constituency assistant, 

Donna From, who is an absolute pleasure to work with and 

who, I must say, Mr. Speaker, provides every citizen that walks 

into that office her relentless support and advocacy and 

guidance for their needs, and serves Regina Rosemont 

constituents incredibly well. She’s a pleasure to work with on 

my end as well and I really appreciate her for the guidance she 

offers our constituents. 

 

I’d like to thank my wife, Stephanie, as other members have 

mentioned their spouses. Our spouses certainly become part of 

our political lives. My wife, Stephanie’s a school teacher here 

in Regina, Mr. Speaker, and who thoroughly enjoys her work. 

And beyond that she’s certainly my confidant, my supporter, 

but also my critic, Mr. Speaker, which I think is important. I’d 

like to thank the broader group of friends and family who 

provide that important support to us as members. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was noteworthy last week after the budget was 

released, I went into the grocery store on 4th Avenue, Extra 

Foods, within Regina Rosemont. It’s always a little bit of a hub 

of activity and a place to engage in some dialogue. It’s almost 

as good as going next door to the Home Hardware on 4th 

Avenue, Mr. Speaker, where we have great political discourse 

as well. 

 

And in the grocery store, Mr. Speaker, a group of constituents 

wanted to chat a little bit about the budget and I didn’t say 

much; I just listened to their perspectives. And one individual 

kind of led the conversation a little bit more — so a contractor 

in the area, Mr. Speaker. And this contractor described himself 

as a non-partisan individual who’s not aligned really with any 

particular party and was really interested in the best 

circumstances for our province. 

 

But he related his own circumstances to that of the budget, Mr. 

Speaker, and he had criticism. He had scathing criticisms, Mr. 



2548 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2009 

Speaker, of how the province, how the Sask Party was 

overestimating and being irresponsible with their revenue 

estimates, Mr. Speaker. He noted that in his business and his 

life that he had to be very responsible in setting those kind of 

estimates; that he didn’t pin his budgets on revenues he might 

gain, or contracts he might gain or hope to gain or hope to 

obtain or whether he was optimistic about it. He had to base his 

finances off of safe assumptions. Otherwise, Mr. Speaker, he 

talked about he needed to make those responsible choices in 

purchasing equipment and in the outlay of debt to do so, and 

whether that’s the cost of his housing arrangement or in his 

vehicles, and just to be responsible, not to be in too risky of a 

circumstance. 

 

He related his personal circumstances to the provinces and was 

very concerned, Mr. Speaker, about the province’s blindly 

optimistic outlook on the future and . . . I shouldn’t say outlook 

on the future. He was concerned about the outlook into the 

actual budget and the assumptions that they used. He was 

concerned that it was more of a hope and a prayer. And this is a 

real concern of constituents of mine, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I guess that takes us to a very important fundamental 

question and concern we have as opposition, is that a budget is 

only as solid as its foundation. And this foundation, we’re 

concerned, is weak. We’re worried about the blind optimism of 

the members opposite who choose to completely not listen to 

economic indicators and to groups out there and to businesses 

out there and economists out there, such as Scotiabank or the 

Conference Board of Canada, who have put out GDP [gross 

domestic product] assumptions that, right now, are currently 

point six three for growth for the current year. 

 

Of course we would love to see us completely outperform that, 

Mr. Speaker, but in responsible budget setting, that’s not how 

you do it. You stick to the responsible and safe assumptions — 

something this government has completely failed to do. And I 

note that the climate in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, as many of 

our good friends in business and good heads as far as 

economists were in here for budget day, Mr. Speaker, I noted 

the mood as our trusted and able Finance critic dissected some 

of our base concern around the foundation and the overly 

optimistic assumptions. And it was kind of a quiet still, Mr. 

Speaker, that spilled over this room as these well-known 

business individuals, with good minds, agreed and were 

concerned with that. And we’ve heard from those same 

individuals since then, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the budget’s foundation has been described as reckless, 

irresponsible, not based on trusted indicators, lacking 

sustainability . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . The Premier is 

asking about who we’ve heard from and would we like to table 

the names. Well, Mr. Speaker, we’re not going to table names 

of those trusted business individuals who have spoken out 

against this province’s budget, because as the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview says, these individuals opposite, they hold 

vendettas. And we’re not going to put those kind of names on 

the table. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we’re concerned with the debt circumstance 

in our province. We’ve worked so hard as a province, as a 

government, and as Saskatchewan people to improve our 

debt-to-GDP ratio out of an incredible mess that existed in the 

late ’80s and early ’90s, Mr. Speaker. And that debt-to-GDP 

ratio has improved for well over a decade here now, Mr. 

Speaker. And it’s a stark contrast and a grave concern to see 

that that trend is going to be reversing and that the debt side of 

that equation is going to grow significantly, Mr. Speaker. And 

Saskatchewan people, Saskatchewan people are concerned 

about this. 

 

Within this budget as well, Mr. Speaker, we see runaway 

spending — a 25 per cent increase in over 2 years. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, I thought this government, the Saskatchewan Party 

was the government who promised to keep spending within 3 

per cent per year — a campaign promise. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

we see runaway spending. We see poor economic assumptions 

by this government at a time of economic uncertainty, at a time 

where people of this province deserve something more, Mr. 

Speaker. They deserve responsible government. And it’s 

certainly a stress for my constituents. 

 

When we look at the inflation side of our circumstance — 

housing, natural gas — individuals, families, businesses being 

gouged right through the winter here, it’s unacceptable, Mr. 

Speaker. And we’re going to continue to work to hold this 

government to account on the natural gas gouging that occurred 

this last winter. 

 

I do have many other comments on the economy, Mr. Speaker, 

but I’m watching my time and I would like to maybe come back 

to them if I’m able to, following some comments on education. 

 

This budget verified, Mr. Speaker, as we looked at the 

education aspects of it, again a very strong trend of legislate 

first and then consult later, Mr. Speaker. This is a concern. No 

consultation on a structure, a funding structure that’s been in 

place prior to us becoming a province; one that supports the 

health of our treasured institution, that being our public 

education system, Mr. Speaker. And this has become a habit of 

this ministry — legislate first, consult later. An absolute 

fundamental change to how boards are funded and, Mr. 

Speaker, for the roles of school boards. 

 

We start to ask questions and we wonder about how this might 

be challenged. We look at the constitutionally enshrined rights 

and access that Catholic school boards have to the tax base. We 

question things as far as the process that they had. Did they 

perform a third party constitutional analysis of the validity of 

the new property tax regime as it applies to separate school 

boards, Mr. Speaker? Catholic education in Saskatchewan has a 

proud, proud history. And this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, 

is going to ensure that it has a bright, bright future as well. 

 

When we look at the role of school boards, Mr. Speaker, there’s 

so many questions out here now. There’s shock within the 

school divisions and there’s questions. What does this mean for 

autonomy? What does this mean for governance? It’s a whole 

new landscape. 

 

[15:30] 

 

The minister committed to school boards that the scope of this 

report did not include their ability to levy for their local needs, 

Mr. Speaker. And that’s so important because not every part of 

this province is the same. Whether we’re up north in Northern 



March 25, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2549 

Lights School Division or whether we’re down in the Southeast 

in Cornerstone, we have different needs, different communities. 

And it’s very important, Mr. Speaker, that those boards, locally 

elected, that are accountable to the people, are able to provide 

for the service and education, equitable opportunities that are 

needed for all those students in every circumstance, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So the minister chose not to let boards know that this was in the 

scope of his report. The member from Rosetown-Elrose chose 

to let boards believe that the ability to access the tax base 

wasn’t being considered. And I guess that’s a concern, Mr. 

Speaker, because here we have some members and a minister 

who have chosen to not be straight with valued partners in 

education, completely reversing a long-standing collaborative 

and respectful environment with education partners that quite 

frankly, Mr. Speaker, has served education incredibly well. It’s 

a question of transparency, Mr. Speaker, of fairness. 

 

So here we have so many questions as we go forward. 

Questions such as adequacy of this funding, what this means for 

the autonomy of school boards. And how are expenditures now 

going to be recognized, Mr. Speaker, and in their unique ways? 

And we know that costs to deliver education around this 

province differ. How is the minister going to be able to ensure 

that that’s provided for, Mr. Speaker? How are we going to 

recognize the future plans of school divisions and school boards 

will be contained within the funding mechanism as we go 

forward? 

 

I guess I ask the question, you know, will divisions that may 

have been constrained in the past by their ability to access the 

tax base, will they receive equity going forward? Is this an 

opportunity to really open up and make sure that we receive 

equity in education funding? 

 

And it goes back to basic questions too, Mr. Speaker, about 

adequate funding for programs that are special and unique, Mr. 

Speaker. Because if boards are constrained and budgets are 

tight, we worry about funding for special education, Mr. 

Speaker. We worry about the additional support that’s needed 

for local needs and for local plans, Mr. Speaker. How do we 

make sure that that inclusive educational experience for all 

students, regardless of where they live, Mr. Speaker, is provided 

for? How do we make sure that boards who are achieving in so 

many ways to progress and to be innovative in the ways they 

deliver education, how do we enable that through this funding 

mechanism, Mr. Speaker? 

 

We’re worried about this, Mr. Speaker, because if the minister 

himself doesn’t recognize the need that the school board does, 

then they’re not getting it, Mr. Speaker. And that’s a huge 

departure. It’s one, a question of autonomy. And many are 

concerned about this as an attack on the democratic delivery of 

education in our province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’ll share a couple comments here. And we’re going to have so 

many more times to discuss this specific aspect of the Bill, Mr. 

Speaker, but I’ll just quote from a media release from the 

Saskatchewan school boards, Mr. Speaker, on March 18, 2009. 

I quote: 

 

“This is a profound change in the history of funding 

education in Saskatchewan,” Challis said. “Boards have 

historically looked to the property tax base to ensure they 

were able to meet the needs of their students and local 

communities. There will no doubt be anxiety about how 

this will impact the autonomy of school boards.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, another article on March 20, in the Leader-Post. I 

quote from this: 

 

“It’s an attack on democracy. It’s an attack on their right 

to control and determine the nature of K-12 education 

system for their kids.” [Mr. Speaker.] 

 

Well these are the concerns, Mr. Speaker, that we have on this 

side of the House. We’re worried about them as we go forward. 

 

We’re worried about the lack of recognition for many other 

fronts here. Inequitable distribution of the property tax benefit, 

Mr. Speaker — that’s been argued about. When property tax 

ratepayers get their assessments and go to pay their bills, 

they’re going to realize many of them, particularly those in the 

urban centres, aren’t seeing a decrease in their bills, Mr. 

Speaker. And we’re worried about that equity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m being told that I need to wrap it up here right 

now, that my time is up. I have so many different pieces that I 

worry about. We’re going to have many conversations going 

forward — both in this Assembly and in committee — to 

realize, I guess, the full impact of the ripping of this autonomy 

and this funding from school boards. 

 

And we have particular questions around why child care spaces 

aren’t open when they so need to be, Mr. Speaker, when we 

have projects announced last year that still aren’t open now, 

when we see 1,000 new spaces that are apparently going to be 

opened up but no funding to actually see that they will be 

utilized, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I could go on and on and on. This Sask Party opposite is failing 

the people of Saskatchewan in many ways. This opposition is 

going to stand up for them. Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s truly a 

pleasure today to stand up before this budget debate. It’s my, of 

course, my second one as a Member of the Legislative 

Assembly. And I’m truly happy to do this on behalf of the 

membership of the Prince Albert Carlton association and of 

course all the people that voted for me in the Prince Albert 

Carlton area. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, of course it goes without saying that, as 

other members have already mentioned over the last couple 

days, that we couldn’t be here if it wasn’t for the love and 

support of our families. And I want to thank my wife, Charlene, 

and my daughters, Alyssa and Mackenzie, for this opportunity. 

These are three strong ladies in my life that keep me on the 

straight and narrow. I come home on weekends and I have a list 

of things to do which include groceries and laundry. So I’m 



2550 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2009 

very proud to be that kind of a husband and father, while they 

hold the home front down while I’m gone. 

 

I also want to thank my constituency assistant Laura Parenteau, 

who had to learn very quickly the demands of a constituency 

assistant, and she’s done a great job since February of last year 

when she was hired. And she keeps the office in shipshape form 

and maintaining a very busy schedule and helping all the people 

of Prince Albert and area that phone in looking for help from 

this government. 

 

I also want to thank the staff who work in my office here in the 

Legislative Assembly for doing a great job, my chief of staff to 

my ministerial assistant. Right now, the other ministerial 

assistant has been seconded to Social Services to assist in that 

ministry. And those two ladies have done a great job. And of 

course the two EAs, executive assistants, that work in the office 

as well do a wonderful job in keeping me prepared and ready to 

go every day while I’m working here. 

 

I also want to thank my colleagues on Treasury Board, the 

Minister of Finance in particular that’s been a great mentor to 

me in teaching me the rules of the Treasury Board and putting 

budgets together, along with the other colleagues that work 

together, the five of us. Also the colleagues in cabinet and those 

in caucus who . . . Last year it was a very accelerated learning 

curve for all of us. 

 

But this year we came together, worked on this budget — a 

very historic budget. It’s a very strong budget, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

historic because it’s designed to keep our Saskatchewan 

economy strong and steady at a time of great economic 

uncertainty around the world. And we are leading right now. 

We’re very optimistic that we’ll maintain that kind of growth 

and that momentum, but we’re very cautious as well, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We kept our promises. We’ll keep those other promises that still 

have to be done. My colleagues have stated, over 100 promises 

kept so far. We have a few other ones that are going to be taken 

care of in the next two budgets I’m sure, with no problem at all. 

But the biggest ones are the education portion of property tax, 

enhancements to revenue sharing which was critical to my city, 

increasing the number of police officers — and we’re going to 

maintain our promise of 120. I’ll speak more to that later when I 

talk about the ministry I’m responsible for. We’re going to 

build a children’s hospital, and of course providing a lift to 

CBO funding levels. 

 

In Prince Albert alone, Mr. Speaker, prior to the actual budget, 

we had a booster shot. And I want to talk about the Minister of 

Health and his officials. They did a great job. They provided 

almost $6 million to the Parkland Regional Health Authority, 

which provides for much-needed service delivery pressure 

money, plus functional planning dollars to design moving 

forward. Because this government, as I stated in my campaign, 

wants to recognize that hospital as a true regional hospital. 

Absolutely. It services over 160,000 people of the North and 

around the Prince Albert area. 

 

And with this budget as well, the Minister of Health and our 

government is putting an additional lift of $27.8 million to fund 

that regional health authority. Long overdue, I might add, to 

support this CEO and her fine staff that work there, and to 

tackle demands and the pressures put on them as we move 

forward. 

 

And I really believe now I can go back to my constituents and 

say that I made a promise in the campaign and we’ve kept it. 

Because we recognize that and it’s funded as a truly regional 

health authority and hospital . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

P.A. is finally getting some recognize. Yes, sir, we are. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — I’m also very happy to thank the Minister 

of Highways and Infrastructure because they are going to repair 

a road that was turned to gravel at the Murray Point access, 

Highway 953, in this budget. The functional planning dollars 

are for that. Many of my constituents thank the Minister of 

Highways and Infrastructure for that because they spend their 

summers travelling back and forth to Prince Albert from the 

lake, and they’ve noticed over the last two years that the 

highway’s deteriorated. The former government made it to 

gravel, and that’s wrecked their vehicles: stone chips, holes in 

floorboards of their trucks, damage to their trailers. So I’m very 

happy to be a part of this government that’s going to make 

changes in that effect. 

 

Of course this government announced, along with the Prime 

Minister of Canada, a very historic announcement to accelerate 

the twinning of Highway No. 11 between Saskatoon and Prince 

Albert. And we’ve all known, those of us who’ve travelled that 

road many times, that it’s very dangerous, has been a very 

dangerous stretch of highway, for reasons that vary from 

weather conditions to those people who shouldn’t be on the 

road after taking part in too much activity. 

 

And you know what, there’s been some tragedy. I think every 

one of us has known someone or a family member of someone 

who’s passed away on that road. And it’s good to see that the 

two governments, two levels of governments, are moving 

forward with a plan. Again the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure has a rolling capital plan, but the federal 

government is going to help along to accelerate that from an 

eight-year project to four, now with our input as well. So we’re 

very happy about that. 

 

The revenue sharing that we’re taking part in this year is 

historic in itself as well, because now the mayors recognize this 

type of PST is tied to the provincial economy in such a way that 

they recognize that when we’re doing well, they’ll do well. And 

you know what, the mayor of Prince Albert . . . Actually it was 

in the Prince Albert Herald the day after the budget, and I want 

to quote. It says, “The government fulfilled its promise from 

last year and for that I commend them.” He also goes on to say 

that the government introduced a formula endorsed by 

municipalities themselves. 

 

SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] 

wanted that kind of formula, Mr. Speaker. They wanted it tied 

to PST, so it worked out very well. They’re very happy with 

that. And moving forward, it’s an extra $1.5 million this year 

for my city and next year it’s even more. And he’s very 

thankful for that, and I’m happy to be a part of a government 

doing that. 



March 25, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2551 

Prince Albert also sees the fact that we get four new municipal 

police officers out of this budget, Mr. Speaker, as part of the 30 

for the year. Saskatoon will get four. Regina gets four. Yorkton 

will get two municipal police officers, RCMP [Royal Canadian 

Mounted Police] officers, and then the remainder of the 

province will be covered by RCMP support. And that’s critical 

because simply the northern part of our province — and the 

member from Cumberland’s gone, but Athabasca’s here — and 

we talked about, with the policing executive people, the need 

for a northern drug strategy, because the North needs that. So 

what I want to do, Mr. Speaker, is . . . The commitment now is 

that we have an integrated drug strategy we’re working on with 

the members of the Prince Albert Police Service and the RCMP, 

who’ll be able to have officers in detachments to tackle the 

northern drug problem. So we’re looking at that, Mr. Speaker. 

I’m proud of that. I’m proud of that statement today in our 

budget. 

 

Seven new SCAN [safer communities and neighbourhoods] 

officers will take us to the point where we can actually look at 

not just working in Saskatoon, Regina, Prince Albert, and other 

bigger communities, but now we can have officers go to the 

North and do surveillance as well which will alleviate the police 

officers who are tied to surveillance for the gang and drug 

activity. 

 

I also want to talk about, we are providing $1.6 million to the 

30 officers, and it’s part of our 120 officer commitment. So 

we’re doing very well there. 

 

The RCMP on budget day issued a news release commending 

the government on its provincial budget. They stated, and I 

quote, “RCMP Saskatchewan is pleased with the relationship 

and planning process that has taken place in preparation for 

today’s budget.” 

 

I want to go back to 1999 and 2003, insomuch as that one 

promise that was made was for 200 more officers in 1999. Well 

when we got to 2003, they made the same promise again to 

fulfill the 200 officers. And at the time, of course, I was a 

member of the Prince Albert Police Service and a proud 

member of the Saskatchewan Federation of Police Officers and 

the board of directors. I knew, as do my colleagues on this side 

of the House that were former police officers that are part of the 

Sask Fed, that they fell woefully short of the 200 officers, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And based on some numbers that I had present 

when I was in the Sask Fed, 80 is roughly the number that they 

were short. So we made a promise of 120 over four years. We’ll 

get there, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That’s surely a promise we will 

keep, guaranteed. 

 

Within the ministry as well I’d already announced $87 million 

for a new remand centre in Saskatoon, which will help to 

alleviate our overcrowding pressures there — $9.4 million in 

safety and security upgrades for our institutions. And that came 

from talking to the union leadership from Corrections, and sad 

to say that they had brought those concerns up for many years 

to the previous minister of the NDP, and for whatever reason 

their concerns fell on deaf ears. And I equate this to a phrase 

that we used in policing all the time. You know what, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, failing to plan was planning to fail. 

 

And that was too bad that they didn’t recognize that, but this 

government in this budget is making a historic injection of cash 

for brand new bed spaces. Since 1980s no brand new bed 

spaces were ever put in place. They replaced the unit, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, absolutely, and I commend them for that. The 

1913 unit was replaced. 

 

[15:45] 

 

So moving on, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I know my time is tight, so 

I want to just finish off by saying that the children’s hospital is 

very important. 

 

I want to give a shout out to the people who worked in the MRI 

[magnetic resonance imaging] department at City Hospital 

where my daughter Mackenzie, the youngest daughter, had to 

go there for a checkup on her eye. She had some issues coming 

forth, but the staff there were phenomenal. The technicians 

treated her like she was a young adult, as she is, a young 

woman, and made her feel very comfortable. So I want to thank 

them for that. And it made my wife and I feel very comfortable 

as well, so that was good news. And we got good news; she’s 

going to be fine. So it’s great to have that moving forward. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you. But the children’s hospital 

that this government is going to fund is going to help other 

parents who have much more serious concerns than I and my 

wife had. So I look forward to having that built and cutting the 

ribbon there with my colleagues. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that I should get, my time 

should be wrapped up here. In all the things we are doing in this 

budget, we will still have a $425 million surplus — in economic 

times unheard of in my generation and most of the generations 

in this room. And I think that moving forward, the people of 

Saskatchewan will still lead, this government will lead the way, 

and we’re very optimistic but cautious, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So I am proud to say that I will support this budget, and I will 

not support the amendment, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 

Albert Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to start off 

my engagement in this budget dialogue by thanking my new 

wife, Michelle. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Furber: — She decided to marry me even after she knew 

what I did for a living and the stress that it would cause her, and 

I’m thankful for the support that I get at home with her. 

 

I’d also like to thank my constituency assistants in Prince 

Albert. They work hard to deliver a great service to the people 

of Prince Albert, and I’d like to thank them for their attempt to 

make me look good on a day-to-day basis. Any failure to make 

me look good is my own; it’s not theirs. So I’d like to thank 

them for their commitment to the people of Prince Albert. 

 

I’d like to thank the folks that work in the caucus office during 



2552 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2009 

the session. It’s long hours; it’s tough work. But they do it very 

diligently and well. So I’d like to thank them as well, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now the government has said many times that they want to 

continue the economic momentum in Saskatchewan. I’d like to 

talk a little bit about the continue part of continue momentum. 

That implies that indeed there was momentum to begin with, 

and they seem to fail to acknowledge that on a daily basis in 

this Chamber. And I’ve found it frustrating to listen to, and so 

have many of my colleagues and many of the people of Prince 

Albert and Saskatchewan who know the truth about the 

economy in this province. 

 

We’ve been a have province since 2004. We’ve seen our 

population increasing since 2005. The growth . . . GDP in this 

province has started years ago. The unemployment rate has 

been decreasing for years. Paul Martin, himself an esteemed 

entrepreneur in this province, has talked about the population 

increasing in this province. 

 

Now let’s talk about how we got here. We changed the taxes for 

the manufacturing sector in this province nearly 10 years ago. 

Royalties for oil and gas were changed seven or eight years ago, 

Mr. Speaker, and we’re thankful that the industry responded 

and made huge investments in our province in this sector. 

Additionally we reduced taxes for small business, increased the 

threshold for the small-business income tax, moved to eliminate 

the corporate capital tax, and in ’99 provided the greatest 

decrease in personal income tax in the province’s history. So 

that’s why the economy in Saskatchewan is as strong as it is — 

not because of anything that they’ve done to this point, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I want to talk about, if I can, some of the economic policies that 

they’ve brought forward to help grow this economy. And they 

could provide me with a list right now if they’d choose, Mr. 

Speaker. And I guess the paused silence there leads me to 

believe that they know full well that they haven’t provided 

anything, except two minor things. Well one of them is a big 

thing and they certainly deserve credit for that. They provided a 

stimulus package which I’ll talk about a little bit later here. And 

they provided some education portion of property tax relief 

that’s been called for for some time. 

 

Now I want to talk a little bit, if I can, about Enterprise 

Saskatchewan. In a speech to the North Saskatoon Business 

Association, the then member from Swift Current said that each 

team upon election, “Each team will have one month to prepare 

its first inventory of the barriers to growth holding that sector 

back from reaching its full potential . . .” 

 

Well we’ve had one month and 16 to follow. And what have we 

got for recommendations out of Enterprise Saskatchewan? 

Nothing. They’ve made three recommendations, Mr. Speaker, 

that have all been denied by that government. It’s a failure of 

the administration. It’s a failure of the minister responsible. 

 

Now we’ve had a forestry crisis in this province for over two 

years. And what have they done about it, Mr. Speaker? They 

admitted two years ago that it was a crisis. In his speech, again 

the now Premier said that: “We won’t need to appoint a forestry 

task force as . . . [Calvert] did in the wake of the recent 

Weyerhaeuser announcement — one will already exist.” 

 

Now he says that they won’t need to appoint a task force to look 

after the forestry industry in the province of Saskatchewan 

because one will exist. Well if it exists, what’s it done? What 

are the recommendations for the forestry sector in this province 

coming out of Enterprise Saskatchewan? They’ve had 17 

months. They’ve recognized it’s in crisis for two years. They’ve 

done nothing. Again, a failure by the minister responsible and 

the administration as a whole. 

 

Now right after he said that they won’t need a task force, what 

does he do? He appoints a task force. And the member from 

Batoche is the head of this task force. They spend government 

money running around the province, say that they’re going to 

release a report based on their findings, and where’s the report? 

It’s two years later. There’s no report; they haven’t produced 

one. They’ve said that they produced one, and I’d like to see the 

findings of that report tabled in this legislature. If they’ve 

produced a report, it should be easy to table it today. 

 

Now in addition to the forestry crisis, we’ve been in a global 

economic crisis that affects Saskatchewan greatly in the last few 

months. And what have we got for recommendations out of 

Enterprise Saskatchewan to respond to the global economic 

crisis? Dead silence again. There’s nothing coming out of 

Enterprise Saskatchewan to respond to the global economic 

crisis. 

 

Now it’s interesting. We’ve had job layoffs, nuclear power 

proposals. Enterprise Saskatchewan has provided none of the 

information to the people of Saskatchewan on any of these 

issues. 

 

Now I’d like to read — speaking of the nuclear portion — I’d 

like to read another quote from the now Premier of the province 

of Saskatchewan about the nuclear industry in Saskatchewan. 

And I quote: 

 

The dithering will come to an end. And moreover, I signal 

today to our universities, that it is time for Saskatchewan 

to act morally and ethically on the issue of uranium and 

the half-life of fuel rods. 

 

. . . We should be and we can be a world leader in the 

research into further refinement and storage options. 

 

So where is the dialogue on storage options as the Premier 

promised there would be, back in his speech to the North 

Saskatoon Business Association? Where is it? He says that he’s 

going to signal to the universities that we should act morally; 

we have a moral responsibility and an ethical responsibility to 

store fuel rods in this province. And where is the dialogue? 

There’s no dialogue. 

 

It’s an embarrassment to that administration that they can’t 

provide a proper dialogue on the uranium industry in 

Saskatchewan and its growth, and the potential for storage in 

this province, which they’re going to slam the people of 

Saskatchewan with without warning. Now I don’t understand 

how they can go down that road. They’ve hidden their agenda 

so far, and I wonder how long it’s going to stay hidden. 

 



March 25, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2553 

Now they’ve had no consultation on the nuclear file to date. 

Communities have taken it upon themselves to hold their own; 

they’ve got 400 people showing up in a community of 500 to 

host a nuclear event. They want a discussion, not provided by 

the ministry of Enterprise Saskatchewan. 

 

Now I want to talk for a little while about a few more reasons 

why this budget scares the people of Saskatchewan. A 12.4 per 

cent spending increase. Now that’s not on top of a contraction 

from last year; that’s on top of over 10 per cent last year. How 

is it possible that a conservative government comes in with 

nearly 25 per cent over two years as an increase to the 

provincial budget? On top of that, they’ve had a campaign 

promise for a 3 per cent growth. So are we going to be cutting 

the growth of government in this province over the next two 

years of their administration to respond to their own promise? 

 

Now the Premier took out billboards in Saskatoon to brag about 

a 42 per cent reduction in debt in this province. Now the 

members are clapping, and good for them. But I’m hopeful that 

there’ll be some honesty with those billboards in the future. Is 

the Premier’s picture going to be on the same billboards in the 

same places in this province signalling the 36.25 per cent 

increase under his administration in this province over the years 

to come? That’s a good question. And are they going to do it? I 

doubt it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Additionally, total debt in this province has increased by $1 

billion this year. How is it possible, when you’ve got the 

greatest revenue in the government’s history in this province 

and you increase the debt by nearly $1 billion the same year? 

Only a conservative government in Saskatchewan could 

manage that one. 

 

Now I’ve got a question for the Enterprise Saskatchewan 

minister about the budget. Was Enterprise Saskatchewan 

consulted about it at all? Did they provide any input? They’re 

supposed to be providing input on all things to do with the 

economy in Saskatchewan. And were they consulted on this 

piece? It seems not. There hasn’t been a release of any kind that 

suggests that they have been. 

 

In their defence, the province has provided what they call a 

$500 million booster shot to the province for economic 

stimulus. Now they provided it before March 31 so that they 

could avoid a deficit in the same year that there’s already going 

to be $1 billion debt added to the province. In the same year 

that they’ve got record revenues in this province, they’re doing 

it — they’re providing a $500 million advance payment to 

avoid a deficit with the greatest revenue in government’s 

history. 

 

Now I want to talk about . . . Basically there’s four facets to this 

booster shot: municipal funding, the ed sector, highways and 

infrastructure, and for care homes. Now the municipal funding 

piece. They call it a booster shot, but this province has provided 

no guarantees to the people of this province that this money will 

be used in a timely fashion on new projects in order to boost the 

economy. This money could be sat on for years by 

municipalities, who I’m sure were glad to get it but there’s no 

guarantee that they’re going to use it. So it’s not part of an 

economic stimulus by any definition. 

 

The ed sector funding, this was advanced without allowing for 

appropriate planning by administration. It was sprung, and I’m 

sure they are glad to get it. But again, speaks to economic 

stimulus? How can you provide economic stimulus when 

you’re surprised by a huge portion of dollars like that, some of 

which were reannouncements? 

 

In terms of the highways and infrastructure piece, I’m sure the 

large budget is welcome by a number of folks for reasons of 

economic and safety reasons. But in estimates, the minister 

responsible bragged about how Alberta contractors would likely 

get the bulk of this work, taking both wages and profits back to 

the province of Alberta. Well I’m glad our Saskatchewan 

government’s economic stimulus package is there to provide 

stimulus for the province of Alberta. What kind of sense does 

that make, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Now I want to talk about what Enterprise Saskatchewan’s 

recommendations might be on some recent job layoffs: Doepker 

Industries, 50 to 60 employees; Babcock & Wilcox, 43; Startec, 

266; Cameco, 35; Agrium, 300; Shore Gold, 89; Prairie 

Diagnostic, 13; Mosaic potash, 1,000; Potash Corporation, 940; 

Evraz, 100; Evraz again, 75; Advanced Engineering, 96. That’s 

3,017 jobs. What’s the recommendation out of Enterprise 

Saskatchewan on how to deal with these job losses? What have 

they provided for answers for these folks from this government? 

Again, dead silence — 17 months on a promise of one month 

return, and nothing out of Enterprise Saskatchewan. 

 

Now again, I will not support this budget. I’ll be supporting the 

amendment for a number of reasons. One, it adds $1 billion of 

debt at a time of record revenues for the province. The 

debt-to-GDP ratio . . . You know, they were elected to grow the 

economy, but what they’re going to do, as they promise in their 

own document, to grow the debt faster than they’re going to 

grow the economy until 2013. How is that possible in the 

province with the way it was on a roll? And you know, all this 

economy could stand was 12 months of these folks — that’s it 

— and then it started to contract. 

 

Now they’ve provided no pre-K [pre-kindergarten] seats. First 

Nations and Métis leaders have weighed in. They’re totally 

excluded in this budget. It’s unfortunate. Property tax, the 

minister can’t even provide a guarantee that every single 

property owner in Saskatchewan is going to get a reduction. I 

don’t see how that provides anything for their campaign 

promise. 

 

Additionally, they’re assuming a growth that’s three times that 

of industry experts. There’s no way that anybody reasonable 

could support this budget based on those facts, Mr. Speaker. I’ll 

be supporting the amendment and not the budget. Thank you. 

 

[16:00] 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I stand here today to 

respond to this budget on behalf of my constituents, for the 

communities, the families, and the individuals I have the 



2554 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2009 

privilege to represent, and who have gained very little or 

nothing from this budget. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do not support 

this budget. I cannot support this budget and for these reasons. 

 

Highways and roads in my constituency are a huge concern. We 

have brought in petitions from my communities hoping, hoping 

this government with its $10.2 billion budget would address 

some of the northern issues. And unfortunately even with 

petitions, it didn’t work so far, but we’ll continue. 

 

We look at Highway 135 from Pelican; Highway 123, 

Cumberland House, when we look at these roads and the 

conditions of them, petitions again for Highway 123. If that’s 

the only way to get the attention, then I guess that’s what we 

have to do. With such a large budget, the hope, the hope that 

people had from this budget, the opportunity that was there for 

all Saskatchewan residents. I look at the slow walking, the road 

at Wollaston Lake. I look at the road there to Wollaston — 

slow. Let’s move. Sandy Bay has issues on roads; Hall Lake, 

Stanley Mission, Sandy Bay as well for roads. These are just a 

few of the roads that need to be addressed. 

 

I go back home and, you know, you hear some of the issues for 

Métis and First Nations. And it’s unfortunate with the amount 

of money that was in this budget that some of the issues for 

First Nations and Métis couldn’t have been addressed. To the 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations, core funding for 

the MNS [Métis Nation of Saskatchewan] with this budget 

should have easily been attainable. The duty to consult, the 

process to ensure that that process happens, kind of hard when 

the process isn’t being followed. Or maybe what’s being 

accomplished by the process isn’t being heard by the 

government or the minister. 

 

I look at DTI [Dumont Technical Institute] and there was a 

shortfall. It could have been addressed in this large budget but it 

wasn’t, Mr. Deputy Speaker. People came here hoping to hear 

some good news. The excitement was out there. Lots of money. 

Huge spending. People were truly . . . an opportunity to address 

some of the concerns. 

 

They left not so happy; not so excited like some are. For some 

communities and some individuals, yes. Some people, different 

industries, wonderful — benefitted. I give you that. But not all 

Saskatchewan residents who took part in this amount of money 

and surplus that was there got the benefits. 

 

And you can talk about the tax cuts. When you have 

communities that have unemployment rate at 80 per cent, what 

are tax cuts going to do for them with their costs rising? When 

you have First Nations housing, the crowding, and communities 

in my constituency, Métis, that are struggling. They’re so 

overcrowded. We thought there was an opportunity. So did 

they. Excitement. Didn’t happen. Let down. 

 

You will have to answer to that. You had an opportunity. You 

made decisions and choices. You will deal with that. 

 

We have an organization like Clarence Campeau Development 

Fund. Same status quo funding, 2 million. We’re looking for 

opportunities for Métis entrepreneurs — status quo. Sad. 

 

The Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations, in this 

House, said she had 80 meetings. And as far as I’m sure, 

nothing to show for it. Because people left here. First Nations 

and Métis truly are saying what’s on their mind now. I hope 

they do bring their message forward. We need to hear their 

message. We need to hear their hopes. We need to make sure 

that you hear what their community needs were. They don’t feel 

like they were heard. And some people may think that’s okay. I 

think it’s a shame. 

 

We look at long-term care facilities. Announcements, 

wonderful for those communities. But for my communities — 

nothing. For the North — nothing. Well you know, to the 

Minister of Health, we don’t have to sit back. Community 

members will do what they need to do. They will fight back. 

They will do petitions, a letter-writing campaign. They will do 

public awareness. If they feel they have to do that to have our 

elders taken care of, then that’s what they have to do. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we want a long-term care centre for our 

elders. In many of our communities in the North we need them. 

I speak of one. It was definitely concerning that some of our 

biggest communities in the North didn’t even get an 

announcement. But we’ll work on that as a community, and 

we’ll bring our concerns to this legislature. 

 

Addictions, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are a huge problem. But I 

want to compliment the staff that are out there. The staff in that 

field are doing an excellent job. They’re trying their best, but 

they need more resources, more facilities. There are social 

problems out there, Mr. Speaker, many of them. But I think 

with this amount of money that was out there, a lot of those 

could have been addressed and unfortunately were not. And that 

again — hope for some people, hope for some people was not 

in this budget. 

 

We talk about northern schools, and I commend Churchill High 

School for its staff, its students, the parents, the organizations 

that did all they could to make sure that announcement came. I 

commend them. What a job. Now let’s build it. 

 

Some of our communities, we announced cell coverage for 98 

per cent of the province — wonderful. I thought it was 

wonderful, and I commented about how I thought it was a good 

thing to do. But unfortunately I found out it was only for 

populated areas, so some of my communities like Southend 

who were trying to receive that have not got that. 

Grandmother’s Bay. There’s other communities need it didn’t 

get it, unfortunately. 

 

I’m concerned about Northern Affairs losing the department 

designation. It used to have an opportunity to argue for northern 

people and deal with some of the concerns. It no longer has that 

opportunity, I feel. When we have a minister who’s busy 

dealing with First Nations and Métis over 80 meetings, so the 

North obviously isn’t getting addressed like it should be from 

her department. 

 

I look at forestry. Forestry workers need support. They need to 

have a government who will go out and talk with them, ask 

them what they need, what can we do as a government. With all 

our money, what can we do for you. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 

people would have probably said, here are some ideas; here’s 

the communities that are impacted. But no, no, we won’t do 



March 25, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2555 

that. 

 

I’m also here to speak on behalf of commercial fishers . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. There’s a little more yelling 

from the floor. I’d like the members to respect the member that 

has the floor. Everybody will have a chance to speak to the 

budget. I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m also 

here to speak on behalf of commercial fishers and trappers. I’ve 

got phone calls from their concerns of not being addressed. Lost 

transportation subsidies that government cut the previous year, I 

thought would be reinstated. And maybe we could go and talk 

to them, how could this money assist you better? What could 

we do to help you better instead of cutting the money and not 

putting it back? But that didn’t happen. Why that didn’t happen. 

Sorry, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that did not happen. 

 

Low fur prices right now are affecting our trappers. It’s tough. 

It’s tough out there. I was at the Northern Trappers Association 

convention. They are struggling. They wanted some assistance. 

With the amount of money and spending that was this budget, 

that could have been addressed. The Minister of Northern 

Affairs could have addressed it. It didn’t get addressed, and 

that’s sad.  

 

There are some loans out there for northern fishermen and 

trappers, and unfortunately from what I’m hearing, there’s not 

many of them getting approved or getting access. So how do we 

address that? The minister, with this money, could have 

addressed that. It’s tight out there. We need to work as best we 

can as a province to help everyone, to make sure everyone’s 

concerns. 

 

That is such a crucial thing. And we could sit here and call 

blame, we could play the game, but all I have to say is this: at 

the end of the day, it is the people, the children, and our 

community members that will suffer. And I think that is such an 

important thing to share amongst ourselves. 

 

There are so many opportunities in my community that I have 

heard from people. With the amount of spending, there was so 

much excitement. There was so much excitement and hope. 

People came with expectations. They came with expectations 

and unfortunately they left — they left — feeling like they were 

not heard; they were left out. Why is that? All these meetings 

that went on with First Nations and Métis minister, they felt like 

they were left out, forgotten. Why is that? 

 

We’ll see what’s going to happen with the school divisions and 

funding. We’ll see what’s going to happen with school 

divisions and their funding. Maybe once they look at their 

budget it will be all right. Maybe they’re going to find out their 

autonomy has been taken away . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Yes, thank you. I look at it, that, and that is concern to me. 

We’ll see what they say. We have to look at the numbers. 

They’re going to talk, and I’m sure they’re going to express 

themselves to you and to the government and to the Minister of 

Education. 

 

I want to go back to just reflecting on the opportunities that the 

government had to so many community members out there. 

You had an opportunity to the Métis, the First Nations, the 

northern, and the rest of Saskatchewan — all of us. You had 

such an opportunity with such money. And you did, you failed 

them. You failed them. 

 

But it’s fine. It’s fine. I’ve heard a lot of, oh you didn’t do 

anything. You guys didn’t do anything. The government 

previously didn’t do anything. That’s fine. I can accept that. 

That’s the way it is; I understand that. But at the end of the day, 

so many people feel let down by that government, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. It’s unfortunate. 

 

But, you know, I’m happy. I have staff that work for me and 

work with me in my constituency. And community members 

that are good people, are going to work hard and fight. And if 

we have to fight, we’ll fight. We’ll do what we have . . . It’s not 

something that’s new to us. We’ll continue. And we’ll do what 

we need to do to bring the concerns to all the departments and 

the ministers. And you can make your decisions again, and I 

hope you make the right decisions. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, therefore I will not be 

supporting this budget and I will be voting for the amended 

budget. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[16:15] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Batoche. 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As I begin, I 

would like to once again thank the ladies that keep me on even 

keel: my wife, partner, and friend, Valerie, and also my CA 

[constituency assistant], friend, and confidante, Mary Anne. 

Thank you both to these ladies. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity to speak 

on this year’s budget. This budget marks the new beginning for 

the province of Saskatchewan. Last year’s budget laid down the 

foundation that became the cornerstone to our future. Last year 

the world was in full bloom; there was no stopping us. Oil was 

over $140 a barrel. The world was surging ahead as if there was 

no tomorrow. 

 

Today the world is a much different place. This budget is under 

much different circumstances. The world is now under a global 

recession; companies, corporations, banks, and even countries 

are staggering under this recession. Even the United States of 

America, the economic giant of the world, is floundering under 

this perfect storm. Banks and insurance companies have 

collapsed. This winter oil was down to thirty-some dollars a 

barrel. Chrysler and General Motors teeter on the brink of the 

abyss. 

 

In past years, this would have been thought to be impossible, a 

joke, inconceivable. Today this and all the surrounding 

consequences are a real and scary possibility. 

 

Yet in this perfect financial storm, this global disaster, there’s a 

place of tranquility — a place that is calm, a place that shows 

financial growth, a place that did not use red ink in its budget, a 



2556 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2009 

place that so far is weathering the world’s woes very well. This 

place is of course our very own Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — You might ask, why has Saskatchewan been 

able to avoid this perfect storm? How are we able to protect 

ourselves from the plight of the world? The answer is because 

of the strength of our resources and the very prudent 

management of our resource revenues by the new Saskatchewan 

Party government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — With last year’s budget we laid the foundation, 

which enabled us to withstand the brunt of such a global 

economic disaster. We have planned wisely and now we 

cautiously move into our second budget by building on that 

foundation. We have set up this province for a future of growth 

and stability — the likes of which have never been seen. This 

budget touches the life of everyone in Saskatchewan with a 

positive note. 

 

The real test of any budget is not the condemnation of the 

opposition members and their tired, old, negative 

gloom-and-doom stance. It is the opinion of people of this 

province that really counts. 

 

I would like to share with you, Mr. Speaker, and members of 

this House, some of the comments of the people of this 

province. But in order to save time, I’ll omit these comments. 

And as you have heard from my colleagues, these comments 

have all been very positive. 

 

Governments in the past haven’t been known for keeping their 

promises, only for making them. The new Saskatchewan Party 

government, in only 16 months of governing, has already kept 

over 100 promises made during the election. The mantra of the 

Saskatchewan Party government is a promise made, a promise 

kept. 

 

What a refreshing change from the previous government that 

gives people much-needed confidence in their government and 

their province. The NDP government operates under the mantra 

that they are the social conscience of the people of this 

province. This façade has been wiped away by the 

Saskatchewan Party. You don’t have to be a socialist to have a 

social conscience. I repeat, you don’t have to be a socialist to 

have a social conscience. 

 

Once again, we have done more for the people of this province 

in 16 months than the NDP have done for the people in 16 

years. We have not only fulfilled our promises, we fulfilled the 

promises that the previous government made and remade and 

never kept. For example, the Humboldt hospital, the 

Saskatchewan first children’s hospital, the bridge at St. Louis, 

and property tax relief, just to name a few. 

 

I would now like to read a quote from a book called Stampede!: 

The Rise of the West and Canada’s New Power Elite by Gordon 

Pitts. He is talking about the pre-’07 election in Saskatchewan 

and the view other people have about our province. And I 

quote: 

On the other side of the border, in poor dysfunctional, 

socialistic Saskatchewan, the roads are unpaved and the 

potholes surely reflect an economy that has been held 

back by state-controlled regulations, onerous taxes, and all 

kinds of bad, leftist policy. 

 

This is what we have to contend with in Saskatchewan, not just 

potholes and onerous taxes, but the attitude of the people that 

have been held back by this leftist government. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, no longer. A new day is dawning. The new 

budget sets the course for Saskatchewan. Our future is bright. 

When you realistically look at us being the only balanced 

budget in all of Canada, Mr. Speaker, in all of Canada, that 

really sets us apart. In fact this might be the only balanced 

budget in North America. 

 

Prudent management of our resources and our revenue has 

brought us here in just 16 short months, a phenomenal feat for 

any government. The people of Saskatchewan are very proud of 

the choices they made to change the government on November 

7, 2007. There is renewed vigour and excitement that can’t be 

held back and we are only just beginning. 

 

This budget not only is the best budget this province of 

Saskatchewan has ever had, it addressed many problems of my 

constituency in Batoche. In our constituency of Batoche this 

budget gives us not only all the rewards that all the residents of 

Saskatchewan will receive, it also gives us Highway 368 and 

our bridge at St. Louis. These two items have been huge 

deterrents to forward-thinking people that drive industry and 

commerce in this province, and also to the ordinary people who 

drive that highway and have to cross that bridge. 

 

With my farming and ranching background, it behooves me to 

mention the monumental steps the Saskatchewan Party 

government has made to alleviate the plight of our agricultural 

producers. The NDP policy was to download taxation on rural 

people and municipalities of this province. This year our 

government increased the budget of the Department of 

Agriculture by $177.5 million, for a grand total of 483.4 

million. That is an increase of 58 per cent. The majority of that 

increase goes into our risk management programs. 

 

This government is keeping our promise to fully fund our share 

of the federal-provincial government programs like 

AgriStability and AgriInvest which provide certainty and 

security for our producers. 

 

The improvements to the 2009 crop insurance program will cost 

the provincial government an additional 20 million. These 

improvements are a result of last year’s crop insurance review, 

which included input from over 1,000 producers. The provincial 

government’s contribution to crop insurance program in 2009 is 

the largest ever made by a Saskatchewan government. 

 

The overall amount of tax paid by property owners to fund 

education were reduced by 103 million this first year. A family 

of four earning 50,000 will realize over $2,000 in tax savings 

this year. Between the income tax cuts announced last fall and 

other family benefits, coupled with today’s property tax relief, 

overall we are putting more than 700 million back into the 

Saskatchewan economy this year through tax reductions, which 



March 25, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2557 

will help keep our economy strong. Mr. Speaker, it is indeed a 

joy to see all of these exciting dreams of our forefathers now 

becoming a reality. 

 

The days of the wee province are now a thing of the past. The 

have-not status has gone by the wayside. The new day they 

have dreamt about is here. With prudent stewardship, we will 

all see a new horizon for our province. At this point in 

Saskatchewan’s history, I know that I am privileged to stand in 

this House and represent the people of Batoche constituency. I 

am deeply indebted to these same people for that privilege, and 

I wish to humbly thank them for this honour. It is on their 

behalf that I enthusiastically endorse this historic budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Meadow Lake. 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

a real pleasure to rise today to enter into the debate on this 

budget. It’s very much a privilege to rise in this House 

representing the great people of the constituency of Meadow 

Lake where I’ve had the pleasure to represent for the past year 

and a half in this House, and previously in another House — 

really an incredible honour, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s customary I know at the budget speech to acknowledge 

those that serve you, that help you, that you work with on a 

daily basis, and I would like to firstly acknowledge the work of 

my constituency assistant, Sharlene Beaulieu, who has been a 

great friend, great supporter, and an incredibly talented CA over 

the course of the past year and a half, who takes care of the 

details that are so important to MLAs and so important to 

constituents. So I would very much like to acknowledge her 

contribution to not just our office, but to the people of Meadow 

Lake. 

 

Also I’d like to acknowledge the support, the friendship, the 

companionship of my wife Alaina who — we’ve been now 

married for about three and a half years and have been together 

for over 10 now — recently she gave birth to our first child . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Harrison: — . . . only about eight weeks ago, Mr. Speaker, 

MacGregor, and young Mac I’m sure is actually . . . tell a story, 

Mr. Speaker. Alaina actually went into labour during a town 

hall meeting that I was conducting in Goodsoil. And she told 

me, you know, I’m going into labour. And I said well, you 

know, we should really be getting then to the hospital. And she 

said, no, you are holding this town hall meeting and you’re 

going to finish it. So we finished the town hall meeting and I 

said, I’m not sure if it’s a good thing or not that Mac decided he 

wanted out listening to his Dad give a speech. So we’ll see how 

that develops in the future, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’d also like to acknowledge my father who’s helping out with 

Alaina and Mac right now. And I’m sure grandpa always has 

some good pointers and advice and he’ll have a good critique at 

the end of this talk. 

 

As you know, Mr. Speaker, I’m not an overly partisan member. 

I, you know, look at things with a very objective eye, and I’ve 

got to tell you, Mr. Speaker, I looked at this budget and looked 

at it very carefully, examined it, and I’ve got to tell you this is 

the best budget that has ever been delivered on the floor of this 

legislature in the 100-plus year history of this province. 

 

And I’ll tell you why, Mr. Speaker. Firstly our new budget is a 

balanced budget. And we may be the only province that tables a 

balanced budget this year, and if for no other reason, Mr. 

Speaker, that really is a remarkable accomplishment. 

 

You look around — not just this country — you look at the 

federal government running a significant budget deficit. You 

look at provincial governments, an example being Ontario 

bringing a budget in tomorrow rumoured to be an $18 billion 

deficit over two years. You look at the United States federal 

government running a budget deficit of $1.75 trillion. You look 

at US states running cumulative budget deficits in the tens of 

billions of dollars. And although we’ve maintained a balanced 

budget, we were able to deliver on some major commitments to 

the people of this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Property taxpayers have funded a disproportionately high share 

of education costs in our province for far too long. That’s why 

during the 2007 campaign the Premier promised a long-term 

solution to this problem, and this budget’s kept that promise. 

Under the new system, the province will cut and cap education 

property tax rates for each of the three major property classes 

— being residential, agriculture, and commercial. The overall 

amounts of tax paid by property owners to fund education will 

be reduced by $103 million or 14 per cent this year compared to 

last. This represents the largest education property tax cut in a 

single year in the history of our province. The provincial 

government will increase its share of funding to school 

divisions by just over $240 million this year. As a result, the 

province will fund about 63 per cent of the operating costs for 

pre-kindergarten to grade 12 education, up from last year’s 

provincial funding of 51 per cent. 

 

The education property tax will be reduced by a further $53 

million next year with the province assuming an offsetting share 

of the funding. At that point the provincial government will be 

funding about 66 per cent, two-thirds of the cost of education. 

The vast majority of Saskatchewan property owners will pay 

less education tax under this new system. This budget’s 

announcement fulfills the Premier’s commitment to achieve a 

fair balance for education funding, to properly fund education, 

and to significantly reduce the education portion of the property 

tax. 

 

[16:30] 

 

And our government will continue to improve the 

competitiveness of Saskatchewan as a place to do business. 

This budget will introduce a progressive three-rate structure to 

determine the education property tax on commercial property so 

small businesses will pay at a lower mill rate. Mill rates will be 

applied consistently across the province to promote equity for 

all businesses while meeting the government’s tax relief 

commitment. 

 

And I would also, Mr. Speaker, very much like to congratulate 

my very likable friend from Rosetown-Elrose for the great work 



2558 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2009 

that he did on this initiative. And I have to add, Mr. Speaker, he 

really is a likable member. I think you would find unanimity on 

this side of the House anyway, and I think probably from some 

members of the press gallery as well who might agree with the 

likability of that member. So I think that’s quite a positive 

thing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Harrison: — During the 2007 campaign, the Premier 

made another important commitment to Saskatchewan 

municipalities. He said our government would introduce a new 

revenue-sharing deal with municipalities tied to the province’s 

own-source revenues. 

 

In this budget, we’ve kept that promise as well. We’ve 

introduced a new municipal operating grant program. This 

program will provide funding support equal to 90 per cent of 

one percentage point of the PST. This is the first step in our 

plan to provide municipal operating grants based on one full 

point of the PST. We’ll bump it up to a full percentage point 

next year, thereby providing a reliable and predictable source of 

revenue to Saskatchewan communities. 

 

In this budget, municipalities will receive nearly $170 million 

to continue fixing sewer systems, upgrading streets, improving 

parks, and enhancing public buildings. And that’s on top of the 

100 million in one-time municipal infrastructure funding the 

Premier announced in February. This is what municipal leaders 

wanted — to tap into a predictable revenue source — and this 

government has delivered. 

 

Last year we announced $1 billion in our ready-for-growth plan 

to rebuild schools, improve hospitals and health facilities, 

upgrade roads and highways. Last month we announced a $500 

million economic booster shot to get dollars flowing swiftly to 

our municipalities, our communities, and our people. We put 

these much-needed infrastructure dollars directly into hands that 

need it. 

 

With this budget, our government dedicated another $1 billion 

to keep building on what we’ve already begun — to keep this 

province moving forward strong and steady. This $1 billion will 

fix more schools and health care facilities in our province. It 

will expand child care centres in Saskatchewan, and improve 

our post-secondary system. It will fix more highways. And this 

$1 billion investment will create more affordable housing and a 

better life for all Saskatchewan people. 

 

I also would like to deal with a couple of more issues, Mr. 

Speaker, and they seem to centre around the member for Regina 

Douglas Park who had a very difficult time as the opposition 

spokesman, the point man for the criticism of the budget. I have 

to say, in my time in public life I’ve never actually seen a 

situation where the opposition critic ended up in more hot water 

than those that he was trying to criticize, but somehow that 

member has managed to accomplish that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Firstly, we had a claim from that member with regard to potash 

revenues. The member claimed that because of a decrease in 

production, we would see a decrease in revenue. And they’ve 

hinged the most part of their argument against the budget on 

this point or a variation of this point, Mr. Speaker. 

The fact is though that the member for Regina Douglas Park, 

the former minister of Finance for this province, somehow had 

no idea how the potash royalty revenue system worked. He was 

completely wrong in his assertion. And I’ll go into some detail 

on this, about how the potash royalty revenue system works. I 

know it’s an exciting topic and our members are very well 

versed in it, but the members opposite obviously have very little 

idea as to how it works. 

 

Basically, there’s three revenue sources, three sources of 

revenue collected with regard to potash production. By far the 

most important is a graduated profit tax with a maximum rate of 

35 per cent. And this profit tax is graduated on the basis of rate 

of the first 15 per cent of profit is . . . or sorry, on the first $60 

or 65 cents per tonne of profit, it’s charged at the rate of 15 per 

cent and it goes up to 35 per cent per tonne; over 60, 65. 

 

What that means is that for any potash production in this 

province, the vast majority of the tax collected, the royalty 

collected is from that profit tax. Therefore a decrease in 

production has very little impact, considering the changes made 

in 2001 and 2002 whereby 8 million tonnes or more are . . . 

anything over 8 million tonnes, basically, it doesn’t matter. So 

production cuts aren’t relevant, especially considering 

inventory. The member for Regina Douglas Park obviously 

didn’t understand that. And for that reason his criticism was 

completely off base. 

 

We also had the interesting scenario with an editorial in the 

Saskatoon StarPhoenix over the weekend making clear that that 

member had a lack of understanding as to how Crowns were 

financed. I’m not going to go into all the details on that, but it 

was again clear that a former minister of Finance in the NDP 

simply had very little idea as to how the finances of this 

province worked. 

 

Secondly, another issue I wanted to address, Mr. Speaker — 

just the negativity coming from that side of the House. All we 

hear is doom and gloom and things are terrible. And you would 

think listening to the speeches from that side of the House that 

we were living in one of the worst jurisdictions in the world. 

And obviously, Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House we don’t 

agree with that point of view. 

 

We believe we are living in a fantastic province, a province 

doing very well, something that we should proud of. We think 

it’s something that the people of Saskatchewan are proud of. 

And it’s disappointing to hear from that other side of the House 

doom and gloom, nothing but negativity. We hear them 

glomming on to any piece of bad news. It’s almost like they’re 

cheering for things to go poorly, Mr. Speaker. And we believe 

that’s a very irresponsible sort of position to take. 

 

The other issue I’d like to address, we saw . . . This was one of 

the best cases of hypocrisy in public life I’ve ever seen. We had 

the member for Battlefords stand up day after day after day 

after day, introducing petitions with respect to the North 

Battleford hospital, the Saskatchewan Hospital. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, what makes this so interesting is the fact that that 

member, when in government on this side of the House, was the 

minister of Health — the minister of Health, Mr. Speaker, and 

in a position you would think to come forward with funding for 

a Saskatchewan Hospital. 



March 25, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2559 

At that time, the hospital was 97 years old; it’s 100 years old 

now. Presumably the issues would have been very similar. But 

what did that member, what did that member do, Mr. Speaker, 

as the minister of Health on the government side of the House? 

Nothing. He didn’t do anything. 

 

Yet now we see the member standing up day after day after day 

after day after day introducing petitions to have the hospital 

funded. So I just find it incredibly, stunningly hypocritical — 

perhaps unsurprising; nonetheless though, disappointing to see. 

 

In terms of what’s happening, I want to talk a bit about what’s 

happening in Meadow Lake, a constituency that’s doing well. 

We have some real challenges on the forestry front and we’re 

working closely with industry to address those. But there are 

some really good things happening in Meadow Lake, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I would point to, as anybody watching from Meadow right 

now knows, the town of Meadow Lake, you can see from 

almost any place in town a giant crane, Mr. Speaker. And that 

crane is constructing, along with a number of large construction 

crew, a new courthouse in Meadow Lake — a need that’s been 

there, a need that’s been identified for a very, very long time, 

that there’s been a need for a new courthouse in Meadow Lake. 

 

And you know what, Mr. Speaker? The NDP didn’t get the job 

done. They didn’t get the job done. They had a very long time 

to get the job done; they didn’t get it done. And in the words of 

my colleague from Carrot River Valley, we’re getting ’er done, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

We also in Meadow Lake are very excited, very excited about a 

new, a long-term care facility which this government 

announced, which this government is going to be going forward 

with. Again a 60-year-old facility, Mr. Speaker, a long-time 

need for replacement, a long-time need for refurbishment. And 

over the course of the last 16 years of NDP government, what 

did we get? Nothing. We got nothing. Sixteen months of the 

Saskatchewan Party government, Mr. Speaker, and we’re 

getting ’er done. 

 

In conclusion I would very much encourage my colleagues 

opposite . . . We’ve heard them, we’ve heard them support a 

number of initiatives in this budget. They complimented a 

number of initiatives. We’ve asked them where they would 

make changes. They really have no idea where they would 

make changes. They’re obviously opposing simply for the 

purpose of opposing. 

 

I would challenge the members opposite to support the position 

of their constituents, to support their constituencies, to look at 

this budget and to make the tough call to tell their party 

leadership: no, this is right for the people of Saskatchewan; this 

is right, this is right for the people of my constituency, and I’ll 

be supporting this budget. I make that challenge to the members 

opposite and I’m hopeful, I’m hopeful that there will be some 

that will put the best interests of their constituency ahead of 

their party and will vote for this. 

 

In conclusion I will obviously be supporting this fantastic 

budget and opposing the ridiculous amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to join the budget debate today and, like I’ve said 

before, I listened with great interest at what the member from 

Meadow Lake was explaining to the people and just telling the 

Sask Party, much like their current Minister of Finance, he 

needs a bit of work in terms of trying to understand numbers 

and trying to explain numbers to people. And that’s one of the 

reasons why I will not be supporting the budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I watch with great interest, Mr. Speaker. I watch with great 

interest some of the comments made by the members opposite, 

and they remind me kind of, of a gong show. And really trying 

to pat each other on the back and trying to confuse the people 

and trying to convince people that this is the greatest thing since 

sliced bread. And this budget, Mr. Speaker, quite frankly 

doesn’t cut it in any way, shape, or form. 

 

I will point out that one of the things I want to do this evening 

or this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, is to take a page out of David 

Letterman’s late night talk show role when he talks about the 

top 10 reasons to not do this, or the top 10 reasons to do this. 

And what I want to do if I can, Mr. Speaker, is to kind of follow 

a similar format in terms of Mr. Letterman in the tonight show. 

 

The top 10 reasons why you should be voting NDP in 2011. 

And of course one of the reasons that we’re talking about, Mr. 

Speaker, is of course their budgetary prowess and their skill is 

simply not there. 

 

But number 10 on the list of the top 10, Mr. Speaker, is Sask 

Party’s inheritance honeymoon is almost over. And once we 

wake up to this deficit bride, Saskatchewan will return in record 

numbers to the NDP, Mr. Speaker. That’s number 10. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Number nine reason why you should be 

voting NDP in 2011 is — make no mistake about it — number 

nine, our target date to rid this province of the Saskatchewan 

Party, NDP wannabes, is 2011, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Number eight, any time you have a party so 

desperate to avoid names for their party, like their affiliation, 

maybe Conservative or Reform or Alliance, that they have to 

name their party after our own province, that’s desperation, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger: — So I look at them and I was thinking, if 

they’re looking at some proper names, why didn’t they consider 

their party name being names the Roughrider party — they’re 

pretty popular; maybe the Craven celebration party, or maybe 

the Rolling Stones party, or maybe the curling fans party. But, 

Mr. Speaker, they wanted to avoid everything conservative in 

their name, so they chose to name their party after 

Saskatchewan. What a great disservice to our great province, 



2560 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2009 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Number seven, that we stand very proud, as a party, of our 

history of how the NDP built this province. And how under 

Tommy Douglas, we re-took this province from many interests. 

And they seem to forget, Mr. Speaker. And how we have 

strengthened our base as a province, through the work of people 

like Lloyd and Blakeney. And how Romanow brought this 

province back from the brink of bankruptcy caused by that 

government, Mr. Speaker — caused by the people across the 

way. 

 

We owe Romanow our greatest deal of gratitude. And thank 

goodness we had the NDP when we had the NDP to bring this 

province back, Mr. Speaker. And a lot of people didn’t forget 

that. And a lot of people will never forget that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

People will also know that no government in the history of this 

country, no incoming government in the history of this country 

has ever inherited a booming economy, billions in the bank, and 

an optimistic growing province — not one party ever inherited 

that except those guys, Mr. Speaker. And I quote, Calvert 

delivered that to Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we can all be proud as NDPers that we left this 

province in very, very good financial position. And my only 

message, my only message to the Minister of Finance and that 

party opposite, please don’t mess it up. Please. He’s got two 

more years. Just sit tight. Relax. Don’t mess it up. Okay, guys? 

 

And what’s at number six? Sixth reason why we should be 

voting NDP and not Saskatchewan Party, is once we assume 

power in 2011 the so-called Saskatchewan Party can go back to 

their natural role — opposition. They have been so ingrained, 

so ingrained as their role as opposition members that they still 

blame the NDP for everything happening today. And, Mr. 

Speaker, they’ve got to stop hiding behind the NDP. You’ve got 

to stop hiding behind the NDP when things get rough. They 

claim everything bad was caused by the NDP, but everything 

good was created by the Sask Party. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, what an insulting thing to say to the 

people of Saskatchewan. Because, Mr. Speaker, the people of 

Saskatchewan know, they know that the NDP left this province 

in very good financial position, and they know across the way. 

So this whole notion of them saying, we’ve done all of these 

wonderful things — like, give it up already. People aren’t 

buying it. People aren’t buying it. And when you insult them, it 

encourages them to vote NDP. 

 

The fifth reason, the fifth reason why you should be voting 

NDP in 2011 is that the NDP missed being re-elected for the 

fifth term the last election by 6,000 votes, Mr. Speaker — 6,000 

votes and 10 seats. And so far what have these guys done? 

What have these guys done? They’ve betrayed the unions. 

They’ve betrayed the labour movement, the working men and 

women in this province. They’ve abandoned the post-secondary 

students; they’ve abandoned them time and time again. They’ve 

neutered the school divisions — they’re out of the picture now. 

They’ve penalized urban centres. They’ve rejected the First 

Nations community. They’ve turned their backs to the Métis. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, all of a sudden the 6,000 votes in Meadow 

Lake and in Regina South and Moose Jaw and Saskatoon and 

Prince Albert, all of a sudden those votes are coming our way, 

Mr. Speaker. They’re coming our way now. They’re starting to 

realize they made a mistake here. They experimented and they 

realized that they made a mistake. 

 

Mr. Speaker, imagine now if we fast-forward three months from 

now, that the next new leader of the Saskatchewan NDP is 

going to deliver a lot for this province, has a lot to offer, and 

will be delivering. So imagine that for a moment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The fourth reason why you should vote NDP in 2011 is every 

single announcement made by that government has an 

NDP-approved stamp on it, Mr. Speaker. Every single project 

that they have undertaken, we had started, Mr. Speaker. And 

they are following our lead and we thank them. We thank them. 

Nothing wrong with that. Nothing wrong with that. 

 

And about the only promise, about the only promise that I see 

them keeping, Mr. Speaker, is that they actually set the future 

election date. And, Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House 

absolutely love it, Mr. Speaker. We are looking forward to 

2011, and certainly that’s something that we want to push 

within our movement and within our party. 

 

Reason number three: in 2011 we will present to the people of 

Saskatchewan a forward-looking NDP movement that’ll be 

exciting, dynamic, and inclusive. It’ll not betray the people that 

they betrayed with this budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the other important difference to note is that this new NDP 

will not be saddled with paying $3 million a day — that we paid 

when we were in government — in interest payment and debt 

reduction during our entire term as government, Mr. Speaker. 

Three million dollars each and every single day. And people 

understand that. People understand that, and they’re excited by 

that. 

 

And the most amazing thing is, after 16 months, Saskatchewan 

knows something that that tired, old Sask Party government 

doesn’t know. They know that being government is more than 

figuring out how to spend the inheritance money that the NDP 

and the Saskatchewan people left you. It’s a lot more than that, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And let me tell you, in 2011, with our new leadership, the NDP 

will be very different and be very dynamic in comparison to 

that tired, old Sask Party government. Mr. Speaker, 16 months 

and they’re tired already. 

 

And what’d I tell people after the last election, Mr. Speaker, is I 

said, they’re back. That’s the second reason. They’re back. 

They’re back to finish off what they started in the 1990s. Here 

we have this budget. They’re increasing debt. They’re attacking 

the Crowns. They’re doing it a little sneakier now, this time. 

They’re providing unsustainable tax cuts. You’ll see. They’ll be 

unsustainable. And their spending’s off the scales. And, Mr. 

Speaker, this budget is built on sand. 

 

So the whole notion is, they’re back to come and finish off what 

they started in the ’90s. And the only group that’s going to stop 

them is the good people of Saskatchewan, alongside of a new, 

invigorated NDP. 



March 25, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2561 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, part of the second reason of 

why these guys are not the answer we had is, on a more serious 

note, is the grandest and perhaps the greatest opportunity — the 

grandest and perhaps the greatest opportunity — to do 

something with the First Nations and Métis people was this 

year. 

 

This was the year, Mr. Speaker, that we all were waiting for, 

under the whole notion of duty to consult, duty to 

accommodate. The First Nations were looking for leadership 

under this government to address housing, to address highways, 

to address health care, and the list goes on. And what happened 

was the minister responded that she had 80 meetings. And Mr. 

Speaker, after 80 meetings with the First Nations and Métis 

People there’s one thing that they wanted: results. 

 

One small thing they wanted was a thing called results, Mr. 

Speaker. And in the meantime, that minister didn’t even speak 

to the minister or the member or the Minister of Environment, 

the minister of Energy and Mines. Didn’t talk to any of her 

colleagues. In the meantime, every year, every single year that 

they lose this opportunity, every day there’s permits being 

issued, there are oil and gas companies all over the place and 

different people doing a lot of wonderful things on the land, but 

they are excluding the First Nations and the Métis people. 

 

And I said in this Assembly and I’ll say it again, that that party, 

the Saskatchewan Party, has rejected the aspirations and the 

dreams of the First Nations, and they’ve turned their back on 

the Métis people as well. And I say to them, shame. And that’s 

one of the reasons why we are not going to be supporting this 

budget, Mr. Speaker. People ought to know that the First 

Nations come here and they actually had a genuine belief that 

something would be done. Like the union movement and like 

the urban centres and like a lot of other people, Mr. Speaker, 

they actually believed that something was going to be done. 

 

And what happened was the minister said, okay, let’s all dance 

around the fireplace singing “Kumbaya,” holding hands, and 

everything will be great. Well, Mr. Speaker, the dancing 

partners have had enough dancing. They’ve had enough of the 

holding hands. They want action, Mr. Speaker. They want 

action and this was the year that they had to deliver and guess 

what, nothing — absolutely nothing. 

 

And you don’t think that the people aren’t motivated? They 

aren’t motivated by that fact, that they reached out, and they got 

their hands slapped away and they got the back turned on them? 

They know, and let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, memories live 

long and hard. The opportunity to do something was totally 

rejected by that government and totally dismissed by that 

minister. And forever that’s the history — I think it’s really 

shameful — as a result of this year’s budget. 

 

I’ll point out, Mr. Speaker, that there’s no doubt in my mind, 

when we talk about some of the challenges the First Nations 

and the Métis people face in this province, we hear a lot of the 

stories of the poverty and of the challenges of all the First 

Nations and Métis people. And you know they have been 

asking, the First Nations have been saying, look, we don’t want 

any handouts. We don’t want to go back to you guys and keep 

asking you guys for all these things. We just want to make sure 

we are part of the economy and part of the equation for a 

successful Saskatchewan. That’s what they wanted. 

 

You know why they wanted that access? Because they wanted 

to have the ability to develop their communities socially and 

economically. And all these great champions in the back over 

there that are going to fight for the First Nations and Métis 

people, all of a sudden they’re pretty quiet now. 

 

All of a sudden they’re pretty quiet, and they’re not saying a 

word now. Well why is that, Mr. Speaker? You know why? 

Because they could not deliver, Mr. Speaker. They could not 

deliver. I think it’s very, very important, very important that 

people understand exactly what is going on. 

 

So I want to re-cap. I want to re-cap as quickly as I can the top 

ten reasons — then I’ll get to number one, Mr. Speaker — the 

top ten reasons why you should be voting, you should be voting 

for the NDP in 2011. 

 

Number ten, Sask Party’s inheritance is coming to an end. The 

party and the honeymoon is coming to an end. Number nine — 

make no mistake about it — the target date to rid this province 

of the Sask Party is 2011. And number eight, any time you have 

a party that names itself after the province has to have some 

kind of desperation attached to it. 

 

And we’re also pointing out, Mr. Speaker, we’re proud of our 

history as a party. And it’s also very important is that when we 

assume power in 2011, the Sask Party can go back to their 

natural roles where they can hide behind the NDP or blame the 

NDP, because that’s all they ever do in government. They have 

no imagination, no skill, and no desire to address some of these 

things, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And number five is the shift is on, the shift is on. Those guys 

across the way can hoot and holler all they want, but the shift is 

on because they’ve made certain choices, and those choices are 

going to come back and bite them on their heels, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It should be pointed out again every single plan, every single 

announcement that they had, we put our stamp on it, so the 

process will unfold and continue moving forward. 

 

And number three, we present the Saskatchewan people with a 

greatest forward-looking NDP move in 2011, and of course part 

of that is the failed, the failed plan by them to address First 

Nations and Métis peoples issues. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the number one reason they should be voting 

NDP in 2011 is when we assume power in 2011, number one, 

we’ll be powering up a new radio station that will be on the air 

24 hours a day, 7 days a week. And we’re going to invite people 

from all walks of life throughout all of Saskatchewan, to call in 

and give us their one-sided, candid, unfiltered opinion of John 

Gormley, Mr. Speaker. And I’ll point out, the most important 

thing is that he doesn’t have a chance to rebut. And we’re going 

to call it something like, talkative radio. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, as you can surmise by now, this budget 

misses a lot of points, a lot of serious points, so therefore I will 

not be voting in support of this budget. I’ll be standing in 



2562 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2009 

support of the amendment that recognizes the challenges and 

the weaknesses of that government, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Being near 5 o’clock, this House stands 

adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2527 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2527 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2527 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2527 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2527 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2527 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2527 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2528 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2528 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2528 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2528 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Rock the Vote 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2528 

 2009 Canada Cup of Curling 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2529 

 Saskatoon Bridge Club 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2529 

 Elbow Celebrates 100th Anniversary 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2529 

 Prince Albert Fights Racism and Discrimination 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2530 

 Better Business Bureau Torch Awards 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2530 

 Social Work Student Recognized 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2530 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Forestry Industry 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2531 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2531 

 Health Ombudsman 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2531 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2532 

 Drinking Water 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2532 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2532 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2533 

 Auction of Government Vehicles 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2534 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2534 

 Report on Forestry Sector 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2535 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2535 

 Transparency in Government 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2536 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2536 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Natural Gas Rates 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2536 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2537 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 84 — The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Amendment Act, 2009 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2537 

 Bill No. 85 — The Municipal Grants Act 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 2537 

 Bill No. 86 — The Saskatchewan Financial Services Commission Amendment Act, 2009 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2537 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Public Accounts 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2538 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 2538 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2541 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2544 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2547 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2549 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2551 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2553 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2555 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2557 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2559 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 




