




















































Hansard: May 12, 2009


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 62A  TUESDAY, MAY 12, 2009, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3023 

 May 12, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s an 

honour to introduce to you and through you to all members of 

this Assembly some very special guests who are seated in your 

gallery, Mr. Speaker. Joining us today is the ambassador from 

the Netherlands, His Excellency Wilhelmus Geerts. We 

welcome him today, as well as the consul general for the 

Netherlands out of the Vancouver office, Hans Driesser. And 

joining them today are honorary consuls from the Netherlands. 

We have Willem de Lint who is the outgoing honourary 

consular. Welcome to you, sir. And we welcome the incoming, 

the new and soon-to-be new honourary consul general for the 

Netherlands, Judie Dyck who’s no stranger to this building and 

this Assembly because of her work in agriculture and in 

specifically advancing the canola industry here in the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the ambassador, His Excellency, has had an 

ambitious schedule over the last number of days. He was in 

Saskatoon yesterday. He was at the synchrotron, went 

underground for a look at that new star of minerals, potash, to 

see how it is mined at a Mosaic mine here in our province. 

 

And in addition to meeting with officials and ministers of the 

government, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you we’ve had a chance, 

His Excellency and myself, to talk just this morning about a 

mutual interest we have in sustainable energy, in carbon capture 

and sequestration, Mr. Speaker, in uranium value-added 

opportunities. We’re looking here, as a province, in the 

Netherlands’ example with respect to the nuclear industry and 

nuclear research. 

 

We talked a little bit about increasing the trade between our two 

jurisdictions, improving perhaps the number of what would be 

expatriates of the Netherlands joining us here in the province of 

Saskatchewan. It was a very enjoyable meeting, and we look 

forward to fostering an even better relationship between 

Saskatchewan and the Netherlands, a relationship that has 

already augmented and forged, Mr. Speaker, in our shared 

experience in war and in liberation and in long-term friendship. 

 

I’d ask all members of the Assembly to join with me in 

welcoming His Excellency and our delegation from the 

Netherlands today in the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to 

join with the Premier on behalf of the official opposition in 

extending our equal greeting to His Excellency, the 

ambassador; to the consul; and to the honorary consuls who 

have joined us today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I fully support all of the comment that the Premier has brought 

to this introduction and would hope for an even stronger 

relationship between the Netherlands and the province of 

Saskatchewan — a relationship, if I may say, is based on a fair 

number of expatriates, friends from the Netherlands who have 

made their home in our province and in fact make their home in 

our legislature. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would invite again all members to 

join in a warm welcome to His Excellency. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Silver Springs, 

the Minister Responsible for Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s with great pleasure that I introduce to you and 

through you to all members of this Assembly some more than 

100 students from St. Joseph High School in the heart of the 

Saskatoon Silver Springs constituency. They’re in the west 

gallery. They’re in the east gallery. They’re on the floor, Mr. 

Speaker. They’re one of the largest groups to ever come to the 

legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they’re students from grade 9 to 12. They’re 

taking English as an additional language program. And, Mr. 

Speaker, they’re from over 15 countries around the world, and 

they’ve come here to study in Saskatchewan and come to their 

Legislative Building. They’re a good-looking group, a 

well-behaved group, and the moniker for St. Joe’s is the 

Guardians. 

 

They’re accompanied by their teachers, Larraine Ratzlaff, 

Elaine Muggeridge, Sheena Wing, Joan Caruk, Gerard 

Saretsky, Christine MacNeil, Janet Carmona-Figueroa, Anita 

Gooding, Roberto Godoy, Theresa Hitchings. And joining us on 

the floor is a student, Jocelyn Fan — welcome, Jocelyn — and 

Mrs. Cechanowicz, an educational assistant. We welcome them 

all. 

 

And if I just may, Mr. Speaker, talk about one of the initiatives 

that this school is involved with. It’s called Changing the World 

One School at a Time, where students bring a dime to school 

every day — 60 per cent of the students participate — and 

they’re 25 per cent of the way to building a new school in 

Africa. 

 

Mr. Speaker, through you and I’ll ask all members to help 

welcome the group from St. Joseph’s collegiate in Saskatoon. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to welcome 

three students in particular from St. Joseph High School, two of 

whom live with my son Jay, my daughter-in-law Kaeli, and our 



3024 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2009 

granddaughter Madelynn. And you’ll see why there’s three in a 

moment, Mr. Speaker, that I’m introducing. 

 

Ana Paulina Medellin Gallegos — Polly to family and friends 

— and Ana Cristina Medellin Gallegos — Cristy to family and 

friends — are twins actually, and they’re from Mexico. Aline 

Queiroz Pereira is from Mexico and has been here from January 

and will be here until the end of June. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Aline and Polly live with my son and 

daughter-in-law and granddaughter, and of course Polly’s twin, 

Cristy, resides in another residence. But these three are a 

welcome addition to Canada, to Saskatoon, for a short period of 

time. And I wanted to join with the hon. member for Saskatoon 

Silver Springs in welcoming the entire group, but particularly 

the three that are known to me. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Humboldt, the 

Minister Responsible for Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

it’s a great pleasure for me to introduce someone who is seated 

in your gallery. In your gallery today, we have with us Susan 

Luedtke. Susan is the executive director for Eagle’s Nest Youth 

Ranch, a group home for high-needs youth. And the Eagle’s 

Nest Ranch is committed to providing quality care, counselling, 

and therapeutic social and educational programs, Mr. Speaker. 

Susan has been the executive director of Eagle’s Nest for 12 

years, helping to found the organization in 1997. In total Susan 

has dedicated over 20 years to working to improve the lives of 

young people in our province. So I would ask all members of 

the Assembly to welcome Susan to her Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, if I might just for a few 

moments join with the Premier and the Leader of the 

Opposition in extending a very warm welcome to His 

Excellency and the consul from Vancouver, and especially, 

Your Excellency, just to say a few words in recognition of 

Willem de Lint as his service as consul here in Saskatchewan 

for the Government of the Netherlands. Mr. de Lint’s service 

has been exemplary, has done a very good job in terms of 

promoting strong ties between the people of Saskatchewan and 

the people of the Netherlands. 

 

And we look forward to working with Ms. Dyck in the years to 

come. I know she’s going to have big shoes to fill, but then Bill 

de Lint does have big feet, Your Excellency. But we look 

forward to working with her, and to again thank Mr. de Lint for 

his exemplary service. And one more time, greetings from this 

side of the House. 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Dutch.] 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 

and through you to all members of this Assembly, I’d like to 

introduce a person that is very important in my life. Seated in 

your gallery is my sister Edna Irwin. Edna, if you’d give us a 

wave. 

 

Edna usually comes up to visit me every year, and she’s usually 

accompanied by another sister, but she’s alone today. So I look 

forward to spending the next couple days with her, and I’m sure 

we’ll get some shoe shopping in. So I thank you, Mr. Speaker, 

and ask all members to join me in welcoming Edna. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you, seated in your gallery are two young women who are 

visiting from Germany — Ariane Lill and Berthe-Marie 

Mierswa. Ariane is from Kiel, and Berthe-Marie is from 

Tetenhusen in northern Germany. Please give us a wave. 

 

These ladies have been in Canada since February with Willing 

Workers on Organic Farms and most recently spent time 

working with Ron and Louise Hawkins who farm near Biggar. 

Ariane and Berthe-Marie will be staying in Canada till July and 

are looking forward to seeing more of this great country as they 

travel and continue to work with Willing Workers 

organizations. Please join me in welcoming them to our 

Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If I may, one last 

introduction to a special guest that’s joined us as well in your 

gallery, someone who follows politics very, very closely in this 

province, maybe more closely than anyone else, frankly, based 

on my discussions with him. He’s very familiar with public 

affairs and the goings-on of this legislature and this 

government. 

 

His name is Phil Entz, and he is from the Abbey Colony, very 

near Swift Current in the constituency of Cypress Hills. And I 

have found him to be not only a source of great interest in 

politics but a source of good counsel as well, whether it’s 

agricultural policy or other matters. And I just wonder if all 

members would join with me in welcoming Phil to his 

Legislative Assembly here today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Members, as well I’d like to introduce three 

gentleman who joined us, seated in the Speaker’s gallery — and 

if they could wave as I call their names — Doug Osborne, Ken 

McMillan, and Peter Suderman. These gentlemen have served 

in many capacities, but the one I’ve really got to know them in 

is the Saskatchewan prayer breakfast committee. I want to 

welcome them to their Assembly and ask the members to help 

me in welcoming these gentlemen to the Assembly. 



May 12, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3025 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition in 

support of indexing the minimum wage. Mr. Speaker, we all 

understand that indexing the minimum wage would ensure that 

minimum wage earners would be able to maintain a standard of 

living as the cost of living increases. And the prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to indexing Saskatchewan 

minimum wage to ensure that the standard of living of 

minimum wage earners is maintained in the face of 

cost-of-living increases. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the petition is signed by residents of Saskatoon, Regina, 

and Melville. And I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for wage equity for CBO 

[community-based organization] workers. We know that 

workers who work in the community-based organizations care 

for and provide valuable services to some of the most 

vulnerable members of our society, such as persons living with 

mental, intellectual disabilities; women and children in crisis; 

low-income, at-risk individuals; young children and youth; 

Aboriginal, immigrant, and visible minority persons. I’d like to 

read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the development and 

implementation of a multi-year funding plan to ensure that 

CBO workers achieve wage equity with employees who 

perform work of equal value in government departments. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these folks come from Saskatoon, Gull Lake, 

and LeRoy, Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

a petition on behalf of rural residents of Saskatchewan who 

question why the Sask Party government is leaving them behind 

with respect to providing safe and affordable water. And the 

prayer reads as follows: 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to financially assist the town of Duck Lake 

residents for the good of their health and safety due to the 

exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency and that this government fulfills its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good 

residents of Duck Lake and North Battleford. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand to present a 

petition in support of fairness for Saskatchewan students 

through the necessary expansion of the graduate retention 

program. 

 

The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately expand the graduate retention 

program to include master’s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who have signed this petition are 

students here in Saskatchewan at our universities, as well as a 

number of health care professionals who have graduate degrees 

practising here in the province. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

in support of a long-term care facility in La Ronge. The prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately invest in the planning and 

construction of long-term care beds in La Ronge. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by the good people of La Ronge and area. I so 

present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 



3026 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2009 

Two of Canada’s Greenest Employers 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today it’s my 

pleasure to inform this House that both SaskTel and 

SaskEnergy have been named two of Canada’s greenest 

employers by Mediacorp Canada. Mr. Speaker, this honour’s a 

testament to SaskTel’s long-standing commitment to reduce its 

ecological footprint in all of its operations. 

 

In choosing SaskTel, Mediacorp highlighted the corporation’s 

extensive recycling programs, energy conservation efforts, 

greenhouse gas management plan, and employee-led initiatives 

to reduce power consumption and donate refurbished computers 

to schools and other organizations. Mr. Speaker, with this 

national recognition, all of Canada will know about SaskTel’s 

commitment to a greener Saskatchewan and a greener world. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, SaskEnergy has invested more than $1.8 

million to assist over 10,000 customers through various energy 

efficiency programs. SaskEnergy’s been working closely with 

the provincial and federal governments on energy solutions for 

customers, two of which include the energy efficiency rebate 

for new homes and the Saskatchewan EnerGuide for Houses 

program. It should also be noted, Mr. Speaker, that 

Saskatchewan is now the leader in national participation in the 

EnerGuide for Houses program with three times the number of 

homeowners per capita taking part in the program. That’s 

compared to the national average. 

 

Mr. Speaker, SaskEnergy is pursuing Saskatchewan-based 

business opportunities, in co-operation with the private sector, 

that will help to protect our environment. SaskEnergy believes 

its pipeline expertise can be used to transport and store other 

commodities, such as carbon dioxide. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the achievement of these Crown corporations can 

inspire companies across the province to find sensible and 

effective ways to reduce their impact on the environment. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Before I recognize any other members, I 

would ask members to be courteous enough to allow the 

member to be able to make their statements so that even the 

visitors in the gallery will be able to hear. 

 

I recognize the member from Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Tribute to the Best Neighbourhood in Saskatoon 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Not long ago, Saskatoon residents were 

treated to the 2009 Best of Saskatoon edition of Planet S 

magazine. For weeks the magazine’s editors were buried under 

mountains of ballots as this contest gained enormous popularity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the best MLA [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly] competition was indeed a squeaker. But as any 

seasoned politician will say, a close win is still a win, and I’ll 

take it again. 

 

I want to pay tribute to the best neighbourhood in Saskatoon, 

Nutana; the best shopping area, Broadway; and to businesses 

and constituents in Saskatoon Nutana who were also named 

winners. Congratulations to the following Nutana restaurants: 

Amigo’s Cantina, best restaurant overall, best nachos, best staff, 

and best live music venue; The Yard and Flagon, best wings, 

best patio, and best place for after work drinks; Calories 

Restaurant and Bakery, best French cooking, best soup, and 

best desserts; Keo’s, best Thai food; Sushiro, best sushi; 

Upstairs, best vegetarian food; and the Broadway Café, best 

breakfasts. 

 

Congratulations to Bill’s House of Flowers, best florist; Steep 

Hill Food Co-op, best eco-friendly store; Guru, best hair salon; 

Bulk Cheese Warehouse, best butcher; Homestead, best ice 

cream; the Broadway Roastery, best coffee; Optika, best optical 

shop; the Vinyl Diner, best CD [compact disc]/record store; the 

Bike Doctor, best bike shop; Turning the Tide, best 

locally-owned store; and Schmatta, best piercing store; 

individual talent, Ward 6 rep, Charlie Clark; and best local 

news anchor, Rob MacDonald. 

 

Congratulations to all of these folks in Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 

 

Saskatchewan Co-operative Fisheries Conference 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier this month 

this year, the Saskatchewan Cooperative Fisheries Conference 

was held. Fishers from across our province’s North made their 

way to Prince Albert for two days of important discussions and 

meetings on the future of their industry. 

 

I am very pleased that two of my colleagues, the Hon. Minister 

Responsible for Northern Affairs and the Minister of Enterprise 

and Innovation, attended the conference in a show of support 

for the hard-working fishers and the challenges that that 

industry faces. The last number of years have been very tough 

ones for the majority of fishers in our province due to mostly 

outdated rules and regulations around the sale and marketing of 

fish in this country. The fishers asked government to continue 

support as they aim to opt out of the federal freshwater fish 

marketing agreement that is more than 40 years old. 

 

I am happy to say that the Saskatchewan Party government 

gave definite support to this plan. We will continue to talk to 

the federal government as the plan moves forward. I am told 

that the fishers of the North were impressed that our 

government came to the conference to listen to their needs and 

work with them. Our government understands the critical 

importance of fisheries and the future of our province. 

 

I wish the fishers the best of luck as they continue on their path 

to greater control of their industry, and I’m sure of their 

success. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 



May 12, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3027 

Celebrating Literacy and Fostering Learning 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It was my 

pleasure to attend the 2009 Canwest Canspell Leader-Post 

Spelling Bee. This competition, which celebrates literacy and 

fosters a desire for students to engage in learning, was made 

possible by the sponsorship of Canada Post, the Leader-Post, 

the Egg Producers of Saskatchewan, and Global. 

 

In this region more than 6,000 students participated in this 

program, enough that 40 bright, young, confident students 

emerged to these regional finals. I am honoured to recognize 

students from my constituency, that I’m very proud of their 

achievement. They include Ms. Amy Zatylny of St. Francis, 

Mr. Damien Duarte of Rosemont, and Mr. Christian Skwark of 

Ruth M. Buck. I would like to congratulate the winner, Ms. 

Katelin Peters of Waldeck School. 

 

I want to thank Mr. Marty Klyne, Leader-Post publisher for his 

support; Mr. Bill Wright as host; and the judges, Mr. Chris 

Oreit, Mr. Dan Danforth, and Ms. Jana Pruden. 

 

Literacy development is essential in ensuring the potential of 

our province is reached. It is essential, certainly essential in 

ensuring individuals are able to achieve a fulfilling life and able 

to participate in their community’s rewarding employment and 

our democratic process. I ask all members to join with me in 

extending our thanks and gratitude to all that ensured the 

success of this spelling bee and to congratulate all participants. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Family First Radiothon 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The third annual 

Family First Radiothon held in Moose Jaw last week was 

another success in support of the Moose Jaw Hospital. The 

radiothon is broadcast for 36 continuous hours on community 

radio CHAB with volunteers donating their time to assist with 

answering the phone and accepting donations. 

 

This year the goal was to raise money toward new surgical 

equipment for diagnostic and treatment of colorectal cancer. In 

Saskatchewan, colorectal cancer is the second most commonly 

diagnosed cancer in men and women, and the second most 

common overall cause of cancer-related deaths. About 250 

people die each year in Saskatchewan from colorectal cancer. 

Early detection is the key for fighting this disease. You may 

remember that the Five Hills Health Region was approved for a 

pilot project for a new colorectal cancer screening program by 

our government. The funds raised in the radiothon will assist in 

the purchase of medical equipment to go along with the training 

to help prevent and work toward a cure for this disease. 

 

This year the radiothon raised $237,874 toward new equipment. 

I would like to recognize the volunteers of the Moose Jaw 

Health Foundation Board for their time and dedication to heath 

care in the Five Hills Health Region. And thanks to the 

hundreds of donors for their generosity to the Moose Jaw 

Hospital Foundation’s third annual Family First Radiothon. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

United Way of Regina Tribute Luncheon 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. One fine day in 

April, I and my colleague from Regina Rosemont had the 

opportunity to attend the United Way of Regina’s tribute 

luncheon. The United Way is Regina’s premier volunteer 

organization, and they do a tremendous amount of good in 

bringing together citizens, corporations, and labour to help raise 

money, provide funding, mobilize volunteers, and to build a 

better Regina. And as many outstanding volunteers as there are 

that make the United Way such a great success, the tribute 

luncheon is a chance to shine a spotlight on those who stand out 

just that much more. 

 

First up were the awards for Distinguished Corporate 

Philanthropy. Those awards are dedicated to outstanding 

corporate community support, and this year’s worthy winners 

were Farm Credit Canada and Great-West Life, London Life, 

and Canada Life. 

 

Next came the Labour Community Service Award, and this 

year’s deserving winner was Wendy Daku, a citizen who has 

devoted decades of her professional and volunteer life to 

working to make a better world. 

 

Finally there was the presentation of the United Way 

President’s Award to Eunice Cameron. Eunice’s life has been 

devoted to the service of people, young people especially. She 

was a high-impact educator with 17 years teaching at Cochrane 

High School and then as the principal-CEO [chief executive 

officer] at Cornwall Alternative School for 10 years, retiring 

last year. Despite being a highly dedicated educator, Eunice 

always found the time to do more for family, more for her 

community. She has always believed, and I quote, that “You are 

a citizen in this community and enjoy the many advantages we 

have in Regina, but you have the responsibility not to just take 

what is offered but to give back so that others may enjoy the 

same” — sage advice. 

 

Congratulations to this year’s nominees for the United Way of 

Regina tribute luncheon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Saskatchewan’s Forest Industry 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Good news, Mr. Speaker. Last week there 

was a sign of progress in Saskatchewan’s forest industry. C & C 

Wood Products of Quesnel, British Columbia announced that 

they had signed an asset purchase agreement with 

Weyerhaeuser. The agreement is to purchase and reopen the 

Carrot River saw mill and the Hudson Bay plywood mill. This 



3028 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2009 

is great news for the communities, forestry workers, and our 

forest industry, Mr. Speaker. 

 

C & C Wood Products fits in to our vision for the forest 

industry in our province. C & C is a value-added producer, Mr. 

Speaker. The administrator from Hudson Bay called this great 

news, and the mayor of Carrot River said it should be nothing 

but good news for us. We’ll get our people back working and 

living in town again. 

 

Unlike the failed 100 million MOU [memorandum of 

understanding] the NDP [New Democratic Party] offered up 

before the last election, the Saskatchewan Party government is 

not putting a single dime of taxpayer money into these facilities. 

And they’re still planning on reopening. This is a slap in the 

face to the NDP strategy of risking taxpayer money on private 

business. As we recently stated in our forest industry 

development framework, our government will continue to work 

with the forest industry on competitiveness issues like taxes, 

regulations, wood supply, and transition to value-added 

production in our industry. This is great news for Carrot River 

Valley. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Supply of Physicians for Stem Cell Program 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, we learned today that stem cell 

transplant specialist, hematologist Dr. Michael Voralia in 

Saskatoon, has been on holidays since February and there’s no 

timeline for his return. Mr. Speaker, patients deserve to know 

where their specialist is and when he will be back at work. 

These patients already have the stress of knowing they have 

cancer. They don’t need the additional stress of not knowing if 

they will have a specialist available to them. 

 

To the minister: when is Dr. Voralia returning to work? And if 

he is not, why not? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’m pleased to report that the Saskatchewan Cancer 

Agency has recently recruited two hematologists to the blood 

and marrow transplant program. One is now in Saskatoon 

providing care to patients and the other hematologist, the 

transplant hematologist, is expected to arrive in early August of 

this year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But it’s this very issue that has caused our government to act 

quickly, I believe, on a physician recruitment strategy for this 

province, because this is just one isolated case that you’ll see in 

various parts of the province because of 16 years of lack of 

movement on this file. I remember asking questions on this very 

issue when the former minister from North Battleford, talking 

about emergency rooms closing, said, it’s just normal practice. 

Normal practice perhaps for that government, but not normal 

practice for our government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the information on 

physician recruitment, but what I’m actually talking about is the 

stem cell program. There is currently only one stem cell 

transplant specialist left handling the caseload of three 

specialists, and he’s seeing 184 patients, according to the 

Cancer Agency. Mr. Speaker, there is concern from the 

Saskatchewan stem cell advocacy group, STEM [Saskatchewan 

Stem Cell Transplant Advocacy Group], that he will burn out 

and leave. Then where will these patients turn for care and 

life-saving treatment? 

 

To the minister: what is this government’s commitment to the 

stem cell transplant program at RUH [Royal University 

Hospital] in Saskatoon? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, our government is 

completely committed to the stem cell program in Saskatoon for 

the province of Saskatchewan. But that member would know 

and realize that over the last number of years this program has 

had a fluctuation of staff within the program. It has been in 

place for roughly a little over 10 years and they have staff that 

have come and go and come and go. 

 

That’s why I’m pleased to see that the Cancer Agency is 

working on recruitment. We have another hematologist coming 

in August to fill in as well, Mr. Speaker. But our government is 

absolutely committed. But I found it very curious when the 

member was asking the question she said, I’m not talking about 

physician recruitment; I’m talking about the stem cell program. 

Well excuse me, the stem cell program needs physicians — 

hematologists — in order to operate the program, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s the responsibility 

of this government to ensure that the stem cell program 

addresses the needs of its patients. To the minister: a program 

review was done in 2006; recommendations have been given; 

the government is moving to get this program up and running, 

properly funded and staffed, but meanwhile to the minister: 

what is he doing to ensure that patients who are left stranded 

today looking for care and answers are having their needs met? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 



May 12, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3029 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the program has been 

reviewed and that’s why our government is committed and 

provided $2 million to planning and construction at the Royal 

University Hospital to allow more transplants to be performed 

in the province. Construction is expected to completed by the 

end of 2009. 

 

But construction is only one piece of the program, as you can 

imagine. We need to ensure that there are the proper 

complement of health care professionals, proper complement of 

hematologists. That’s why the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency is 

working towards that. They’ve attracted one. They’ve got 

another one coming in August. 

 

And that’s why I think, into the future with our dedicated 

recruitment program, our dedicated recruitment strategy from 

our government — something that this province has never seen 

under 16 years of NDP government, Mr. Speaker — a program 

that is initiated under our government, I think it will bore 

results. It will prove very successful, just as the recruitment 

agency has proved very successful from our government 

regarding registered nurses. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Utility Rates and Greenhouse Gas Emissions 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Sask Party election 

platform promised to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 32 

per cent, Mr. Speaker. The Sask Party now says the difference 

between the 32 per cent reduction targets of then and the new 

shadow targets is $65 million annually. The NDP left a Green 

Future Fund with $320 million in it. This would have offset the 

first five full years of 32 per cent reduction targets, but the Sask 

Party chose to scrap the fund. 

 

To the Minister of CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan]: how is it that SaskPower customers always pay 

for the Sask Party’s inability to manage this file? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, if the member opposite is 

interested in SaskPower actually reducing emissions, and think 

that $320 million which sat in the GRF [General Revenue 

Fund] and wasn’t allocated is going to solve all the problems at 

SaskPower, then perhaps I can remind the member asking the 

question, Mr. Speaker, that SaskPower low carbon energy 

sources — and just to point out, low carbon means a reduction 

of emissions — we have allocated, there is budgeted $1.7 

billion for renewable energy; $139 million for energy 

efficiency; and conservation, $105 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the list goes on. We have over $2 billion allocated 

in current and future funding to meet our greenhouse gas 

emissions in this province, Mr. Speaker. I think the $320 

million mystery fund that the NDP keep talking about is only a 

fraction of what this government is committed to. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the Sask Party 

inherited the 320 million Green Future Fund. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when there’s capital spending at SaskPower, the 

Sask Party chooses to increase SaskPower rates. When the Sask 

Party talks about clean coal or carbon capture, they talk about 

increasing power rates. Mr. Speaker, the NDP created enough 

wind power to serve 73,000 Saskatchewan houses and still 

remained with the lowest cost utility bundle in all of Canada . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the minister: why 

does this government always look to SaskPower customers to 

pay for the Sask Party’s inability to manage? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I’m glad that the member 

opposite references carbon capture and storage for our province. 

The province is a world leader in carbon capture and storage, 

which makes me wonder why, Mr. Speaker, the NDP 

Environment critic said, and I quote, “. . . carbon capture and 

storage, a technology the Sask Party claims to be cost-effective 

which is a claim that is simply dubious . . .” She also said, Mr. 

Speaker, in December, “They [meaning us] committed to the 

expensive and untried technology of carbon capture . . .” 

 

Yet their little green brochure, Mr. Speaker, on page 11 says, 

and I quote, “Carbon capture and storage is critical technology 

. . . We will continue to research these technologies . . .” It goes 

on to say, “Saskatchewan’s exceptional geological storage 

potential will enable us to store very large volumes of carbon 

dioxide at relatively low cost for hundreds of years.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, are they for it or against it? Are they for 

reductions? Are they against it? Are they for clean coal? Are 

they against it? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we’re four-square in favour 

of trying to get some answers out of that Sask Party 

government. The fact is they chose to spend the $320 million 

green fund in other areas. Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party has 

chosen subsequently on every occasion to pass the buck on to 

Saskatchewan people through increases in utility rates. 

 

To the minister: are rate increases the government’s way of 



3030 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2009 

undermining public support for climate change action or is this 

the government’s plan to undermine Saskatchewan’s Crown 

corporations? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I would point out in a 

StarPhoenix article from earlier this spring it says, and I quote, 

“. . . it’s a fool’s game to believe [that] this province can reduce 

emissions without cost.” Mr. Speaker, reducing greenhouse gas 

emissions is not free. It will cost the province money. It will 

cost SaskPower ratepayers money. But, Mr. Speaker, we will do 

everything we can to make those rates affordable for the people 

of our province going forward. 

 

It is a position of our government to balance economy and the 

environment, Mr. Speaker — something that the NDP 

Environment critic says is a red herring, that we should have no 

discussion about the economy in the face of climate change. I 

think that is irresponsible. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina . . . 

Order. Order. I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the NDP 

remains committed to a 32 per cent reduction in greenhouse gas 

emissions from 2004 levels by 2020. We even set aside $320 

million in proceeds from the sale of a greenhouse gas emitting 

asset to begin the process of implementing those targets. Those 

greenhouse gas reduction targets are the same targets the Sask 

Party promised to implement in the last election, the same 

targets that they were so confident of meeting that they 

scrapped the Green Future Fund upon coming to office. 

 

Of course the minister now claims that the money wasn’t real, 

just money in the General Revenue Fund — you know, the 

same account the government uses to pay for health care and 

education, for instance. 

 

To the minister: why is the Sask Party breaking its promises on 

climate change? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I have twice read out the 

list of the investments that our government is committed to 

when it comes to green technology. It’s over $2 billion. And I 

would think perhaps, Mr. Speaker, if the members opposite 

were serious about actually achieving reductions in our 

province, that they would think that perhaps $2 billion versus 

$320 million was probably a good approach. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, as to federal targets, I will point out again the 

member opposite said, and I quote, “I would say the federal 

targets are something [that] they should clearly be adopting.” 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a broken promise by the Sask 

Party, and what we’re serious about is having climate change 

addressed, not having a document entered into the legislature 18 

months into government that will not see the light of day until 

perhaps next spring. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party now has a new set of climate 

change targets, a 20 per cent reduction by 2020, but their 

so-called plan has more than a few holes. The legislation 

contains no year when greenhouse gases will stabilize and it 

contains no baseline year against which reductions in 

greenhouse gases could be measured. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: how can she describe this as a 

credible plan when it doesn’t provide a baseline year against 

which reductions in emissions could be measured, and how will 

we know whether we’ve reduced emissions by 2020? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that we’ve stated 

that the emission reductions that we are seeking are 20 per cent 

reduction by 2020 from 2006 levels, our baseline year. But, Mr. 

Speaker, a lot of the information — understanding the way the 

legislative process works — a lot of the information, the 

fleshing out of this legislation will be done in regulations. That 

will be done in consultation with environmental NGOs 

[non-governmental organization]. It will also be done in 

consultation with industry. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if the member opposite wants to engage in 

her own consultation, she can easily do some in-house 

consultations. She has direct access to a former vice-president 

of one of the largest oil and gas companies in the world 

actually, Mr. Speaker, so perhaps she could ask her potential 

new leader what he thinks of the new targets. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, the minister says 2006 is the 

baseline. Well that’s very interesting given that it’s not 

contained in the Bill. So is it not contained in the Bill so that 

she has wiggle room to deal with a different baseline at some 

point? I think so. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s clear what the Sask Party is doing. They will 

select the latest possible year against which to measure 

reduction in emissions, and they hope that they can claim 

victory. But greenhouse gases won’t stabilize for years, 

assuming that they ever do. To the minister: can the minister 



May 12, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3031 

tell us whether greenhouse gas emissions in 2020 will actually 

be lower than they are today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pretty sure that the 

action that we will be taking will do more than what the NDP 

did. I have a report here from the Scotiabank Scotia Economics. 

It’s based on provincial emissions over the course of 17 years 

from 1990 to 2007. Saskatchewan has the highest increase in 

emissions overall, 65.9 per cent. We also carry, Mr. Speaker, 

the highest emissions per capita in the entire country. That is 

their record. We are trying to fix the legacy that they left 

behind, Mr. Speaker, and a lot of this information will be done 

in regulations. And, Mr. Speaker, on regulations . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. It’s becoming somewhat difficult for 

the Speaker to hear the response. I recognize the Minister 

Responsible for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite said 

yesterday, and I quote, “Our government undertook . . . 

regulations to reduce emissions.” I thought that was a little bit 

interesting because I wasn’t aware of any. So I thought, well 

maybe I don’t know everything. So I went back to the Ministry 

of Environment and asked. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there were no regulations to reduce emissions by 

the previous government in this province, Mr. Speaker. So 

perhaps you can take the next question that she has, take that 

opportunity to clarify the record and admit that the NDP had no 

regulations to reduce emissions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Here’s what we’re serious about, Mr. Speaker: 

we’re serious about the fact that the Sask Party has broken its 

promise to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party is hoping that they 

can announce a 20 per cent reduction target now and hope that 

Saskatchewan people don’t read the fine print. But the fact is, 

greenhouse gas emissions will continue to rise for this 

foreseeable future. Their so-called reduction target could still 

result in a significant increase in emissions from where they are 

today. 

 

To the minister: why is the Sask Party playing a shell game 

with the people of Saskatchewan? Why won’t they just admit 

that their so-called plan to reduce greenhouse gases is actually a 

plan to do nothing of the sort? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Under the NDP, emissions rose in this 

province by almost 66 per cent. We will take absolutely no 

lessons from the NDP on how to reduce emissions in this 

province because they did absolutely nothing. They had no 

legislation and, as I just pointed out, there were no regulations, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the NDP record is, and I quote from the Sierra Club of 

Canada, “. . . an environmentally regressive Premier and [a] 

cabinet whose NDP orange verges on brown.” And, Mr. 

Speaker, from the David Suzuki Foundation, “Saskatchewan 

remains the Canadian jurisdiction with the fastest growing 

greenhouse gas emissions and the highest per capita emissions.” 

Mr. Speaker, that is their record, that is their legacy, and we 

will do all we can to overcome the mess that they left behind. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Effect of Power Generation on Greenhouse Gas Emissions 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. The study released 

yesterday by the government confirms that there will be no 

reductions whatsoever in greenhouse gases by 2020 from 

nuclear power plants, presumably because those plants, if 

developed, would not be built by then. It also confirms that the 

majority of the power will be exported out of the province, 

which suggests that it would contribute more to reducing 

greenhouse gases in other jurisdictions than it would here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

To the minister: why is the Saskatchewan Party touting nuclear 

as one of the major ways to address climate change when their 

own studies confirm it will do nothing to help Saskatchewan 

reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 2020? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 

member for that question, or assertion I guess. And as 

assertions go, Mr. Speaker, of all the ridiculous assertions from 

that side, that is the most ridiculous to date. 

 

Mr. Speaker, even those members will admit that there are zero 

GHG [greenhouse gas] emissions from nuclear power. That’s 

not a matter that’s up for debate. That’s a fact, Mr. Speaker. 

There is no way that nuclear power, even if it’s built in this 

province, could not reduce greenhouse gas emissions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. The same report released 

yesterday notes that a regulation requiring 30 per cent of utility 



3032 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2009 

electrical generation to come from renewable energy sources by 

2020 would reduce greenhouse gases by 2.5 megatonnes or 

one-quarter of the Sask Party’s new so-called target. 

 

But the Sask Party has no plans to invest significant new 

resources in renewable energy sources. Everything they’ve done 

on this front is a continuation of initiatives already begun by 

members on this side of the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why is renewable energy always 

an afterthought with this government? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, let’s call a spade a 

spade. We said in this legislature we took ideas from the 

members opposite; we improved upon them. We said the 

Crown Corporations Committee; we asked them to join us. We 

said the Crown Corporations Committee will look at all types of 

generation. 

 

SaskPower has been working hard to ensure that we have a 

renewable mix of energy going forward. We have the fastest 

growing economy. We have no choice, Mr. Speaker. We have 

to be there. We have to be there with wind energy. We have to 

be there with gas. We have to be there with hydro. We’re 

working on all fronts. 

 

Very soon SaskPower will release a wind study based on the 

information that they received from some 28 groups that came 

to Saskatchewan and expressed interest on pursuing wind 

energy. That’s just one aspect, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to offer 

more if there’s more questions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Environmental Plan 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, my question will be to the 

Minister of the Environment. Yesterday in the plan that she 

unveiled, it calls for the establishment of something called a 

climate change advisory council. Now, Mr. Speaker, you will 

and I think even government will understand how there is some 

skepticism among the Saskatchewan public and among this 

opposition about this government’s appointments to various 

councils. 

 

So my question to the Minister of the Environment: how does 

she plan to appoint this council? And by the way, will there be 

room on that council for individuals who may not in fact 

support the minister’s plan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, we will be looking for 

experts in different fields, whether that’s industry or research 

and development; expertise coming from our universities and 

the sectors that are represented there; and environmental NGOs, 

Mr. Speaker. We are looking for a broad base of people who 

can advise the government going forward so that we make the 

right decisions on reducing our emissions in this province, Mr. 

Speaker, because in 16 years we do not look forward to another 

66 per cent increase in emissions like we saw under the NDP. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, by the minister’s own admission 

yesterday in the materials presented to the public, there are a 

number of environmental groups in this province who do not 

support her plan. Now when we watched this government put 

together the UDP [Uranium Development Partnership] panel, 

they went out and found an environmentalist who claims to be 

in support of a nuclear reactor. 

 

My question again to the minister is: will there be room on her 

council for those who may in fact disagree with the plan that 

she has unveiled? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, our government has 

already undertaken consultations with various groups, including 

environmental NGOs, and the message that we heard from them 

is that the time for talk is over and the time for action is now. 

And, Mr. Speaker, that is exactly the position that we will take. 

 

And I’m sure not every single person in the environmental 

NGOs is going to agree 100 per cent with anything that any 

government does. And, Mr. Speaker, we are not looking for a 

rubber-stamp advisory council. We are looking for people who 

are going to bring us ideas and insights and creative 

opportunities to reduce emissions in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, according to the documents 

released yesterday, it was revealed that the Saskatchewan Party 

government actually changed its climate change targets way 

back in January. They decided to break the promise way back in 

January. Now it’s my understanding that even in the month of 

February the minister was publicly saying that they had not yet 

made a decision. 

 

My question to the minister is: why, why the three-month 

delay? After having made the decision to break your promise in 

January, why a three-month delay until April, nearing the close 

of the legislative session, to indicate to the public that you’re 

breaking your promise? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



May 12, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3033 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, the member, the 

Environment critic last year counselled us to adopt the federal 

targets. That is something that we examined as a government 

and as a cabinet. Our date for release for the legislation was 

yesterday and we made that a full announcement, Mr. Speaker. 

We announced our targets. We announced the legislation. We 

announced the consultation on regulations and, Mr. Speaker, we 

also announced change to the Go Green Fund because as an 

independent, an outside source had told us — we asked for an 

outside opinion on that — that the NDP’s green initiatives fund 

was not going to help us, indeed, reach our targets, Mr. 

Speaker. So we announced an entire program yesterday to 

reduce emissions in this province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when being asked about environmental 

issues, the Leader of the NDP said this, and I quote, “If I have 

some regret about our time in office it’s that I didn’t, we didn’t, 

early enough sense the urgency around some of these issues 

. . .” 

 

The Speaker: — The minister’s time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the minister would be well 

advised to leave her little yellow and green sheets at home and 

refer to her own activity, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yesterday the minister suggested that the very 

cornerstone of this plan is an equivalency agreement with the 

federal government — an equivalency agreement, Mr. Speaker, 

that doesn’t exist. What we saw yesterday was an agreement, an 

agreement to talk about an equivalency agreement, Mr. 

Speaker. There is no equivalency agreement with the federal 

government, and not likely until the fall of 2009. I ask the 

minister what’s to happen in the fall of 2009 if in fact we have a 

federal election and a change in a federal government. 

 

And why, Mr. Speaker, why, Mr. Speaker, was the agreement 

— that was portrayed yesterday as an equivalency agreement — 

only signed yesterday? Would that not indicate that this is a 

plan that’s been put together on the fly, in a hurry to deliver 

something before the end of this session? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, well I’m sorry that the 

NDP don’t like my little yellow sheets because what’s on my 

little yellow sheets is the truth about the NDP record. And if I 

were them, I wouldn’t . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — But, Mr. Speaker, at no time yesterday 

did I portray the agreement that I signed with Minister Jim 

Prentice as an equivalency agreement. For the member opposite 

to assert that for some reason I was misleading yesterday is 

completely inappropriate, and I have to say I’m a bit shocked. 

 

What I said was it was an agreement in principle to work with 

the federal government to reach an equivalency agreement. That 

is what I said all along. And any assertion that I said otherwise, 

Mr. Speaker, I take absolute offence to. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Support for High-Needs Youth in the Saskatoon Area 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

today our government has taken another step towards . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Minister Responsible for Social 

Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today our 

government has taken another step towards strengthening the 

province’s child welfare system. I am pleased to announce that 

we are providing Eagle’s Nest Youth Ranch with a total of $4 

million to provide 20 new spaces for high-needs youth in . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, these spaces will consist 

of 11 short-term emergency receiving beds and 9 assessment 

and stabilization beds, and they will assist some of Saskatoon’s 

most vulnerable young people. We know that there has been a 

critical shortage of appropriate care spaces for youth in the 

Saskatoon area. The Children’s Advocate described this issue in 

the report that he released earlier this year. 

 

Addressing this issue and the gap in the care continuum in 

Saskatoon is an important part of our government’s plan for the 

child care system announced in February. Eagle’s Nest is one of 

the finest providers of residential youth services in the province, 

Mr. Speaker. They currently provide 46 spaces for youth in the 

Prince Albert area. 

 

The funding announced today will enable Eagle’s Nest to 

expand its services to Saskatoon and purchase property and the 

necessary furnishings. We expect that these 20 new spaces will 

be available next month. We’re looking forward to continuing 

our successful partnership with Eagle’s Nest as they expand to 

Saskatoon where together we can strengthen the services we 

provide to the children in our care. 

 

Our government is committing to putting children and youth 

first and ensuring a better quality of life for the young people of 

Saskatchewan. Today’s announcement takes another step closer 

to that goal. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 



3034 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2009 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I 

want to thank the minister for sharing an advance copy of her 

ministerial statement. And I know that the families and folks in 

Saskatoon will be most welcoming to Eagle’s Nest Youth 

Ranch to the Saskatoon area. The 20 new spaces will be a very 

good addition, and that’s very hopeful. 

 

I note the commitment to have this open next month. That’s 

very impressive — the speed of which this $4 million will be 

put to use — and we look forward to that. Speaking of a breach 

to trust, the Children’s Advocate report, and the response from 

the minister, we are also looking forward to — probably, maybe 

in the next two days but surely within the next few weeks — the 

data updates. I note that the minister made a commitment to 

update her website, on a regular basis, on the impact that her 

initiatives are having on the foster care issue in Saskatoon. And 

the website looks pretty much the same as it looked in 

February. So we’re looking for that. 

 

But with this news, I’m happy to hear it and thank you very 

much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 

Bill No. 94, The Profits of Criminal Notoriety Act without 

amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that 

the Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. The minister may proceed to move 

third reading. I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 94 — The Profits of Criminal Notoriety Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

that Bill No. 94, The Profits of Criminal Notoriety Act without 

amendment now be passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready 

for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 

that it has considered certain estimates and to present its 

seventh report. I move: 

 

That the seventh report of the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice now be concurred 

in. 

 

The Speaker: — The Chair of the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice has moved: 

 

That the seventh report of the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice be now concurred 

in. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Chair of the Human 

Services Committee. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Standing Committee on Human Services 

 

Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 63, The 

Saskatchewan Housing Corporation Amendment Act, 2008 

without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister Responsible 

for Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that 



May 12, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3035 

the Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the Minister Responsible 

for Social Services. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 63 — The Saskatchewan Housing Corporation 

Amendment Act, 2008 
 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 

Responsible for Social Services that Bill No. 63, The 

Saskatchewan Housing Corporation Amendment Act, 2008 

without amendment be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 

Committee on Human Services. 

 

Standing Committee on Human Services 

 

Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 66, The 

Witness Protection Act without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister Responsible 

for Corrections and Public Safety. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that 

the Bill now be read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 66 — The Witness Protection Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — I move that this Bill be now read the third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 

Responsible for Corrections, Public Safety and Policing that 

Bill No. 66, The Witness Protection Act without amendment be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 

Committee on Human Services. 

 

Standing Committee on Human Services 

 

Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 49, The 

Ambulance Amendment Act, 2008 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I request leave to waive consideration in Committee of 

the Whole of this Bill and that the Bill be read now a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 49 — The Ambulance Amendment Act, 2008 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — I move that this Bill now be read a 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 

that Bill No. 49, The Ambulance Amendment Act, 2008 without 

amendment be now read the third time and passed under its 

title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 



3036 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2009 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 

Committee on Human Services. 

 

Standing Committee on Human Services 

 

Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Human Services to report that it has considered 

certain estimates and to present the seventh report. I move: 

 

That the seventh report of the Standing Committee on 

Human Services be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — The Chair of the Standing Committee on 

Human Services has moved: 

 

That the seventh report of the Standing Committee on 

Human Services be now concurred in. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

I recognize the Chair responsible for the Private Bills 

Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Private Bills 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am instructed by 

the Standing Committee on Private Bills to report it has 

considered Bill 903, The Ancient Order of Melchizedeq, Inc. 

Act and to recommend to the Assembly that this Bill not be 

further proceeded with at this session. 

 

Mr. Speaker, your committee has concerns regarding the ad hoc 

process of dealing with private Bills relating to degree-granting 

authorities of religious colleges. Other concerns raised included 

the ability of private Acts to confer degrees under The 

University of Saskatchewan Act, 1995. These questions could 

not be addressed by your committee. In light of these 

circumstances and the current ongoing review of the 

post-secondary education system, your committee recommends 

that this Bill not be further proceeded with in this session. 

 

I move: 

 

That the fifth report of the Standing Committee on Private 

Bills be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair of the 

Standing Committee on Private Bills: 

 

That the fifth report of the Standing Committee on Private 

Bills be now concurred in. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I therefore direct that Bill 

No. 903, The Ancient Order of Melchizedeq, Inc. Act be 

removed from the order paper. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Committee of 

Finance. 

 

The Speaker: — I do now leave the Chair. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Executive Council 

Vote 10 

 

Subvote (EX01) 

 

The Chair: — The first item of business is the estimates for 

Executive Council found on page 71 of Saskatchewan 

Estimates book. I will ask the Premier if he will please 

introduce officials present today, and after I call the first item of 

business he may make some opening statements then if he 

wishes. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair of 

Committees. We’re looking forward to the afternoon, to the 

debate and discussion that will ensue during estimates. And it’s 

my pleasure to be able to introduce senior officials of the 

government who’ve joined us today for the discussion, 

hopefully to provide some help to myself. 

 

I want to welcome Garnet Garven, the deputy minister to 

myself, to Executive Council. I’m going to be saying a few 

words about him as the opportunity affords, but appreciate 

having my deputy, Garnet, here. To my right is James Saunders 

in Executive Council as well; Reg Downs, the senior advisor in 

Executive Council; and Bonita Cairns who often provides much 

of the specific information requested by members opposite. 

 

And, Mr. Chair of Committees, we’ll leave it at that. We’ll have 

ample opportunity for discussion and debate. But I want to 

welcome the officials here, thank them for their time, and thank 

the members opposite in advance for the questions that will be 

coming during estimates. 

 

The Chair: — Executive Council, vote no. 10, subvote (EX01), 



May 12, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3037 

central management and services. I recognize the Leader of Her 

Majesty’s Official Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I want to join the 

Premier, of course, in welcoming his officials who have joined 

us. And if I may say, if memory serves me well, the subject of 

the Premier’s estimates is usually a concern for a broader group 

of officials than are in the room today and no doubt have 

prepared for this afternoon’s discussions. And so, through the 

officials who are here, I would extend thanks also to those 

many officials I know who have been at work to prepare for this 

afternoon. 

 

Mr. Chair, if I may just preface my interventions this afternoon 

with just a very few comments. I recognize that I have about 

three hours and two days to bring down the government. I 

suspect, Mr. Chair, that’s not likely to happen. What I hope can 

happen today is a good, frank exchange of ideas and hopefully 

some good, frank exchange of information and answers to 

questions. 

 

To preface my interventions today though, Mr. Chair, I just 

want to say this. It has been said that to whom much is given, 

much is expected. And I think it is a fair observation, and I 

think it would be shared by others outside of this room, that the 

current Government of Saskatchewan has been given much. 

 

Arguably, no other government in this province’s history 

coming to power has come at a more advantageous time in the 

life of the province. This government, I think it’s fair to say, 

inherited some very significant work of former government and 

governments. They inherited a circumstance where our 

provincial debt had been paid down substantially, where I think 

we’d reached a point of the relationship between the debt and 

the GDP [gross domestic product] being one of the best in 

Canada. This government inherited Fiscal Stabilization Fund 

cash reserves that approached $2 billion. 

 

This government inherited an economy, I think by all 

judgments, an economy that was essentially firing on many, 

many cylinders. If I recall, the member from Nutana established 

the saskjobs.ca website and when government changed there 

were something like 11,000 jobs on the website. And I think, 

Mr. Chair, it’s fair to say that this government has been gifted 

by some skyrocketing resource prices, and we see oil climbing 

again today. How well I do remember, Mr. Chair, when oil 

reached $50 a barrel, and that was hard to believe, and now we 

get concerned if it gets to $50 a barrel. They inherited a 

growing population. 

 

And, Mr. Chair, this government was elected with a very 

workable majority, strong majority, strong mandate from the 

people of Saskatchewan. They inherited an opposition of course 

which is in transition at this moment, and if I may say, they’ve 

proven to be a very worthy government in terms of their public 

relations. The Premier is a very able communicator and, at least 

by my measurement, they’ve never really faced a very hard, 

hard decision yet. 

 

So I think it is fair to say, Mr. Chair, that this government has in 

fact been given much and therefore, Mr. Deputy Chair, the 

expectations of a province, expectation of an opposition, the 

expectations are high, high on those issues which we know face 

our province, which we know will shape the future for all of our 

people. And so today in the course of these estimates, I and 

most of my colleagues will want to participate in questioning, in 

challenging, in seeking information about this government’s 

future, about how they intend to bring to the people of 

Saskatchewan what the people of Saskatchewan believe given, 

given the strength they enjoy, given the economy they enjoy, 

given the fiscal capacity that they enjoy. 

 

We will cover over the course of the day a wide variety of areas 

of attention of government, ranging right through from the 

environment and climate changes — the issues we were just 

talking about in question period — to economic issues, to the 

important issues of First Nations and Métis relations, northern 

affairs. I’m sure we’ll have some discussion before the course 

of the day is over around nuclear energy and our Crowns, 

obviously some discussion on social policy, and broad 

discussion, I hope, on good governance. But my premise, Mr. 

Speaker, is we will ask some tough questions today because this 

government has been given much, and those who have been 

given much, of them much is expected. 

 

[14:45] 

 

Let me therefore begin the conversation today where we left off 

in question period on the question of the government’s climate 

change proposal. Mr. Speaker, this has been some time in the 

coming. I can recall, when the current government was in the 

opposition benches, they were suggesting at that time that there 

would be a formal plan described before the election. We did 

not see that. 

 

Post the election, government chose — one would assume in a 

knowledgeable choice — to adopt the targets that had been 

established by the former New Democratic Party government. 

And now, only of late, we learn from government that they in 

fact, having made the promise in the campaign, have now 

abandoned that promise and have abandoned the targets which 

they committed to and adopted from the former government. 

 

So my initial question to the Premier today — because I have 

not heard a clear answer from the Minister of the Environment 

on this question — my first question to the Premier today is: 

why did the Saskatchewan Party government choose to break 

their own campaign promise and abandon the targets that they 

had adopted, the targets that had been set by the former 

government? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Chair: — I’ll recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chair of Committees, and I 

thank the hon. member for the questions. We’re going to have a 

chance perhaps to reflect on his career — a distinguished career 

I would say — maybe later on this week in this legislature. At 

least I hope to take that opportunity, and so perhaps we could 

just get right to the questions and answers and the debate that 

will ensue today and leave those things for another day. 

 

Mr. Chair of Committees, a couple of points in terms of 

touching on the former premier’s introduction of his line of 

questioning before we get into the specific question on the 



3038 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2009 

environment plan, the very first emissions reduction plan in the 

province’s history introduced yesterday by the Hon. Minister of 

the Environment. 

 

I want to touch on some things that the premier said. I think he 

was, obviously he was quoting the New Testament when he 

mentioned quite rightly that to whom much is given, much is 

expected. And I mean, I guess we’re going to start today by 

agreeing because I agree that much has been given to this 

government — in some measures by actions of the previous 

government, yes. Much has been given to this province just by 

natural endowment, by providence if you will. Those gifts have 

existed for a long, long time. 

 

And so he’s quite right. I think expectations are high and they 

rapidly went higher and higher of a new government. I’d also 

point out that relative to other provincial situations — I think of 

Ontario, I think of even the province of Alberta that’s looking at 

a $4.7 billion deficit — that our government has not, and 

thankfully, mercifully, our government and our people have not 

faced those kinds of difficult questions that have been dealt 

with in other cabinet rooms and in other legislatures across the 

country. 

 

And so I do believe it’s also fair of the former premier to say 

the measure ought to be then, what do you do with what has 

been left to you? What has this government done, together with 

the people of the province, with this good fortune, and in some 

cases the stewardship provided by the previous administration? 

And let me just cite a couple of those first of all. 

 

I mentioned in this Assembly — I’ve mentioned it in public 

very many times — the business tax cuts undertaken by that 

member who just spoke, no doubt with some great difficulty to 

get his party to support those kinds of business tax cuts, where 

someone in his party would not have been supportive, was 

really leadership for the province that has paid dividends to 

Saskatchewan’s economy in the months that followed that 

budget, and to our government as well, as we have inherited a 

much healthier business tax regime. 

 

Now I would point out, I would point out, I hope, I think it’s 

fair to say, as we give credit to the government that did those 

things, the previous government, I hope that they would say — 

maybe from their seat, as the member for Lakeview’s doing — 

I hope they would agree that the official opposition Sask Party 

that campaigned on those very business tax cuts in ’03 when 

they were not in vogue, when they were not the policy of the 

party opposite, and then continued to press the case for those 

business tax cuts after the ’03 election when we were still in 

opposition, I think perhaps that had also a positive impact on 

getting those things done. 

 

There’s some other good things we’ve inherited from the 

previous government, including carbon capture. Well the 

member for Nutana is already in a bit of a bad mood, I think. 

She doesn’t agree with that even, that an opposition can cause 

some good things to happen. I would argue that this opposition 

has already caused some good things to happen when our 

government has moved on a number of adjustments in part 

because they were raised in this Assembly. 

 

So let me just say this, that what . . . Let me answer the 

question, what has the government done with what we’ve 

inherited? Well for us there were a number of priorities. We had 

a growth agenda when we were elected to the government we 

campaigned on, we talked about in opposition, and that growth 

agenda was fundamentally based on having a more competitive 

economy. 

 

We’ve seen the largest in-year income tax cuts in the history of 

the province. We’ve seen the largest property, education 

property tax cut in the history of the province. That’s what 

we’ve done with the wealth of this province, with the resources 

that have been left to us both by providence and even in cases 

by previous administration. 

 

We have undertaken the largest infrastructure investments in 

Saskatchewan’s history because that too is part of our growth 

agenda. We had to deal with an infrastructure deficit left behind 

by the previous government. And, Mr. Chairman, let me just 

say this: they might say, well we didn’t have the money you 

had. Well they had about $700 million, I think, in the fund 

when it all wrapped up. And yet there was this infrastructure 

deficit, and yet there was this challenge with respect to revenue 

sharing unaddressed with our municipalities. 

 

What else did we do? Well we could have chosen just to live by 

the letter of the law. We introduced The Growth and Financial 

Security Act in terms of debt repayment. We did introduce 

stronger balanced budget legislation in The Growth and 

Financial Security Act, I think the first Act that we introduced 

as a government. And had we only met the letter of that law, we 

would have paid down a lot of debt, Mr. Chairman, but we 

exceeded that. We made a decision as government to 

significantly exceed what was already more stringent 

requirements for debt repayment by our own legislation. And 

because of that, Mr. Chairman, I’m very proud to say — the 

people of the province should take the credit — that 40 per cent 

of the province’s General Revenue Fund debt from the day we 

took office has been reduced. Forty per cent of the debt is gone, 

Mr. Chairman, that we inherited. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — That’s what we’ve done with growth, Mr. 

Chairman. That’s what we’ve done with good fortune from 

higher resource revenue and some of the policies that were good 

for the province inherited by the previous administration. 

 

And I look forward to the hon. member from Regina Douglas 

Park entering the debate because he often likes to talk about the 

1980s and, Mr. Chairman, I think we should probably talk a 

little bit about a decade, for sure, that saw an increase in debt 

and compare it and contrast it with what’s happened since this 

party took office — again, a 40 per cent reduction in the 

General Revenue Fund debt of Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Chairman, I also want to point out that if we can make 

the investments in terms of infrastructure and debt reduction 

and lower taxes for a more competitive economy, if we can do 

all of those things with the resources that we have, it’s still not 

enough. Because we know with the growing economy there 

comes challenges. There comes challenges for those who are 

most vulnerable among us, for those in rural and urban and 

northern Saskatchewan who are having a hard time keeping up 



May 12, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3039 

with what are higher costs for housing, higher costs, really, for 

everything. That’s one of the hallmarks of a growing economy. 

And I heard the hon. member, when he was premier, say that he 

would much rather have the challenge of too few housing than 

too much housing. In an economy where people were leaving, I 

would agree with that. But it is a challenge nonetheless. 

 

And so what else have we done with the resources, the revenues 

that we have in the province of Saskatchewan? Well there is a 

very, very long list of historic and unprecedented increases to 

allowances, Mr. Deputy Chair, social investments in the people 

of the province of Saskatchewan. Whether it’s the 6.5 million 

annualized enhancements for seniors’ income plan, Mr. Chair 

of Committees, which raised the maximum monthly benefit 

from 90 to 190 or for single seniors from 72 to 155 — not 

increased, I don’t believe, in the life of the hon. member who 

just spoke, of his previous government, not once. We’ve seen 

the inflationary increases in the Saskatchewan assistance plan 

and the transitional employment allowance — TEA — so 

people can move from dependency to independence.  

 

We’ve responded to higher utility costs. We’ve responded to 

transportation costs; $1.7 million to increase daily food 

allowance for welfare and community living division group 

home and day program clients, something that people in the 

care homes have been waiting for for a very, very long time, 

Mr. Chairman; 12.4 million to adjust shelter rates in income 

assistance programs in response to the task force on housing; an 

increase in the Saskatchewan rental housing supplement for 

low-income families, between 36 and $136 a month, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

And let me also say this, for the first time in the history of the 

province, the Minister of Social Services undertook the 

innovation of tying increases in these allowances to inflation by 

region because housing inflation is different depending on 

where you are in the province. Housing inflation may be more 

acute in the city of Saskatoon than it might be in the community 

of Wynyard. And so our government said, let’s be sensitive to 

that. Let’s actually tie these allowances and the inflationary 

increases to the reality of inflation in the markets that they were 

in. That’s also a change we brought about, Mr. Chair of 

Committees. 

 

Increased the employment supplement by $2 million, benefiting 

6,000 low-income families. Increased shelter rates for 6,500 

households in the social assistance plan. Provincial training 

allowance was increased in August ’08 and again in ’09. And 

the PTA [provincial training allowance] is now indexed to keep 

shelter rates current. 

 

Mr. Chairman, what are we doing with the resources that we 

have inherited as a government that we are grateful for, that we 

mark prudence for, that we acknowledge the opposition to the 

extent when they were government they had a positive impact 

on? Mr. Chairman, well we’ve reduced the debt by 40 per cent. 

Historic tax cuts. Historic property tax cuts. Historic 

infrastructure investment. And a government that, in 

unprecedented ways, has made sure that we have made social 

investments in people, in families who are vulnerable, who need 

to participate in this new Saskatchewan and in prosperity. 

That’s what we’ve done, and I’m proud of the record, Mr. 

Chairman. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — With respect to the question on the 

environment, let me just say this, Mr. Chairman. I think it’s fair 

to say, by any reasonable measure, that our government with its 

imperfections and mistakes that we have made — and there will 

probably be more, human nature being as it is, Mr. Chairman — 

but with all of that, I think it’s fair to say that the people of 

Saskatchewan think of their government, maybe perhaps a 

number of things, but I do think the people of Saskatchewan 

believe that well even if we don’t agree with everything they 

do, they keep their promises. They do what they said they 

would do in the campaign. 

 

So, Mr. Chairman, it was and remains a very difficult decision, 

the one we made that led to the introduction of the greenhouse 

gas reductions Bill yesterday in the legislature. It was not an 

easy thing to do because I’m very proud of the record of these 

women and men of keeping campaign promises that we’ve 

made. We looked very, very carefully at this issue, Mr. 

Chairman, inheriting from the previous government — other 

than a budget allocation where there were no ideas to how they 

were going to spend it, other than a climate change office that 

was simply that — a press release. We inherited no plan. We 

inherited no legislation for emissions reductions. We inherited 

nothing from the previous government. 

 

And so we began to look very carefully at the targets that they 

had implemented, that they had assigned to the province — the 

ones that we agreed with in the campaign, I freely and readily 

admit — and asked ourselves, can we achieve these targets 

without completely kneecapping the economy? Can we achieve 

these targets while ensuring that we still have affordable 

electrical rates? And, Mr. Chairman, can we achieve these 

targets in the context of an equivalency agreement with Ottawa 

and of a potential new continental cap and trade as we’ve heard 

from the Obama administration and the Harper government? 

And the answer was clearly, Mr. Chairman, there was just 

simply a lot of doubt. 

 

And so what we’ve done instead, Mr. Chairman, is move 

forward with reductions that harmonize the province with the 

federal government. What we’ve done is move forward, for the 

first time in the history of the province, emissions reduction 

legislation that prescribes penalties and fines if emissions are 

exceeded by the people of Saskatchewan, by industries in the 

province. What we’ve also done is made sure we balance the 

economic future and the future of Saskatchewan families who 

would like to be able to continue to afford electricity with the 

important environmental causes at stake. 

 

And moreover, Mr. Chair — and we’ll have a chance to debate 

it, Mr. Chair, I’m sure, in the subsequent questions — I don’t 

think you should look at this Bill absent the facts of our 

government’s agenda when it comes to environment. Because 

the other facts include this: the largest per capita commitment to 

technology that will actually deal with carbon that you will find 

not just in the Dominion of Canada, but on the continent, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

When you consider what we’re prepared to do with Montana, 

we announced that last week. When you consider the $1.4 

billion Estevan project, Mr. Chair, when you put that together 



3040 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2009 

with the legislation, the conservation initiatives — another one 

announced yesterday with great effectiveness by the Hon. 

Minister of Crowns who had helpful Father’s Day present, gifts 

as well in his announcement, Mr. Chair — when you put all of 

that together, what we see is, I believe, the best environmental, 

the best carbon plan that you’ll find anywhere in the country, 

and the per capita commitment on the part of the people of 

Saskatchewan unrivalled anywhere. 

 

I look forward to more questions, Mr. Chair, but the bottom line 

is this: we moved away from NDP targets because we want to 

see the economic momentum of the province continue because 

it’s that economic momentum that will pay for these carbon 

capture initiatives, that will pay for initiatives to make sure we 

are more environmentally sustainable in the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[15:00] 

 

Mr. Calvert: — I did say, Mr. Chair, the Premier is an able 

communicator. I didn’t say he was a lengthy communicator, but 

I think that’s proving to be the case this afternoon. I think at the 

end of the Premier’s comments, I heard the germ of an answer 

to my question, why his government chose to abandon the 

targets and break the promise, targets which one would presume 

they had given some consideration to before adopting them as 

their party policy going into the election. 

 

Now there has been some speculation that in fact the reduction 

in the target was first of all and foremost driven by a desire to 

be on a level playing field, or rather to adhere to the target set 

by the Harper Conservative government in Ottawa. It is 

interesting, Mr. Chair, that the target now set by the Sask Party 

government, having abandoned their promise, is precisely the 

target recommended by and set by the national Conservative 

government. 

 

Now it is interesting when the minister is asked to explain the 

difference, well she said, you know, the lower targets — and I 

think I heard this in the Premier’s answer — will have a better 

chance of maintaining the strength of the economy. And yet 

yesterday at least when asked to document this, the Minister of 

the Environment pointed out that in terms of costs to 

SaskPower, or the consumers at SaskPower, of rate increases, 

the reduction from 32 per cent target by 2020 to a 20 per cent 

target by 2020 would only vary the cost by 2 per cent on the 

consumers of electricity, and in terms of cost to industry, 

suggesting that the costs would be in the several hundreds of 

millions of dollars. 

 

But over the period of time between now and 2020, Mr. Chair, I 

think it’s reasonable to suggest these are not onerous, onerous 

costs to the energy industry in our province to reach the 32 per 

cent, and particularly, Mr. Chair, when this government had 

access to over $300 million at its disposal. If they didn’t like the 

plan that we had laid out for that 320, there were clearly other 

options for it, but they used it for other purposes, Mr. Chair. 

 

So I’m not sure yet we’ve had a clear answer. Let me just ask 

the Premier this: was the reduction in the target, by his 

estimation, necessary to preserve the strength of the energy 

economy and to protect SaskPower, or was it to adhere to the 

federal climate target set by Stephen Harper? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the answer is (a), the first one. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Then perhaps the Premier can explain how it is 

that by lowering the target from 32 to 20, how that 32 per cent 

target would have had such a negative or dramatic impact either 

on the Power Corporation or on the energy sector in our 

province which together represent the two large, large emitters. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you for the question. Mr. Chair, it’s 

interesting. The hon. member is inquiring as to analysis done, 

assuming . . . In his question he assumed that we had done some 

analysis on the decision we made. And he’s correct in that. 

 

As I’ve said, it is not a, it is not a . . . Well the hon. member 

from Lakeview is laughing from his seat again, so I’m going to 

bring him into the debate with some quotes of his that he’d 

made in the past, which will be quite interesting to see if he’s 

still giggling after those quotes, Mr. Chairman. 

 

But I would just say this. The hon. member assumed that we 

had done some homework into these adjustments. The answer 

of course is, we have done a lot of homework into these 

adjustments because for us a government that keeps the . . . 

Unlike members opposite, when we say something in a 

campaign, our intention is to do exactly that. And that’s been 

the record of our government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — And so in this particular issue, in order to 

change that, you bet there was a lot of analysis done. Interesting 

though that the hon. member would assume some analysis on 

our part to come to the decision. 

 

Part of the reason we had to make the adjustment, Mr. 

Chairman, is we quite incorrectly assumed that they had done 

some homework when they were the government, before they 

set the targets that we did agree to in the election campaign. But 

what we found, Mr. Chairman, was that there was nothing in 

terms of assessment. 

 

The hon. member from Nutana is talking from her seat. Well 

I’m going to invite her over to the Environment ministry, and 

she can go through all . . . 

 

The Chair: — Order. Order. Order. We’re in Executive 

Council. I would ask the members to respect the person that’s 

asking the question, and also respect the person that’s 

answering the question. There’s other people wanting to enter 

into the debate. I would just recognize the people on the floor. I 

recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, I’ve consulted with the 

Minister of the Environment again who’s consulted with 

officials. So if there is some NDP economic analysis of their 

targets on the effect of Saskatchewan families and of the 

economy, something we assumed existed, we need to have the 

former minister, the member from Lakeview, who is very 

engaged in the debate, agree to come over to the ministry with 

us and show us where they exist. Or maybe, maybe they’re in 

the documents that ministers still won’t turn over to archives, in 



May 12, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3041 

violation of a transition. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Maybe that’s where the documents are. I 

don’t know. 

 

He was also the minister of Justice. I think there’s a bunch of 

questions there we’d want to talk about. But I want to say to the 

member who just asked the question, to the member who just 

asked the question: how in the world could they set any targets 

at all for the province with zero analysis on what that would do 

to our economy in the province and what that would do to 

electrical customers for SaskPower? 

 

Because it doesn’t exist. All there was was a vague notion on 

the part of members opposite, including the member who’s 

been engaged from his seat, the former Environment minister, 

the member for Lakeview, there was just this vague notion that 

people would be paying a lot more under the NDP plan. Here’s 

what he said, April 19, 2007. He said, “And this is one area 

where people can contribute . . .”, he said. He was engaging the 

people of the province. He said people can contribute in this 

area, and it “. . . is to actually pay for new production which is 

. . . zero emissions.” 

 

He went on to say in April 19, 2007 on CBC [Canadian 

Broadcasting Corporation] News, he said Saskatchewan people, 

“Saskatchewan people are saying they’re . . . [willing] to pay 

higher power rates if that’s the cost of fighting climate change.” 

Implied in that of course is that apparently the analysis of the 

opposition, then Government of Saskatchewan, had simply been 

that it’s going to cost a lot more, because we can find nothing 

else. We can find no other work that the previous government 

did. 

 

Mr. Chairman, we found a fund that was allocated with no plan 

on how to execute the technology investments. We found a 

climate change office that was just a tentative agreement to rent 

a space and a press release. Mr. Chairman, Mr. Chairman, there 

was no plan for the NDP on greenhouse gases. And I believe 

that’s why one of the leadership candidates today — well 

yesterday, or earlier on — in Estevan, seeking to replace the 

current member from Riversdale said, we failed the people of 

the province on poverty and failed them on emissions. 

 

We intend, we intend not to fail the people of the province. We 

are going to move forward with our plan with respect to carbon 

capture. We’re going to do it in a way that’s also respectful of 

the economy because we know that the economy is one way to 

ensure that the changes coming to Saskatchewan are affordable 

for families who have to pay the electrical bill. 

 

The other issue that the hon. member may want to talk about 

some more, I hope he does, is . . . And by the way we will do a 

comparison on the hon. member’s plan and its impact on 

SaskPower versus what we’ve announced yesterday. 

 

But the hon. members opposite need to remember there’s more 

than just SaskPower at stake, as important as that is. There are 

potash mines who have a carbon footprint, and there are 

uranium mines who have a carbon footprint, and there is a huge 

oil and gas sector that has a carbon footprint. And, Mr. 

Chairman, right now they’re paying for a lot of health care in 

this province. They’re paying to hire nurses in this province. 

They’re paying for better education and better highways. 

 

So when we move forward on an aggressive plan to deal with 

these important environmental issues, we do need to balance 

affordability. We need to balance continued sustainability for 

our economy. We need to engage not just environmental NGOs 

but industry so that we can have reachable targets and that those 

targets, while doing something meaningful on carbon and CO2, 

also ensure that Saskatchewan can continue to lead the country, 

Mr. Chairman. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — So let’s try and understand this, Mr. Chair. 

The Premier and his government, while campaigning for office, 

promised the people of Saskatchewan a plan. Well they don’t 

come up with a plan. Then they decide to adopt the plan of the 

former government — the New Democratic Party’s plan — 

which includes a 32 per cent, a 32 per cent reduction by 2020. 

 

Now, Mr. Chair, we’re understanding that the Saskatchewan 

Party did no research about adopting that, and they denied that 

research has been done. Well, Mr. Chair, I can tell you that 

significant, significant research was done — both at committee 

levels, at the bureaucratic levels — and that these targets were 

very carefully set, very cognizant, very cognizant, Mr. Chair, of 

the economy of Saskatchewan which . . [inaudible interjection] 

. . . Now there’s some member from the backbench over there 

just hollering from his seat. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Moose Jaw. Moose Jaw. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — No, it’s not from Moose Jaw this time. Mr. 

Chair, so now let’s understand this. So the government has been 

in office now almost two years; it’s coming to the midpoint of 

their government. Apparently if this was a very significant 

priority for the government, they would have acted very quickly 

upon coming to government to either change the plan or begin 

significant implementation. And I’ll say again in this House as I 

have said publicly, as others have said, if I have some regret 

about our time in government, is that we did not act with more 

wisdom or speed on this matter. 

 

Now the fact of the matter is, that government has come to 

office almost two years ago. If it is as they say a priority and 

they are not satisfied with what is in place, then why in the 

world, Mr. Chair, does it take this long to come up with a plan? 

Particularly the kind of plan we saw yesterday, a plan without, 

in fact, the equivalency agreement with the national government 

which they say is essential, a plan that does not — as I’ve been 

able to read it — indicate any significant measures in energy 

conservation or any significant measures in renewable sources 

of energy, Mr. Chair. 

 

They’re counting on this equivalency agreement from Ottawa, 

uncertain whether the national government is going to adopt the 

cap-and-trade system which is now becoming prevalent in 

North America, unaware if this federal government will even 

survive the fall. 

 

They’re basing all of this on an equivalency agreement with 



3042 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2009 

Ottawa and a technological fund. Well, Mr. Chair, there was a 

fund in place. If the government wanted to direct that to 

technological advancement where, in fact, some of it was going, 

then that was their choice. No, they chose to get rid of the fund. 

 

Mr. Chair, then we have the circumstance where apparently the 

government made this decision way back in January. Way back 

in January when we were receiving news releases about the 

most popular baby names in Saskatchewan, they make an 

important decision of the targets that are going to be achieved 

by their government in this province way back in January. 

 

The Minister of the Environment we’re told, in the month of 

February, is saying to the people of Saskatchewan and the 

journalists, no, no such decision has been made. Yesterday she 

said the decision was made. And then it takes to April, towards 

the end of April to tell the people of Saskatchewan that the 

target, that the promise is being broken. Mr. Chair, this is not 

credible. It is not the sign of a government who is taking this 

file seriously. It is not confidence in a well thought out plan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, the Kyoto Protocol was 

signed in 1997. I think there has been ample . . . I’m glad to 

hear the hon. member admit that their legacy is years of climate 

failure, climate change failure in terms of their policy. That 

admission I think is a healthy thing. It’s the road to 

improvement and the road to getting it done a little bit more 

effectively down the road. 

 

You know in that regard, Mr. Chair, we welcome members 

opposite to join us because we’re on that same road. We’ve 

inherited that legacy from the members opposite. We’ve 

inherited the fact that there was no legislation before this 

Assembly. 

 

There were in other provinces. Alberta had legislation. British 

Columbia has legislation. Quebec has legislation, and now the 

fourth province — and there’s no others — has legislation 

moving forward that our targets of the national government, 

combine that with a very aggressive plan with respect to carbon 

capture. We have a lot of work to do because of what we’ve 

inherited. But I’m pleased to see that we’re making some 

progress. 

 

Some would like to have it more aggressive. I’ve heard from 

the industry sources saying even the new federal caps are too 

high. I’ve heard from environmental groups saying, well they’re 

not high enough. And I guess as the hon. member knows well 

— perhaps better than me — this side of the House is really 

about trying to make those decisions. 

 

[15:15] 

 

And so I can truthfully say to the member opposite, we have 

looked at this issue very carefully. We have consulted with 

industry, and we have made decisions both with respect to this 

legislation and the attendant investment we’ll make in carbon 

capture and sequestration and other technologies and renewable 

energy that we’ll hear more about in the future. We made this 

decision with the best environmental interests and economic 

interests of the province at heart, and time will tell as to whether 

or not the people of the province support the decision. 

 

You know, Mr. Chairman, there’s been some discussion of the 

different approaches by two different governments and the 

impact of the targets, the NDP targets. And they’re sticking to 

their targets, so I guess we’ll be talking about it in the months 

ahead and probably through the next election. 

 

While the NDP targets in the long term, in the very long term 

— if SaskPower is able to meet the targets — in the long term 

may not be that much, may not be that much, have that much of 

a negative impact on people’s electrical bills if those things 

happen, if SaskPower’s able to in the long term meet the 

targets. But it’s very likely that, Mr. Chairman, very likely that 

increases in electrical bills will spike for an unknown period of 

time under the NDP plan. Under the NDP plan though in the 

long term, in the long term, if SaskPower reaches its targets, 

may only be slightly higher on people’s electrical bills. We 

know that for some period of time undetermined the NDP plan 

will cause huge increases in people’s electrical bills at a time, I 

don’t think, when this province or this economy perhaps ever 

could afford it, but could afford it in the context of where we’ll 

be even throughout this next decade as a growing have 

province. So again we reached for a balance. We reached for a 

balance, Mr. Chairman. 

 

And it’s interesting that the hon. member would, the hon. 

member would have a number of questions with respect to the 

environment because it is hard to contain all of the questions 

that, all of the positions that the NDP have had on the 

environment. It is hard to contain them, even with a smaller 

font, on one page. Just in the last number of months we’ve had 

the Environment critic opposed to carbon capture, saying it’s 

not really feasible; it’s not effective. And then the government 

in favour of carbon capture. Their own glossy brochure that the 

Hon. Minister of the Environment refers to says, no this is part 

of the solution. We’ve had many different positions from 

members opposite with respect to nuclear power being at least a 

greenhouse gas friendly, perhaps, alternative for the province to 

look at. 

 

Mr. Chairman, we’ve heard the hon. member for Coronation 

Park, I believe it is, every other day get up in the House and say 

rates are too high. But then his colleague, the Environment 

critic, says she’d like rates to be even higher because she wants 

us to have even more onerous targets with respect to 

greenhouse gas emissions. 

 

And you know, Mr. Chairman, I remember getting lectured by 

members opposite when I sat in opposition about the luxury of 

being in opposition — that you could really be on all sides of 

the issue. That was one of the advantages. And I remember, and 

I remember, Mr. Chairman, I remember, Mr. Chairman, that 

members on that side of the House would tell us in opposition 

that we really can’t have it both ways. Well, Mr. Chairman, the 

same advice applies to them as well, and when they . . . 

 

The Chair: — Again members are entering the debate from 

their chair. I would ask them not to do that. And it’s getting 

increasingly hard to hear the person that has the microphone. I 

recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — And just as soon as the NDP have an actual 

coherent position on carbon capture, on sustainable energy 

technologies, on where we should do with rates, on greenhouse 



May 12, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3043 

gas emissions plan, when the day, the moment that they finally 

have a coherent plan, an idea, I hope they’ll share it with us 

because we would be prepared to take a look at it, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the member from Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. This whole area points to 

a very interesting issue around how you develop public policy. 

Now what we know is that the Premier learned quite a few 

things during the ’80s around developing public policy, and we 

accept his quotations about that at various times over the last 

decades in fact. And one of the issues becomes, in this 

particular area, how do you respond to these bigger, broader 

issues that are influenced from out of the province? 

 

And in Saskatchewan, one of the range of tools that we have as 

a province is the whole array of Crown corporations, and in this 

particular area we’re talking about SaskPower and we’re talking 

about how we provide safe, dependable power for the people of 

Saskatchewan in the long term. 

 

Mr. Chair, we knew when we were working in this area that 

there are some extremely difficult issues, and I think that the 

Premier has confirmed that. But what we also knew is we 

needed to have some funds that were available. 

 

Now we know that when the new government came in, they 

made a lot of quick choices without thinking through what they 

did, and I think this — what we’re seeing today — is an 

example of what happens when you make some of these quick 

choices without really thinking it through. Because there was a 

fund of money that we set aside from the sale of the upgrader, 

which we knew was going to be available to deal with a number 

of the public policy issues that were going to have to be 

addressed through SaskPower and, to a lesser extent, through 

some of the other Crowns. 

 

And, Mr. Chair, when that fund was wiped out — or as they 

say, put into highways or other places — I don’t think there was 

enough forethought by the crew that had just come into 

government about what the longer term effects would be. And 

now we’re at that point in 2009, and the money’s not there to 

address some of these public policy issues. 

 

So where does it come from? Well it comes from increased 

costs on utilities which we’re seeing on a pretty regular basis, 

and my colleagues have been raising this. Now, Mr. Chair, my 

question to the Premier is, when you’re in the role that he has as 

Premier and you’re dealing with public policy, you either make 

some choices around providing some funds out of the General 

Revenue Fund — which I think the minister has mentioned that 

that’s where this money is or was — or you go and increase the 

money in how you charge for those utilities. 

 

What we know is that in the ’80s, in the public policy forum 

that that Premier was trained, debt was increased in the Crowns 

to the point where it was unsustainable, and that was what 

caused the great deal of difficulty in the early ’90s for the 

Government of Saskatchewan, for the people of Saskatchewan 

which we have now, are in a position . . . And so some of the 

choices that were made in those years have some of the kinds of 

things that you are now, as a government, making choices now. 

 

So my question to the Premier is, are you going to deal with 

these public policy issues through taxation, through revenue 

generation on the government revenue fund, or are you going to 

put it on the backs of the utility payers directly? And I think the 

more important question is, are you going to be open and 

accountable in how you do this because I see you going down a 

track which caused us incredible difficulties in this province 

which resulted in the near bankruptcy of this province in the 

early ’90s. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well you know, Mr. Chairman, I think the 

hon. member wants to talk about the 1980s because he doesn’t 

want to talk about today because the legacy of the government, 

of the Saskatchewan Party government today is 40 per cent less 

debt since we were elected, Mr. Chairman . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — The legacy of the Saskatchewan Party 

government today is sustainable and historic tax cuts; record 

investments in people, in those who are vulnerable in our 

communities right across the province; and record investments 

in infrastructure. You know what, Mr. Chairman? We’re 

pursuing radical notions like you ought to, if you can afford it, 

pay down the debt, lower taxes, and — oh, by the way — fix 

the odd highway that’s been ignored for 16 years, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — And I would say this to that hon. member. I 

would say this. We’re going to work very hard to keep that 

record as a government. And, Mr. Chairman, we know when 

the next election will be because that’s another promise we’ve 

kept. When that next election happens, I’m not sure if that 

member is running again, but if he is, I hope he’s prepared to 

debate with his Saskatchewan Party opponent about a record, 

Mr. Chairman, that includes that debt reduction, that includes 

lower taxes and better services for Saskatchewan people 

because that will be the legacy of this government. That’s the 

direction we’re headed, and that’s where we’re going to 

continue to go, Mr. Chairman. 

 

With respect to his questions, with respect to his questions on 

what did we do with the $300 million? Well you know what? 

Earlier on, the hon. member from Riversdale was saying you’ve 

moved away from your promise on greenhouse gases, and we 

have admitted that we have. 

 

But, Mr. Chairman, one of the promises that we kept was one 

we made when I was in the city of Yorkton with the hon. 

member for Yorkton. We gave a speech to the chamber there 

and said, you know the NDP have this . . . They’ve sold the 

co-op refinery. I beg your pardon. They’ve sold the Regina 

assets, and they’ve privatized the upgrader. And with their 

proceeds from the upgrader, they are going to have an 

environmental fund. But other than a backgrounder — and I’m 

going to get to it in a moment — there’s not a lot of details 



3044 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2009 

around what this fund will be. 

 

We said that we need to get to these environmental issues and at 

least 40 million of that 320 million will go to those 

environmental issues. But we also said that the people of the 

province had priorities we needed to deal with, that we needed 

to fix highways and infrastructure in the province. So we 

campaigned on a change from that fund, using that NDP 

environmental tech fund to fix highways. 

 

What else did we say, Mr. Chairman? We should use that fund 

to pay down debt. Promises made, promises kept. And then we 

took $40 million, and we moved it over to green initiatives. And 

in the ensuing months, Mr. Chairman, as fate would have it or 

perhaps as good planning and good public policy would have it, 

we have actually vastly exceeded anything contemplated by 

members opposite with that $320 million. 

 

And I want the member to pay attention because he raised the 

question about exactly what we are doing with these 

environmental investments and how does our plan differ from 

their plan. Their media backgrounder from their Green Future 

Fund in September 2007 said that they were going to put $100 

million for conservation and efficiency. The Saskatchewan 

Party record and our plan going forward, energy efficiency and 

conservation — $105 million. 

 

They said they were going to put — when they agreed with 

carbon capture — they said they were going to put $125 million 

towards carbon capture and storage, Mr. Chairman, $125 

million. That’s basically one project for this government. That’s 

the Montana project, never mind the investments we continue to 

make in centres at University of Regina, together with Shell, 

together with the university itself, never mind what we’re going 

to be doing at Boundary dam, Mr. Chairman, in the hundreds of 

millions of dollars. 

 

That member should be embarrassed to stand up and compare 

their record and what they were prepared to invest in terms of 

environmental technologies with what’s happened already in 

the province of Saskatchewan under our watch. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — But let’s go further. Let’s go further. That 

hon. member’s plan that he was just touting and saying, what 

have you done with our plan, was going to spend $75 million to 

increase the use of renewable energy. Well, Mr. Chairman, let 

me just find it. I will tell you that our plan that we have talked 

about here in this Assembly in the past — the Minister of the 

Environment has — how does it compare to 75 million from the 

NDP? How about $139 million planned for by this government? 

 

Mr. Chairman, the total value of investments and technology 

that this government is prepared to make is $2 billion. And I’m 

not sure about the new math of the hon. member opposite, but I 

am prepared to compare that, that investment in the future and 

in the sustainable economy, with what may have happened if 

that member had gotten around to his 300 million versus 2 

billion on the part of the Saskatchewan Party government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Well, Mr. Chair, we’re getting such long 

answers to our questions, and my colleagues have lots of 

questions, so I’m going to slip to another area. Mr. Chair, in the 

whole budget that the government has brought forward, they 

have increased the spending in 18 months almost 25 per cent. 

And that’s gone right across the board. 

 

Now I have a simple question for the Premier. Waiting lists in 

health care for surgery have been a huge issue, and on 

December 2007, the number of people on the waiting list was 

approximately 26,000. And now at December 2008, the most 

recent information on the public waiting list, it’s gone up by 

1,000 instead of going down. Can the Premier explain why, 

after all the ranting and raving about waiting lists and health 

care and everything else, you’ve been in government for 18 

months, and the waiting lists have gone up? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I can’t hardly recall a 

time when the current Health minister, then Health critic, would 

have ranted and raved about things, Mr. Chairman, but I’ll take 

the member at his word. 

 

An Hon. Member: — I think it was about five years worth. 

 

[15:30] 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — It may have been five years worth — that’s 

right — the member for Lakeview says. I think there’s been a 

lot of debate in this legislature about health care over the years, 

and some of it fairly emotional, as it should be, because 

obviously there are fewer issues as important as the health care 

of our citizens. 

 

You know, it’s interesting, Mr. Chairman, that the segue from 

the environmental discussion would be health care and would 

be wait times because I think we all agree in this Assembly, 

notwithstanding our party affiliation, that one of the most 

important things a government can do to deal with wait times is 

health care workers, front-line health care workers. And if you 

have a shortage of nurses, that will exacerbate your wait times. 

If you have a shortage of doctors, that’s going to make it even a 

little bit more difficult to deal with wait times. 

 

And so we as an opposition said that we should have targets for 

nurse recruitment and retention, for example, that we should 

have targets. Now I am just going to jump back to the 

environment discussion for a minute because I don’t think we 

ought to be . . . that you can get obsessed by just sort of setting 

targets that are unachievable. On the environment issue, I note 

that the CEO of the National Round Table on the Environment 

and the Economy said this: “I think what is important is that 

there is a focus for a target. A lot of people have suffered from 

what I call targetitis: throw out bigger and better targets [he’s 

talking about greenhouse gas emission reductions] to show that 

somehow we’re more concerned than the other guy on doing 

something.” 

 

I think we’ve seen in the environmental debate in this House 

that members opposite may have targetitis. They’re interested in 

those targets and increasing them even if they’re not interested 

in backing up those targets with action. 

 

But the NDP took quite a different tack — and I assume still 



May 12, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3045 

takes a different tack — with respect to one of the important 

issues in dealing with wait lists, and that’s setting targets for 

nurse recruitment. I remember when the hon. member from 

Indian Head-Milestone asked the minister the question, what’s 

your target? I remember when SUN [Saskatchewan Union of 

Nurses] asked the member for North Battleford, the then Health 

minister, what’s your target? And what did he say? He said, 

well we don’t like to set targets for nurse recruitment because 

it’s very likely we’ll miss the targets, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Now I don’t think that’s good enough for the province. That’s 

part of the reason, by the way, we have longer wait times for 

procedures — and yes, still today — than we did. That’s also 

something we’ve inherited from the NDP. 

 

So what has our government tried to do? Well first out of the 

gate, we worked very hard to get a sufficient number of nurses. 

We know if you’re going to reduce wait times in the province, 

you need to be able to have beds open. In order to have beds 

open, there needs to be nurses. So rather than fight with SUN, 

we sat down and, in an unprecedented way, hammered out a 

partnership with the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, with 

nurses in this province. We followed that up with, to be sure, an 

aggressive contract, so we could send a message to our nurses 

and nurses from across the country that you are welcomed here, 

that we need you here, that you’re the long-term solution in 

many ways to wait times. And both of those things occurred, 

Mr. Chair of Committees. Very recently the Government of 

Saskatchewan has announced a physician recruitment and 

retention plan — first one in the history of the province — 

because we also believe that front-line workers include doctors. 

Doctors are part of the answer to shortened wait times. 

 

Is there more work to be done? Absolutely. Wait times are long. 

There’s examples we all have that are close to us — I have 

some very close to me — of wait times for procedures that are 

too long. And so that is why . . . and I encourage members 

opposite to work with us because they’ll be seeing more from 

our government on this very specific issue. But we are going to 

be building on both the recommendations of the patient-first 

review and the unprecedented health care worker recruitment 

and retention efforts of this new Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. Premier, last Thursday at the 

legislature, we had a group of people here from the 

Saskatchewan ProLife organization. It’s the second year that 

they’ve been here for their March for Life. They have asked the 

legislature and members of your government to de-insure 

therapeutic abortions. 

 

I want to know what your government’s position is when it 

comes to this particular medical procedure. Is it your intention 

to de-insure therapeutic abortions, or will women in this 

province continue to have access to therapeutic abortions 

through our Medical Care Insurance Commission? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, the answer to the question is 

no, no to the first part; yes to the second part. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the official 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — For a while, Mr. Chair, I’d like to move some 

of our discussion into a broader economic discussion or perhaps 

a focused discussion around the economy and the activity of 

this government. I well recall, during the process of the 

campaign which brought this government to office, there was I 

think a lively debate about the Premier’s flagship, the economic 

plan which was the creation of Enterprise Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — I hope the members can applaud the results 

thus far of Enterprise Saskatchewan. Can the Premier describe 

for the legislature today, for the people of Saskatchewan, as 

they approach the mid-term of their government, what tangible 

result has been provided by Enterprise Saskatchewan to the 

economy of this province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, I know my hon. 

friend and I can hardly believe that other members are talking 

about other things right now, but it’s happening. 

 

Let me just say in answer to the hon. member’s question that 

Enterprise Saskatchewan, it is a different approach to economic 

development in the province. I just recently had a chance, an 

occasion to speak with the Vice-Chair, Mr. Gavin Semple, 

about where things were at. And obviously it was . . . And in 

daily conversations with the minister, who I applaud for doing 

an excellent job of providing leadership to a brand new 

approach to economic development in the province. 

 

What we wanted to do with the establishment of Enterprise 

Saskatchewan is depoliticize the process, is to have an 

independent board prepared to provide advice and counsel to 

the government on the economy. And in cases where we could 

agree and afford to enact the recommendations they made, we 

would. In other areas where they recommended where we were 

unable to act immediately, we would say so publicly. And then 

Enterprise Saskatchewan would be welcomed, even as an arm 

and funded by the government, to say publicly, well we think 

the government needs to move a little harder on this issue. 

 

Part of the way to do that is to organize Enterprise 

Saskatchewan by sector teams, as the plan called for. There are 

a number of important sectors to the economy. We can all name 

a number of them, I’m sure, from agriculture to mining to the 

technology sector in our province. We’ve asked these sector 

teams, fundamentally volunteers, to provide advice to the 

government on barriers to growth in their sector that perhaps 

government can do something about if it has the means and the 

will, report back publicly to the government on that. 

 

You know, we’ve already benefited from advice from 

Enterprise Saskatchewan. The recent inclusion of the R & D 

[research and development] tax credit, which was by no means 

. . . I’ll be quite transparent here and say that, you know, it was 

not a done deal in the budget process that was occurring just a 

few months ago in our province. Enterprise Saskatchewan made 

a forceful case, said if we were truly to have an innovation 

agenda that was workable for the province, we need to make the 

improvements, changes to the R & D tax credit that provide an 



3046 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2009 

incentive beyond what existed already for those companies to 

make R & D investments. 

 

It was Enterprise Saskatchewan that also recommended income 

tax competitiveness, and we moved on that recommendation. 

And more on that in a moment because they would tell you 

publicly we should be going further in terms of a flatter income 

tax process, and they’ll say that publicly and we’ll get that 

advice. 

 

They also advised that we had a problem with education portion 

of property tax. That’s a capital tax. There is no more insidious 

tax on an economy than one that taxes capital, regardless of its 

ability to necessarily generate income. And so we took historic 

steps in the budget to deal — first phase this year — with the 

education portion of property tax. And the rest will come next 

year, and I expect we’ll never be done because we’ll now have 

a provincial mill rate and there’ll be opportunities to reduce it 

further as we can afford to. 

 

That’s the kind of advice we’ve gotten from Enterprise 

Saskatchewan just in under a year because they had to get up 

and running, had to have the enabling legislation. And I expect 

this to just evolve and develop more and more each month and 

each year that passes. 

 

I expect as I maybe predicted naively in the paper that I 

presented as opposition leader where we outlined these ideas, I 

do naively believe that even by the time we’re finished — 

whenever that is, either in a couple of years or a couple of 

decades — as a government, whichever it is, I don’t think the 

next government will want to change it because they’ll have 

inherited a better system, one that does take the political clause 

out of economic development and relies truly on the 

stakeholders of the economy to provide open and honest advice. 

And then it’s incumbent on the government to explain why, or 

they would not follow that advice. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, just one other on the question of 

enterprise. The Premier in his answer has suggested that 

Enterprise Saskatchewan has talked about further flattening of 

the income tax system. Not sure that we needed Enterprise 

Saskatchewan to tell us that. The . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Well the minister from Thunder Creek yells from his seat, why 

didn’t we do it? In fact we did do it. We did it in a more 

dramatic fashion than has ever been done in this province’s 

history, and you, sir, have inherited it. You, sir, have inherited 

it. 

 

Now the fact of the matter is we didn’t need Enterprise 

Saskatchewan to tell us that property taxes, that the levy on the 

property for the funding of education was too high. We didn’t 

need that. The Premier tells us it was Enterprise Saskatchewan 

that instructed his government to do something about the R & 

D. So my question to the Premier is . . . And we might just, you 

know, ask the Premier to answer the question specifically so 

that we might get through a variety of questions that the people 

of Saskatchewan expect their opposition to ask. 

 

Will we find ourselves in a circumstance that Enterprise 

Saskatchewan’s recommendations are going to be very public 

recommendations? Because I do not recall — I may have 

missed it — but I do not recall yet a public report from any of 

the sector teams or any part of Enterprise Saskatchewan. I do 

not recall Enterprise Saskatchewan being public in a call for the 

change to the R & D. Can we expect some transparency from 

Enterprise Saskatchewan which in fact is costing the taxpayer a 

great deal of money? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Interesting, Mr. Chairman, that the hon. 

member would say that we didn’t need anybody to tell us that 

we needed to do something about income tax. They needed a 

near-death experience in the election in 1999, when we 

campaigned on income tax reduction and they almost lost. And 

then, well the member from Nutana says, chirping from her 

seat, they needed the Vicq commission. And good work by the 

Vicq commission. 

 

Of course the hon. member must admit he relied on third parties 

to provide that advice because otherwise they would have done 

it prior to the ’99 election when they almost got beat right out of 

the blue, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Of course they needed someone else to tell them about property 

taxes. There was the Scharf-Langlois report and there is the 

Boughen report that they commissioned. I mean it’s an amazing 

line of questions. Why would you need Enterprise 

Saskatchewan and the stakeholders of the economy to advise 

you about taxes? I don’t know. Why would they need those 

same kinds of groups in a different manifestation to provide 

them advice? You know what the difference is, Mr. Chairman, 

on property tax, for example? The difference is they ignored the 

people that they asked advice for. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — The Boughen report — let’s talk about the 

Boughen report. What did it say? The Boughen report said, you 

need to provide meaningful education portion property tax 

relief. That’s what the report told the former premier, 

roundabout the time when he went to SARM [Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities] and said, we’re going to 

get this done; we’re going to get it done. 

 

The Boughen report though also said, you should increase the 

PST [provincial sales tax] by a point. Right? As it turns out, 

they did listen to the Boughen report — at least half of the 

Boughen report. They got the tax increase part right. And you 

remember that hon. member was talking about breaking 

promises earlier on. That hon. member raised it. 

 

Do you remember what the then minister of Finance said in 

response to questions in this House about why in the world 

would you not provide property tax relief and increase people’s 

PST? Do you remember what he said, Mr. Chairman? I’ll tell 

you. He said, well you wouldn’t want to talk about a tax hike in 

an election; you want to do that after the election. 

 

Mr. Chairman, of course governments rely on third parties. We 

now have Enterprise Saskatchewan providing good advice. I 

want to thank the Enterprise board for what they’ve been doing 

because they’re doing a good job for the province of 



May 12, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3047 

Saskatchewan. They’re getting under way. And in terms of 

public disclosure, I would like to talk more about that because 

we’re going to be, I’m sure, talking about transparency and 

disclosure, and we have a record and the NDP have a record 

and we’d be prepared to talk about that. 

 

But I will say, Mr. Chairman, as the sector teams are reporting 

now, we are going to have a full report from Enterprise 

Saskatchewan twice a year. It’s part of the, it’s part of what’s 

written into the DNA [deoxyribonucleic acid] of this 

organization. We do want it to be public, and our ministers and 

our caucus are going to have to get used to the fact that this 

group of women and men, Enterprise Saskatchewan, are going 

to provide advice to the government as we have asked them to, 

whether we want them to or not. 

 

Now knowing the women and men on this side of the House, I 

have a pretty good feeling that when we get that good advice — 

unlike the government previous — we might actually do 

something about the things that we’re advised on, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[15:45] 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — I also want to say this, Mr. Chair of 

Committees, that I omitted to say that the Enterprise 

Saskatchewan board is right now, has been engaged with the 

Deputy Premier and the Minister of Education working on the 

schools of opportunity issue because you will know our 

legislation gives communities a chance to provide an economic 

case that their community is viable. And that decision, if made 

by the government, will in fact buy those communities some 

time to demonstrate viability. It will keep that school open. 

 

And one group that we are relying on for advice — not the 

ministry, not the politicians — we’re relying on people like the 

board of Enterprise Saskatchewan, representatives of First 

Nations and of labour and of post-secondary and of business 

and of municipalities and of government. We’re asking them to 

be engaged in the process. 

 

Mr. Chairman, we are determined to make this Enterprise 

Saskatchewan model the envy of the country. We’re going to do 

so not because of anything the government does or even the 

minister, as able as he has been on the file, will do, but because 

of the great women and men that are involved in Enterprise 

Saskatchewan — the volunteers and the sector teams and the 

great board we have in place, I’m proud to say, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, there is no doubt about it. Every 

government in this province, including the one I led, has 

received valuable information from third party, from third party 

groups. We did receive very valuable information from the 

Vicq commission, having made a policy decision. Mr. Vicq 

recommended proper and direct ways to provide that. 

 

We did, Mr. Chair, take some very direct information from a 

summit that we held bringing together the economic players of 

Saskatchewan, a summit which the Premier and his caucus at 

that time refused to attend, and boycott, refused to listen to the 

voices of industry and the economy in our province. And from 

that, I would argue, came the direct changes that we witnessed 

to the business tax regime in this province. 

 

Now, Mr. Chair, what we did not do, what we did not do, and I 

guess the verdict is still out, but I’ll tell you what we did not do 

was create a massive bureaucracy which many of us, which 

many of us see happening around Enterprise Saskatchewan — a 

massive bureaucracy, Mr. Speaker, that is becoming and 

growing more and more expensive. The verdict may well be 

out, but to date we’ve seen very little for this massive 

bureaucracy that’s been created around Enterprise 

Saskatchewan. 

 

That said, Mr. Speaker. I want to move on. The Premier now 

has attended twice to job fairs in Ontario, I think relatively 

successfully the first time round. I would like to ask the 

question, a few very specific, specific questions, and maybe we 

can get a specific answer around the Saskatchewan job fair 

presence in Toronto. 

 

I would like the Premier to indicate to the legislature today how 

many private sector employers accompanied Saskatchewan’s 

presence to the job fair last year. How many private sector 

employers accompanied the Government of Saskatchewan to 

the job fair this year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair . . . 

 

The Chair: — Order. Order. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, we can provide a specific 

breakdown to the hon. member of his question. He mentioned 

the summit though first, if I may, and why members of the 

opposition were not at the summit on the economy that was 

planned by the former government. I just want to remind the 

hon. member that I think we were at an even more important 

economic meeting in the province being held at that same time. 

 

You might remember, Mr. Chair, that one of the biggest threats 

to economic prosperity was the NDP job-killing monster — the 

most available hours legislation proposed by a potential leader 

of that party over there when she was the minister of Labour. So 

we were at a rally — a packed, loud rally across the street — of 

business people and others and business employees who were 

working very hard to ensure that the NDP hadn’t undone their 

own good work with respect to business taxes by labour laws 

that weren’t really needed, that wouldn’t have helped part-time 

workers to the extent they claim, and that would have sent a 

chill through the business climate of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — That’s where we were. That’s where we 

were. 

 

With respect to the job fair, we have attended two as the hon. 

member has referenced. One in the spring of 2009 this year, one 

in the fall of 2008. I will say that there were, in 2009 there were 

few . . . In the spring of 2009 I think it’s fair to say there were 

fewer private sector employers than there were in the fall, but 



3048 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2009 

still a good number of them. And there were public sector 

workers there which I would expect . . . [inaudible interjection] 

. . . Well we’ll get . . . The hon. member is very impatient. 

We’ll provide that information to members opposite. 

 

And you know, Mr. Chairman, I would also say this. I think it’s 

important to note that there were public sector employers there, 

including the Saskatoon Health Region who are looking for 

nurses, who are looking for health care workers. There were 

other Crown corporations involved who need workers as well. 

So they attended both the spring and the fall job mission. 

 

I also want to say this. On both occasions, on both occasions the 

Saskatchewan Construction Association was there and, Mr. 

Chairman, I will say this. When the Saskatchewan Construction 

Association is there, we have them representing dozens of 

private sector employers. There are dozens of private sector 

employers, Mr. Chair, who are represented by the Construction 

Association. 

 

And do you know why they need workers? It’s actually a great 

story because, in the face of a unprecedented, worldwide, 

economic recession, Saskatchewan still had jobs posted on that 

website, saskjobs.ca. Saskatchewan was still creating jobs when 

others were losing jobs. And employers like the contractors and 

the construction companies from across this province knew that 

they needed construction workers, in part because of the 

business climate we have and the other reason is because the 

unprecedented investment in infrastructure this government has 

made. 

 

So there were those who were public and private sector 

employers. We will provide the specific information to 

members opposite about the participation in both job fairs that I 

believe were successful — successful in terms of the families 

that came back to the province, successful in terms of getting 

our message out. And, Mr. Chairman, may I say this, at a 

fraction of the cost, more successful than any Future Wide 

Open TV campaign meant to burnish that old government’s 

image that ever came from members on that side of the House, 

Mr. Chair. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I’ll be very interested to see the 

information that the Premier has now committed to provide 

about the number of private sector employers, because my 

understanding is that, in fact, the number of private sector 

employers were very, very few in number in this most recent 

job fair in Toronto. The Construction Association, fair enough. 

But my understanding is, beyond that, there were very few 

private sector employers there. Most of the employers or 

representatives were of the public sector — nothing wrong of 

course with public sector jobs. 

 

I heard the Minister of Advanced Education saying from his 

seat, well the Crowns were there and they were looking for 

workers. Well I understand that SaskEnergy was there, that 

we’ve spent the money to have SaskEnergy in Toronto at the 

jobs fair. And while the jobs fair was on, I accessed the 

SaskEnergy website where job postings are listed and I found 

there was one posting. One posting at SaskEnergy, and I’m not 

sure we need to go to Ontario to find someone to fill that job. 

I’m sure there are people in Saskatchewan who could fill that 

job. 

 

But, Mr. Chair, I have another question for the Premier. A 

friend actually attended the job fair in Toronto and reported 

back to me, in fact has sent me a picture of a sign that, I’m told 

at least, was at the job fair in Toronto. This sign says, and I 

quote, Mr. Chair: “Premier Wall Parkway.” I would like to ask 

the Premier: was this sign a part of the Saskatchewan display at 

the job fair in Toronto, and why would we have a sign up at the 

job fair that reads Premier Wall Parkway? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, I’m not sure if there was a 

little street sign that had Premier Wall on it or not. I know that 

officials in the ministry did a very good job of promoting the 

province of Saskatchewan. We tried to go down and 

complement that promotion by getting on Canada AM and by 

getting on all of the media outlets there. And I’m not sure how 

many points in the polls we’ve risen because there was a little 

green Premier Brad Wall sign at a job fair in Toronto, because 

most assuredly that must have been the reason, given the 

implications coming from the hon. member. 

 

You know, Mr. Chairman, I also want to answer some of the 

questions that came. In addition to the dozens of companies 

represented by the Saskatchewan Construction Association, we 

also note that Travelzoo Inc. was there. Access 

Communications was there. North Ridge Development was 

there, Mr. Chairman, and the Canadian Home Builders’ 

Association was also there. We also know that Co-operators 

Insurance was there. And so there was a mixture of private and 

public sector employees. And you know, Mr. Chairman, there 

may have been, there may have been a Premier Brad Wall street 

sign at the top of one of the booths. I’m not sure if there was or 

there wasn’t. 

 

What I am sure of, Mr. Chairman, is that no government more 

effectively, in terms of using taxpayers’ dollars — I believe this 

— no government has worked as hard to tell Saskatchewan’s 

compelling story in the most efficient way possible with the use 

of public money than our government. And we’re going to do 

more of the same, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I want to 

just change the page a little bit here and speak to a couple of 

issues that are within my critic responsibilities. And this is 

something that we actually had asked the minister on too when 

we were in estimates and it has to do with . . . I think first and 

foremost I’d like to say, you know, congratulations on reaching 

a permanent formula for revenue sharing, having that put in 

place. I know that it is just at a percentage of the final total 

which, I believe that that’s been put in place, that next year we 

will move to a full point of the PST that will be distributed to 

the municipalities. 

 

But one of the questions that we talked to the minister about, 

and he was a little bit soft on it, so I thought we’d ask the 

Premier, that the distribution of revenue sharing — or I believe 



May 12, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3049 

it’s been renamed the operating grants — to the municipalities 

is done on a per capita basis. And while often we are using 

statistics that are quite outdated, the stats that are used this year 

were from 2006, and we all know that there has been many 

changes made. We have seen shifts in population. We have seen 

some communities grow substantially — many in the province 

— but yet the province is still using outdated statistics. 

 

I guess I would ask the Premier if he has ever considered 

changing the formula so that the distribution is done differently 

on more current numbers than outdated Stats Canada numbers. 

 

[16:00] 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — I want to thank the hon. member for her 

question. I hope this leads to a whole bunch of discussions 

about population in the province. I will want to wrap up in 

answer to the question of the previous member if I may also 

point this out, Mr. Chairman. I am proud of the government’s 

record of promoting the province of Saskatchewan. We’re 

doing that outside the province. We actually do promoting, so 

we get coverage in CNN [Cable News Network], in Fortune 

magazine. 

 

But the hon. member for Nutana says, so did we. So did we. 

Lorne Calvert’s delivered more than $11 million, this is . . . 

Well, I won’t quote, Mr. Chairman, I’ll just use the language of 

the Assembly. The previous government under the now Leader 

of the Opposition spent $8 million on a Wide Open Future 

campaign. Was it half of the ads ran right here in the province 

of Saskatchewan, people who are already convinced about the 

wide open future? 

 

They ran a $75,000 equalization campaign, which was 

self-serving. Never forget the Raise a Flag for Fairness 

campaign for $268,000, and the whole security fence-gate that 

happened as a result of that. 

 

Remember the budget of the former member, Andrew 

Thomson? Remember that budget, where they ran TV ads with 

the minister of Finance actually in the ads trying to burnish the 

government’s image? And when we asked him in the legislature 

why was the minister of Finance in the budget ads, he said, well 

because it’s my budget, Mr. Chairman. It’s my budget. I 

remember that. I guess we could find Hansard about it. 

 

Mr. Chairman, between budget advertising, between advertising 

at the end of that government’s reign when they were about to 

be defeated, that kind of advertising we saw, Mr. Chairman — 

Real Careers and Real Life campaign, pre-election Department 

of Health learning campaigns, over $1.6 million — that’s part 

of the reason why the member for Nutana is sitting over there 

and we’re sitting over here, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, we’re using the same system 

for analyzing revenue sharing as we’ve inherited from the 

previous administration. We do use StatsCan numbers. Part of 

the reason is because they’re the only numbers that the federal 

government will accept in terms of joint federal-provincial 

initiatives. 

 

Some municipalities are asking for flexibility. Some 

municipalities are saying to us, look, if we’re dealing with a 

provincial-only issue, can we move away from Statistics 

Canada numbers because we don’t believe that they may be as 

accurate or as up to date as others. We are, as the Minister of 

Municipal Affairs has said, we’re prepared to look at some 

other options. 

 

But I would say this: one of the challenges we have is that 

Statistics Canada have a hard time keeping up with the growth 

in the population of the province of Saskatchewan. It is a 

challenge. It is a challenge, and we need to be flexible and 

cognizant of the fact, and I know the Minister of Municipal 

Affairs is talking to his stakeholders. 

 

I would also say this, that we relied on some consensus amongst 

rural municipalities and urban municipalities when we came up 

with this revenue-sharing plan for the province, a promise we 

made in the election and kept, Mr. Chairman, a promise that 

had been made by members opposite for a good long time that 

they never got around to keeping. So we’ll be flexible as we 

work with municipalities. But I will say that when it relates to 

initiatives that will potentially engage the national government, 

we are — by their request — forced to use Statistics Canada 

numbers. We may have some flexibility on other matters; 

maybe the hon. member will bring those forward. I’ll be happy 

to do my best to answer those questions as well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Chair, the Premier, I hope he’s more 

on top of things in government than he is answering questions, 

because he’s always been a question behind and had to add a 

little bit to it at the end of each one. 

 

When he talks about advertising and he was critical of 

advertising that the former government did about the province 

and within the province, both inside and out, I’m wondering in 

passing as I was listening to him — there’s been many, many 

billboards around the province with his smiling face on it, put in 

place by the party saying, you know, we’ve reduced the debt by 

40 per cent which is very good . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Higgins: — But, Mr. Chair, I would wonder if the Premier 

will have his smiling face on billboards when the debt starts to 

rise at the end of this year as projected in his budget. I’m sure 

he won’t, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when he also talked about the per cap system of 

the distribution for operating grants for municipalities, he talked 

about a promise that they had worked on. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

it’s easy to keep a promise when the previous government did 

all the work. There was a great deal of groundwork that was put 

in place and . . . 

 

The Chair: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. I recognize 

the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, a great deal of work went into the 

preparation for the final revenue-sharing formula, groundwork 

that was done around many round tables that were held over 



3050 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2009 

many, many months. It wasn’t thrown together like a quick 

environmental plan, Mr. Chair. So a lot of work went into it. 

 

The Premier also made the comment that the only numbers 

acceptable for revenue sharing and for distribution were the per 

cap numbers. But I’ve been told that Alberta, if your 

community funds itself, a census of its community, that those 

numbers will be considered by government to use for 

distribution on a per capita basis and also that in British 

Columbia, that they use a process of not only building from 

Stats Canada — which is always a lag time of four to five years 

before you will see new numbers — that they will do some 

comparisons with health numbers within the province and use 

that for distribution of provincial funds across the province. 

 

So I was wondering if the Premier would have a look at it and 

give it some consideration for municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, as far as I can tell — and we 

just had a meeting with SARM; I just had a meeting with the 

city mayors — to the hon. member, I would say we just had a 

meeting with the city mayors where they thanked the 

government for the revenue-sharing deal. And we had a meeting 

with SARM, and SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 

Association] was there. 

 

We had another meeting with the SARM directors not very long 

ago; a number of MLAs attended. And I can honestly say . . . 

and I’m not discounting that this may be an issue and that we 

would be prepared to look at it. But I can honestly tell the hon. 

member we just have not heard this concern from 

municipalities. Again I’m not discounting that it exists. And 

would we be willing to look at some changes? Potentially we 

would be, Mr. Chairman, if the stakeholders are interested in it 

and again if it accommodated the federal situation. 

 

I would want to correct the record though, Mr. Chairman. The 

hon. member seems to think that all work on the municipal 

revenue sharing was done. And then I would invite the hon. 

member to take — hopefully she asks another question — to 

tell us exactly what formula was in place if the work was all 

done. The most difficult thing about municipal revenue sharing 

isn’t saying you’re going to do it; it’s actually getting it done. 

The most important thing about long-term, own-source 

municipal revenue sharing is figuring out a formula that makes 

sure that revenues grow with the province when the province 

grows and contract if the province is not growing. 

 

Well this didn’t exist. Again, Mr. Chair, there wasn’t a formula 

that existed. It wasn’t agreed to by the parties. In fact it was this 

government, it was this government that proposed one point of 

the PST. It was this government that offered that to 

municipalities and, I think, was well regarded, well received by 

our municipal partners. Then of course the negotiation took 

place over the share between urban and rural and what part 

would be implemented in phase 1 and implemented in phase 2. 

 

I will say that the hon. members opposite made a commitment 

— as they did many things just before the last election — that 

they would get it done and may have initiated some meetings. 

That hon. member from Douglas Park was the minister, I 

believe, and I think he had engaged in some dialogue and asked 

officials to engage in some dialogue that was not a formula. So 

there was a lot of work to be done. 

 

And you know, she started her question talking about party 

advertising. Mr. Chair, let me just say this. The billboards she 

refers to were paid for by the Saskatchewan Party. And there 

may be billboards in the future that promote what we’re trying 

to do for the province when the debt continues to go down in 

the future, when income taxes and other taxes continue to go 

down, and when investments go up. 

 

Compare that if you will — since she’s brought up the subject 

of party advertising — to her own advertising for the 

leadership, where if you look very carefully at the end of it, it 

says, and I quote, “Deb Higgins is the NDP’s best chance for 

taking on Brad Wall and ensuring [and get this] that the NDP 

takes its rightful place on the government side of the House.” 

That’s an advertisement from that hon. member. 

 

And therein lies the problem for the NDP. They have learned 

precisely nothing from the last election, Mr. Chairman. They’ve 

learned no contrition. They’ve learned no humility. They stand 

over there and publish their own party advertising that says it is 

their rightful place to be on this side of the House. It is owed to 

them. It is an inalienable right for the NDP to govern this 

province. 

 

Mr. Chairman, we take a markedly different view. We believe 

it’s up to the people of the province to pick who their 

government is. And we think, Mr. Chairman . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — And we think this. We think that we want 

to make sure that we earn the choice they made. The people of 

the province made a choice on November 7, 2007. They didn’t 

choose those who think it’s their rightful place to be the 

government, like the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

They chose another party. And we’re going to work very hard 

to earn that choice in the weeks and the months ahead. And 

again, we know the date for the next election when they will be 

able to choose again. 

 

But I hope, for the sake of the hon. member who’s engaged in a 

leadership campaign, that she can learn a little bit from an 

election loss, that the NDP can learn just a little bit of humility 

and a little bit of an understanding that they ought not to take 

anything in this province for granted, lastly the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Chair, I’m very glad that the 

Premier is reading my election for the leadership website and 

looking at the information that’s been put out. I know he looks 

for good ideas wherever he can find them, so he’s not above 

taking them from there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one other question that I have for the Premier: has 

the process used by the Government of Saskatchewan for RFPs 

[request for proposal] changed in the last 18 months? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, I thank the hon. member for 

the question. The issue of RFPs and tendering government work 



May 12, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3051 

is important to the government. And the member is right. We do 

look for good ideas wherever we find them. We noted some 

ideas already discussed in the leadership campaign — not from 

the hon. member but from her rivals. One was about an idea for 

electric tractors, which the hon. member for Kindersley . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . The hon. member says the length of 

the cord is problematic for it. But who knows? Honestly 

though, who knows what technology may come from that. 

 

And, Mr. Chairman, I will tell that hon. member we will 

continue to take good advice wherever we find it, including 

from members opposite. 

 

And on that point, just before I get more directly to the 

question, we hope that members opposite will join the all-party 

committee that this Assembly has tasked with looking at the 

issue of renewable and other sources of energy, Mr. Chairman. 

We had said that the NDP, with their EDP [energy development 

partnership] proposal, had some good ideas with respect to 

engaging the province on talking about future generation needs 

in Saskatchewan and how we can make sure they’re sustainable 

and affordable. And I think the principle of what was proposed 

was a good idea by members opposite. 

 

We have now passed in this House a resolution engaging the 

committee, the all-party committee in that same process. So 

that’s a good idea that we’ve taken from the NDP. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the RFP policies of the Government of 

Saskatchewan have not substantively changed since the 

previous administration. There were occasions under the 

previous administration where there was no competition at all 

for certain contract work they’ve done, some in Executive 

Council that we’re aware of and other pieces of work done and 

tendered to certain consultants. 

 

We have engaged in the competitive tendering, in competitive 

requests for proposal, and requests for information processes, 

Mr. Chairman. But as was the case with the previous 

government, there may be occasions where there some was 

some sole source contracting done with consultants. And the 

ones I can think about in particular that were discussed in this 

legislature last week were consultants who had been sole 

sourced by the previous administration and who were doing 

follow-up work on some of the work they had done previously 

and seemed like the logical successor. But perhaps the hon. 

member has specific questions, and if she does, I’ll do my best 

to answer them. 

 

[16:15] 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Mr. 

Chair, if I just might preface my question with a few remarks 

that in our parliamentary system, it is usual to have an 

independent officer of the Legislative Assembly or parliament, 

in this case the Provincial Auditor, to ensure that the funds that 

are expended by the government are in fact expended in the 

way that the government said they would be spent so that the 

Legislative Assembly would then have some comfort in terms 

of how the money has been spent before they provide approval 

for future budgets. That’s a tradition in our parliamentary 

system. 

 

It took about 85 years, I believe, in our system to move from a 

point where the funding for the auditor’s office was made truly 

independent of government by moving it to a review of the 

Board of Internal Economy. I think this was done in 1990, I 

believe, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I was very surprised in a recent Public Accounts Committee 

meeting in January — January 20 to be exact — to have 

government members of the committee saying things like, you 

know: “I think as the government, and we do this with every 

ministry, to every department, to go in and say lookit, where are 

the efficiencies?” in speaking of the auditor’s office, and then 

goes on to say: 

 

And the auditor’s department is really no different in that 

respect . . . But I think that’s still part of what we want to 

do, is to make sure that each department is looking for 

efficiencies that they can bring to the government . . . 

 

And then another member goes on to say — and I think 

misrepresenting something the auditor had to say — that, you 

know if you’re going to have the Auditor General of Canada 

look at review practices and so on, he said “. . . we wouldn’t be 

prepared as a government to finance that.” 

 

And you know, I’m doing a very quick overview of some of the 

statements that were made, and members can refer to the Public 

Accounts of that day, but the attitude of the members seems to 

be one of that the auditor’s office is just another department of 

government. And the question I have for the Premier is, what 

message is the Premier sending regarding the independence of 

the auditor’s office? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, we want to, obviously, be well 

served in this legislature and in this government by the 

independence of the Provincial Auditor. And questions from 

members on either side of the House about whether or not any 

office, including the auditor’s office, is running efficiently or 

not I don’t think belie the fact that the government’s priority . . . 

or undermine the principle of this government which is that 

there ought to be independence on the part of the Provincial 

Auditor. 

 

We relied on him to expose a number of issues in the previous 

government when we were in opposition. We rely on him to 

hold us accountable as well, Mr. Chair. 

 

Witness, for example, he wants to talk about the importance of 

transparency in the financial accounting and the planning of the 

government. We inherited a government that had stopped the 

practice of four-year projections in their annual budget, if you 

can believe it, Mr. Chair. They had completely stopped telling 

the people of the province about the government’s four-year 

plan or projections about revenues and expenditures in the 

province of Saskatchewan. We have immediately reinstated 

what was, I think, a long-standing tradition of the Romanow 

administration and very much a part of fiscal probity and good 

planning and transparency to make sure that four-year planning 



3052 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2009 

is in every budget. And as long as this government is serving 

the people of the province, it will be in every single budget, Mr. 

Chair. 

 

With respect to the specific issue the member raises, I have not 

seen the transcripts of the debate in Public Accounts. I can only 

tell the member this. From what I heard from what he said, it 

sounds like members are concerned about the efficiency of all 

arms of the government, as well as supportive of the 

independence of certain arms of the legislature, officers of the 

government, including the officers of the legislature, including 

the Provincial Auditor. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Can the Premier tell us what his 

rationale was in raising the question of the independence of the 

auditor’s office in that committee meeting? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, I’d ask the member to repeat 

his question and explain, please. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well again, what was the Premier’s 

rationale in having his members raise this question of 

independence in the committee meeting in January? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, I didn’t raise with our 

members anything that would have gone into the debate that 

ensued in Public Accounts. There was no conversation between 

me and members of the government who serve on Public 

Accounts with respect to the issue that he raises. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well then the question I would have, 

would the Premier be so kind as to ensure that the government 

caucus in fact respects the issue of independence of the 

Provincial Auditor’s office, that we don’t slide back in the kind 

of view of the Provincial Auditor that we saw in the 1980s in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

What is his view, for example, with respect to the Public 

Accounts Committee? Is it his view that the Public Accounts 

Committee is simply another committee of the Legislative 

Assembly? Or is it his view that the Public Accounts 

Committee has some special purpose in terms of scrutiny of the 

government spending? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — No, Mr. Chairman. We want obviously to 

enable the independent officers of this legislature to do their 

job. And we’ve appreciated the work of the Office of the 

Privacy Commissioner. The majority government members of 

this House initiated his reappointment. 

 

We obviously want to support the work of the Ombudsman. 

The majority members on this side of the House, together with 

members opposite, initiated his reappointment. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I can point out quite . . . In vote 28, the 

Provincial Auditor’s vote, Mr. Chairman, we see appropriations 

that have grown by $300,000. That’s an indication of our 

support for the auditor. 

 

I don’t know what is being inferred by the hon. member. I 

wasn’t there. I have not read the transcript. Unlike the previous 

government, there was no . . . Maybe this was the practice in the 

previous government: maybe the previous government, maybe 

the former Premier used to direct his members to do certain 

things in the Public Accounts Committee. I don’t know. I can 

assure the member . . . Maybe that’s why we got things like 

SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 

Company] and Murdoch Carriere and all of the long list of 

issues where transparency was sorely lacking on the part of 

members opposite. Maybe that’s what happened under his 

government. 

 

This Premier in this office doesn’t engage in influencing 

members of the Public Accounts to speak to the issues that the 

hon. member has raised. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, a question 

to the Premier. Leading up to the last election, it was your 

party’s position that once elected, you would implement spot 

loss hail. You had a review of crop insurance. Spot loss hail 

was not something that your government has chosen to 

implement. And I’m wondering if you can give us the rationale 

for a decision which really is breaking one of your promises. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, it’s true that we campaigned 

in the last election on our desire, should we be elected by the 

people, to improve the crop insurance program. For a good 

period of time it had been neglected by the previous 

government, and we saw the circumstance of coverage 

decreasing and premiums increasing and no apparent effort or 

desire on the part of the previous government to keep up with 

the demands from the agriculture sector that were changing of 

their crop insurance program. 

 

There was questions in the legislature about spot loss by 

members on our side of the House when in opposition, but what 

we campaigned on was a desire to improve the crop insurance 

program, Mr. Chairman. As was the case with so many 

Saskatchewan Party promises, it’s a promise that we’ve kept in 

18 months. The review is complete and now we have $155 

million increase in crop insurance funding which I believe is 

unprecedented and I hope that hon. member, as the agricultural 

critic, would want to support. 

 

One of the changes that did not occur, there was no move with 

respect to the spot loss hail issue. Mr. Chairman, the campaign 

commitment was to review and improve crop insurance. It’s a 

promise made, Mr. Chairman, and a promise kept. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Chair, your party spent a lot of 

time leading up to the last election talking about implementing 

spot loss hail coverage if you were going to become 

government. And what’s curious is that as soon as you had the 

opportunity to do so, you weren’t able to implement this 

particular promise that was made by all of your members in 

rural Saskatchewan and certainly across the province and in 

rural constituencies. 

 

Now I hear them yipping and yapping over there, you know. 

And one of the things I’ve learned is, if you throw a rock and 



May 12, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3053 

you hear a yelp, you know you’ve hit a dog, Mr. Speaker. Well 

obviously we’ve hit a dog over there because there are a lot of 

people in our province, particularly rural Saskatchewan, that are 

curious as to why this government has not implemented that 

particular election promise. 

 

They’re also curious as to why there’s been very little support 

for the hog industry in this province. And if you look at the 

numbers of producers in this province, they have dramatically 

dropped since this government came to office. Now if you look 

at the number of hog producers, we see very few hog producers 

remaining in the province. And if you look at the number of 

livestock producers, you see a significant drop in the number of 

producers. And we’ve lost about a third of our herd. Can the 

Premier indicate to us what the hog industry and the livestock 

industry can expect, given their very sorry record thus far? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I admire — I do — I 

admire the courage of the member for Nutana. And I admire her 

ability to put that question with a straight face especially 

considering, Mr. Chairman, that she was involved on the very, 

very front benches of a government that made a special craft out 

of ignoring rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Chairman . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Who took to new heights, Mr. Chairman, 

any government’s ability to ignore such an important segment 

of the province of Saskatchewan, rural Saskatchewan; who 

closed hospitals across rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Chairman; who 

ignored calls for changes in improvements to crop insurance — 

that’s their record; who did nothing on the education portion of 

property tax, year after year after year; who were in Mexico 

when federal agricultural programs are being planned in Canada 

and affecting our farmers, Mr. Chairman — that is their legacy; 

who ripped up GRIP [gross revenue insurance program] when 

they were first elected, Mr. Chairman. That is the legacy of that 

member opposite. 

 

She served on the front benches and the Executive Council of 

the government that could have made a lot of different choices. 

They could have done more than talk about education property 

tax relief, but they didn’t. They could have done more than 

talking about crop insurance programs, but they didn’t. They 

could have done more than just talking about being engaged 

with the federal government on new agricultural program for 

producers, but they didn’t. 

 

So I will happily, happily go through the list of things that our 

government has been able to achieve for producers, 

acknowledging while I do it that the plight of the cattle industry 

and the hog industry is growing, especially that is the case with 

the hog industry in Canada, with unique pressures and new 

pressures as a result of H1N1 virus. 

 

But, Mr. Chairman, I will gladly point out to that hon. member 

that the Minister of Agriculture’s budget saw an unprecedented 

increase of $177 million this year; that there’s a $20 million 

increase to the crop insurance program, bringing the program 

budget to 155 million total; 5 million in new provincial funding 

for a new federal-provincial Growing Forward agreement; 9 

million to transfer the administration of AgriStability, to bring it 

back home, Mr. Chairman. 

And as for cattle and hog, while we are very disappointed with 

the actions of the national government to not join with our 

program, we didn’t just ask them to do something. When they 

said no, regrettably, we acted, Mr. Chairman. We acted within 

weeks of our government being sworn in with a $90 million 

loan program for the cattle industry and the hog industry. And 

then just earlier this year we moved, Mr. Chairman, on a $71 

million cattle and hog support program. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the program is not the solution. The solution 

would have been more help from the national government, in 

part, and the solution also would have been borne up, I think, on 

a track record inherited from the previous government that is 

better than it is. 

 

[16:30] 

 

Mr. Chairman, perhaps the most important rural issue that a 

provincial government can deal with— because a lot of them 

are federal in nature; they deal with trade issues — the one area 

where the provincial government has some control, almost a 

unique control to deal with in terms of agricultural support, is in 

the issue of education property taxes. 

 

We don’t need the federal government to move on that issue. 

We don’t have to worry about WTO [World Trade 

Organization] to move on that issue. We don’t have to worry 

about international trade agreements to be able to move on that 

issue. We can as a government if we choose, we can have 

MLAs if we choose, who when they campaign on reducing 

taxes, property taxes for farmers, act on it when they have the 

chance to do it. 

 

And that member opposite campaigned in the last election for a 

party whose education portion of property tax plan completely 

ignored farmers in the province of Saskatchewan. So I think she 

will forgive, I think she will understand if rural Saskatchewan, 

if farmers, if ranchers, if hog producers, if SARM, if APAS 

[Agricultural Producers Association of Saskatchewan], take her 

questions and comments in this Assembly with more than a 

grain of salt. Because, Mr. Chairman, their record is talking, 

and the record on this side of the House is acting. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well you know, Mr. Speaker, it’s fascinating 

how the Premier likes to forget that it was the NDP government 

that moved to a 60/40 for agriculture producers in the province 

of Saskatchewan at a time when we didn’t have oil at $140 a 

barrel, Mr. Speaker. We moved to a 60/40 in the late 1990s and 

the early part of this millennium, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And in fact agriculture producers, both those with cultivated 

land and pasture land, enjoyed what the SSTA [Saskatchewan 

School Trustees Association] had been calling for, where 40 per 

cent of the taxes for education would come from the local 

landowner and 60 per cent would come from the province. That 

was not the case for those people who lived off farm in towns, 

villages, and cities — that was an area that we had work to do. 

 

The other thing I will point out to the Premier, at a time when 

oil was at, if we were lucky, $50 a barrel, there was a significant 

increase in the livestock industry in this province. In fact we 



3054 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2009 

grew the herds. We saw a significant growth of our cattle herd 

in the province. Now we also saw a significant increase in the 

number of hogs that were being produced in this province. 

 

Now 18 months after this government comes to office, we’ve 

lost a third of our herd and the hog industry is in the tank and 

there are very few hog producers relative to what there were 18 

months ago. So the Premier can say that they’ve done all of this 

work in the area of agriculture. I do note, I do note that the 

budget increase that these members have implemented in the 

Ministry of Agriculture is all around risk management. It’s 

around AgriStability and changes to crop insurance. 

 

Now the member from Humboldt will say, well that’s what they 

want. I think I recall, when the NDP was in government, CAIS 

[Canadian agricultural income stabilization] was always funded, 

Mr. Speaker. CAIS was fully funded by the NDP government. 

CAIS was funded 100 per cent. It was funded by the NDP 

government. 

 

Now they like to have a different spin on it but, you know, the 

record is the record. And they can run around and mislead 

people as much as they want. But every budget, the CAIS 

program in the province of Saskatchewan under an NDP 

government was fully funded. 

 

So can the Premier please tell us, given that there’s been such a 

tremendous loss of our cattle herd, given that the number of 

producers that are producing hogs in this province have been 

reduced dramatically, is there any hope for those livestock and 

hog producers from this government? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, just for the record, the oil 

forecast in our budget is $48.75. That’s the oil forecast. She’s 

talking about what they didn’t do at 50 bucks a barrel. 

 

You know, that hon. member who asked the question may want 

to explain to rural Saskatchewan why they couldn’t move on 

property taxes when they were . . . What was the stabilization 

fund at when you left office? I wonder whether the hon. 

member can tell us — 500, $700 million? How big was the 

mountain of money? 

 

It’s funny. That member often points to the billion-plus dollars 

this government inherited. Well it didn’t just occur on 

November 7. If it was there on November 7, that money, it was 

there on November 6. It was there on October 6. It would have 

been there, largely, in September, especially based on their own 

numbers. 

 

Well she’s saying it was. Then where was their help? Then why 

didn’t they do anything? We knew the cattle industry was 

struggling. We had to put together a loan program quickly after 

forming government to the tune of $90 million. The hon. 

member in her own heckling from her seat acknowledges, 

admits to the fact that they had the means. They just didn’t have 

the will or the desire to step in for rural Saskatchewan. And 

that’s the difference. That’s the difference. 

 

Mr. Chairman, as we speak in terms of hope, and we know that 

it takes more than $40 a head or what we’re able to even pay for 

hogs, but we know $11 million worth of cheques are going out 

as we speak. That’s for hogs alone. Some will say, well that’s 

not enough, and you know they’re probably right. We would 

like to have topped that up with another 60 per cent from the 

federal government. 

 

But when you combine all the initiatives of this government, 

Mr. Chairman, when you combine the education portion of 

property tax, when you combine the goodwill that I think is 

engendered by long-waited improvements to crop insurance, 

when you combine the fact that we’ve moved in southwest 

Saskatchewan with respect to a drought aid program in terms of 

a well-drilling program, when you combine the fact that we 

moved on the gopher issue on behalf of producers and rural 

municipalities in the province, when you look at all of those 

things I think that’s why you have people like Dave Marit, the 

president of the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities, saying this was the best budget in the history of 

the province for rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Chairman. 

 

So there is work to be done. Is there hope? Well there’s $11 

million worth of cheques going out to the hog industry. Thanks 

to the SARM administrators there’s aid going out to the cattle 

industry. We’re going to keep advocating with the national 

government for better long-term programs and for help with 

producers and, Mr. Chair, under the leadership of the Minister 

of Agriculture I think the best hope for farmers and for rural 

Saskatchewan is that those members are over there and the hon. 

member, the minister, and these members are over here, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. It’s a pleasure to join 

into the questioning this afternoon. Throughout this session, Mr. 

Chair, we’ve heard from a number of Saskatchewan people who 

are quite concerned with how the Sask Party’s grad retention 

program is leaving a large number of graduate students out in 

the cold, how they’re not benefiting from the program. 

 

When the Sask Party brought in their retention program they 

made two errors. The first error was excluding out-of-province 

graduates, and to their credit they fixed that problem so that the 

program was more similar to the previous NDP program that 

was available to people across the country. The second problem 

they made was excluding graduate students, master’s and Ph.D. 

graduates — the very individuals, when we talk about a 

knowledge economy, the people that are so important to 

fostering and growing that. 

 

A few weeks ago in committee I had the chance to ask the 

Minister of Advanced Education some questions about the 

graduate retention program. And I asked the minister if he was 

open in the future to expanding this program and to ensuring 

that all Saskatchewan students are treated fairly, ensuring that 

physiotherapists, M.B.A. [Master of Business Administration] 

grads, and M.A.s [Master of Arts], anyone pursuing graduate 

degrees, Mr. Chair, that these individuals would receive the 

benefit. So my question to the Premier today . . . And the 

minister, when I asked that question, he said he was open to the 

possibility in the future. 

 



May 12, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3055 

My question to the Premier is, is he open to this possibility? 

And if there is agreement on this issue, if they do understand, if 

they have heard from people through petitions and through 

visits to this legislature and through their offices, if they have 

heard that this is a major concern for graduates here in the 

province, where is the bottleneck? What is preventing this 

program from being fixed and operating as it ought to? Thank 

you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, thanks. I want to thank the 

hon. member for that question. He has been deliberate and 

focused in his effort to, I think, improve what is already a very 

good program. 

 

The challenge is here that there’s not a consensus amongst 

deans — even amongst, I would expect, some of those involved 

in postgraduate studies — as to the best way to ensure that this 

is the best environment for that kind of postgraduate study. And 

certainly we want to be a leader in this regard. 

 

I would say to the hon. member that governments can also 

invest in research and development. Governments can invest in 

direct student financial assistance. And here our government’s 

record is, I think, an improvement over the previous 

administration’s record in terms of that support. 

 

I think we can all do better. I think that’s part of what 

Innovation Saskatchewan’s going to help achieve. It’s a part of 

what the innovation agenda of the government will achieve. 

 

The hon. minister has said that he’s open to further 

improvements and, you know what, he’s got a track record on 

this issue of improving the program. We’ve heard him say in 

the past that perhaps the government should look at expanding 

the initiative to out-of-province postgraduates. That work 

happened. The review occurred and, Mr. Chairman, I’m pleased 

to report that minister came back and recommended we should 

make that expansion. 

 

That case was clearer though, I would admit, than with respect 

to expanding the program as it exists to postgraduates when 

there may be other ways to ensure that Saskatchewan is a leader 

in this regard. I would say . . . And there’ll probably be more 

questions from the hon. member. The short answer to his 

question is no, we wouldn’t rule that out. I wouldn’t rule it out. 

It’s one of the options that would be before the government in 

trying to make sure we have the very best climate possible for 

postgraduate studies and a climate that attracts postgraduate 

students and retains those who wish to remain in the province. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Throughout this session, 

we’ve also heard, a topic has been the issue of tuition. And this 

year we saw the NDP tuition freeze lifted, and students on 

university campuses are now facing tuition increases. 

 

While in the budget it was advertised as a 3 per cent tuition 

increase, we’ve seen in recent days when the rubber hits the 

road, actually not all students are being treated in the same 

manner and that the increase is certainly affecting some 

students more than others. In the colleges of Law and Pharmacy 

at the University of Saskatchewan, tuition will be going up 7.5 

per cent — so considerably more. More than double the 3 per 

cent that was suggested. 

Through committee and through question period I’ve had the 

opportunity, Mr. Chair, to ask about the so-called tuition 

management system or strategy and what this is about. And I’ve 

asked in committee to have this succinctly explained. 

 

To the Premier: with this tuition management system, can 

students in Saskatchewan now expect every year that tuition 

will be going up 3 to 7.5 per cent? Thank you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, there’s been a number of 

comments in the wake of the provincial budget. We’ve had 

people like university president Peter MacKinnon basically 

saying it’s time to proceed responsibly, proceed on a 

year-by-year basis. It’s time for the provincial government to 

properly fund universities and provide some longer-term 

funding so that we can, in fact, have the lowest tuition rate 

possible. 

 

You know — and, Mr. Chairman, notwithstanding the freeze of 

the last couple of years — what people can expect from this 

government is something quite markedly different from the 

record of the NDP where, over the course of their government, 

tuitions increased at the University of Regina by 88.6 per cent 

and where tuition at the University of Saskatchewan increased 

by 99.2 per cent. 

 

Mr. Chair, we see this budget providing $23.5 million to 

post-secondary institutions to limit those tuition increases to an 

average of 3 per cent. And I noted the comments of I think it 

was the U of R [University of Regina] students’ union president 

who said — and obviously they don’t want any increase at all 

— but they said, the spectre of 10 or 20 per cent is one thing; 3 

per cent seemed to be more reasonable. That’s the tuition rate 

hike that our funding would prescribe, knowing that there will 

be other decisions by the institutions that may see those tuition 

increases vary. 

 

But, Mr. Chairman, I’m proud of the government’s record of 

investing in post-secondary institutions and taking a longer 

view of the importance of affordable education and well-funded 

institutions, rather than what might have been the political 

expediency of tuition freezes that former New Democrat 

ministers of Finance said were not the right way to go, that 

governments who have lifted freezes have admitted were not 

the right way to go. 

 

[16:45] 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Certainly in times of 

economic uncertainty it’s important that access to affordable, 

quality education is a priority for the government, a priority to 

ensure that we don’t squander our future prosperity here in the 

province. 

 

Reading The StarPhoenix on the weekend, members of the 

Assembly and members of the public would have read the story 

on the cover that talked about the need at the university to shave 

$10 million yearly from its operating budget going forward on 

an ongoing basis. Clearly, Mr. Chair, the $10 million needs to 

be made up from a variety of areas, and faculty, staff, and 

students are concerned and want to ensure that the quality and 

the accessibility of education provided on our university 

campuses remains the top-notch level of education that it is. 



3056 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2009 

With this $10 million that needs to be shaved from the budget 

on an ongoing basis, there will be belt-tightening, one would 

assume in a variety of areas, from a variety of revenue sources. 

As costs are reduced, there will also need to be the need for 

increased revenue. And once again, Mr. Chair, this takes us to 

the issue of tuition. 

 

We’ve seen with the tuition management system that was put in 

place this year an advertised increase of 3 per cent, but we’ve 

actually seen an increase for many students of 7.5 per cent. So 

my question to the Premier is: with this ongoing belt-tightening, 

how much will his government, how much will they allow 

tuition to increase next year? Will 7.5 per cent be the new base 

increase? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, we’re going to keep — with 

respect to next year’s tuition levels and funding — we’re going 

to keep this government’s promise to fund post-secondary 

institutions in a way that’s consistent with a province that has a 

growth agenda, that understands the importance of those 

institutions as evidenced by our first two budgets where those 

increases occurred. And I noted the chairperson of the 

University of Regina talked about the generous increase in the 

provincial operating grant of 6.3 per cent or $4.9 million. I 

noted University of Saskatchewan officials talking about the 

generous level of funding from this government and increases 

that came forward. 

 

Mr. Chairman, my understanding of the story the hon. member 

is referring to, and I read it as well online, in The StarPhoenix 

report of the University of Saskatchewan undertaking its own 

internal review to find savings and efficiencies while they 

continue to deliver affordable and quality post-secondary 

education here in the province and to students from around the 

world . . . And by the way, I think that’s what we all should be 

doing. That’s what the Government of Saskatchewan should be 

doing. That’s what all post-secondary institutions should be 

doing. If we can find ways to find efficiencies while still 

providing affordable, quality services — in this case 

post-secondary education — why wouldn’t we do that, Mr. 

Chairman? Why would we as the government, why would I as 

the Premier want to discourage our universities from doing 

that? 

 

What we can do for our part, and I think the hon. member 

hopefully would receive this well, what we can do from our part 

as a provincial government is to properly fund these 

institutions, is to provide a longer term view of the funding 

that’s required by them so they can deliver those services and 

keep tuition low. 

 

I noticed that in the case of the University of Saskatchewan’s 

effort for efficiency, our minister’s already engaged with the 

students’ union president, with the university. I know they want 

to work together on what this might mean so the priorities of 

accessible education but quality of education can be achieved. I 

thank the member for his question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s Official 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I want to move to an 

area which I think of the issues that I want to raise with the 

Premier today, this is perhaps the one that I view as the one of 

most significance. But let me say before we get there, someone 

ought to just keep a little Hansard of today’s proceedings for 

future reference. 

 

I listened with much interest as the Premier was addressing 

some of the issues raised by my colleague from Saskatoon 

Nutana around the agricultural file regarding support for our 

livestock industry in the province, regarding property tax. Now 

I’m quite used to the fact that this government, as many new 

governments will do, engaged in a fair bit of revisionist history. 

It seems to be a great capacity of this government to revise 

history. 

 

You see I heard from . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . There, I 

heard it again — 16 years, nothing happened. And yet they 

blame us for everything. You know, even the Premier has 

admitted that something happened in 16 years. So I understand 

revisionist history from a new government or an aging 

government as they are now certainly doing. 

 

But you know, Mr. Chair, I thought this was a very telling 

thing. Maybe the Premier could just clarify the record here. 

When I became the premier of this province, the property tax on 

farm land in Saskatchewan demanded 60 per cent from the farm 

land; 40 per cent was paid for by the province. When I left 

office, 40 per cent was paid by the farmer off the land, and 60 

per cent was paid by the province. That change occurred, Mr. 

Chair, and now the revisionist history over there says, no, it 

didn’t. Well I think the record will stand. 

 

But what concerned me in the Premier’s response was this 

notion that the former government, the former government had 

a . . . The member from Wood River seems to want to engage in 

the debate. He should do it more often, as opposed to from his 

seat. 

 

Mr. Chair, the Premier indicated that a substantial amount of 

money was in the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. Now he’s had a 

change of heart from when he first came to government and 

described the circumstance as stark. But no, no, no, he now 

describes a substantial amount of money was in the fund. But 

then he implied, in his comments to the member from Nutana, 

that our government should have spent that fund out, that we 

should have spent those dollars, leaving a new government with 

nothing in the bank. 

 

Well now that’s something that members present should ought 

to watch for in the future. Because as we approach that 2011, I 

recommend that members in this legislature today and future 

members and members of the public ought to watch that any 

surplus that may be accruing isn’t just spent out in an effort to 

win an election. 

 

So I think the Premier needs to be very careful about suggesting 

that everything that a government accrues by way of a fiscal 

stabilization, or whatever account name they call it now, that 

ought to just be spent out before the election. I think, Mr. Chair, 

that’s an irresponsible approach to the provincial finances. 

 

Now I want to move to what I think in my view are some of the 



May 12, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3057 

most significant questions that I’ll want to address with the 

Premier today, and that has to do with our First Nations and 

Métis peoples. This is very, I think, straightforward — not a 

simple, but a straightforward question. 

 

Can the Premier today indicate to the House when he might 

expect that real, substantive proposals will come forward from 

his government in partnership with our First Nations and Métis 

peoples around the duty to consult and accommodate? When 

can we expect to see some real, substantive proposals? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, with respect to the hon. 

member’s preamble, will he not admit for this Assembly that in 

the last campaign their education portion of property tax plan 

had nothing additional for farmers, for agriculture producers? 

That’s the fact of the matter. They moved on rebates. Well it is 

the truth. They moved on rebates. We actually built on their 

rebate plan in our first transitional budget. 

 

But, Mr. Chairman, I welcome the scrutiny of Hansard. In fact, 

I would want to add into the record of Hansard with respect to 

our property tax relief, the example in the RM [rural 

municipality] of Winslow of a 10-quarter farm, under the 

Saskatchewan Party plan that’s implemented — it’s not a 

promise; it’s not a report; it’s done — a 2008 taxable 

assessment of $298,100, the 2008 education tax, $3,403; the 

2009 education tax, $2,364; the 2010 education tax, when fully 

implemented, $1,306. You save — you being the farmer at this 

RM of Winslow, Mr. Deputy Chair of Committees — save 61.6 

per cent as a result of our plan. 

 

Mr. Deputy Chair, that is a difference, and I’m prepared to have 

Hansard reflect the fact that in the last election campaign, each 

party proposed property tax relief. Only one party’s property 

tax relief program from the election included farmers, and it 

was the Saskatchewan Party. And we have now delivered on 

that, Mr. Deputy Chair of Committees. 

 

With respect to the issue of duty to consult and accommodate, 

Mr. Chair, I’m looking forward to this discussion and hope 

there are a series of questions. Because even before we want to 

seek others from outside of our borders in Canada or even 

immigrants from outside of the country to come and help with 

our labour shortage, even before that, we truly believe we want 

as a priority to see the greater engagement in our economy of 

First Nations and Métis people. 

 

And there are no easy solutions to this, I readily admit. There 

would have been practices of the previous government that 

worked, that had some success, ones that we have continued. 

There’ll be other things coming forward from this government 

we think have great hope for success. 

 

And by the way, it was interesting to hear in the preamble, if I 

may, the hon. member stand up and say, well the government 

now just blames us for what’s wrong and takes credit for 

everything else. He asked the question at the top of estimates. 

Was he here for the answer, when I have said today and I will 

say it again in the future, I’ve said it in the past, that we need to 

give credit where credit’s due — to give that previous 

administration credit for the things they did right. In fact I never 

and I’m not aware of other governments, other provincial 

governments, that have done it as much as the women and men 

of this government who have said, the previous government got 

a lot of things right. So I’m not sure . . . I mean I guess part of 

being opposition is that you just can’t be pleased. You can’t be 

pleased to get credit; you can’t be pleased to get blamed. And 

so it’s just, sort of this shotgun, this shotgun approach. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Chair of Committees, we started an historic 

process, and an historic round table, led by my colleague and 

friend, the hon. member for Kelvington, the Minister of First 

Nations and Métis Relations. We engaged in this process to 

develop a draft framework on the issue of the duty to consult 

and accommodate. And it is a process, not an event, to be sure. 

We’re working carefully with First Nations and Métis people to 

advance the issue, to advance the duty to consult and 

accommodate issue. 

 

We expect that round about early June will be the target date for 

the consultations that are happening now around the framework. 

There will be exploratory tables where we’ll sit down with First 

Nations and Métis people and hammer out some areas where 

admittedly there are some differences. There are concerns 

amongst First Nations with the process that we have outlined, as 

there were with the process of the previous administration. And 

then we hope by fall, certainly by the end of the year, to make 

that draft framework the final framework in a partnership to 

move forward. 

 

I began my comments by saying, Mr. Deputy Chair of 

Committees, that I had great hope for the duty to consult and 

accommodate process in providing some answers and solutions 

for all of us around the greater engagement of First Nations and 

Métis people in our economy. I believe that because of course 

the duty to consult and accommodate requires government to 

make sure that specific economic opportunities are part of this 

consultation, part of the accommodation. 

 

Increasingly, I can report with pleasure to the committee and to 

the hon. member, that companies are more willing all the time 

to engage meaningfully in the process and see it as an 

advantage to have First Nations partners, people from our Métis 

communities as partners, because they need, frankly, suppliers, 

businesses to supply them in these resource developments. They 

need workers, and they’re looking for partners. So I’m very 

hopeful about the future, notwithstanding the fact that there is a 

lot of work yet to be done and there are some difficult issues 

remaining to be resolved. 

 

[17:00] 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I gather from the Premier’s 

comments that we can expect therefore, or the legislation the 

people of Saskatchewan can expect, a more definitive proposal, 

if not an agreement, by the fall of this year. Is that . . . That’s 

correct. 

 

Then my question to the Premier is this: does he anticipate, 

does his government anticipate that at some point through this 

process there will be a serious discussion with First Nations and 

Métis communities about revenue sharing, about revenue 

sharing that may in fact be a component of the province’s 

response to duty to consult and accommodate? Does the 

Premier expect that we will reach that point in time, that day, 

when revenue sharing is a reality for our First Nations and 



3058 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2009 

Métis communities? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Chair, this is an important issue 

and I think it may highlight a difference perhaps between our 

two parties. And I invite the hon. member to state the position 

of his party on this particular issue. 

 

When the letter from the minister went out to begin the 

consultation process on the draft framework on the duty to 

consult and accommodate, it was December 22, 2008. The 

outstanding issues identified by the ministry in her letter include 

the following: sharing in the province’s economic growth; 

environmental stewardship; dispute resolution; traditional use, 

sacred site; territorial mapping; and finally, consultation 

capacity requirements. 

 

We have said to First Nations that we want to talk about sharing 

of the benefits of a growing economy with First Nations and 

Métis people. But as late as last week, we were also very clear 

and upfront with our First Nations partners that when it comes 

to revenue sharing, this government supports and recognizes the 

NRTA [Natural Resources Transfer Agreement]. The resource 

revenues of the province of Saskatchewan are at the purview of 

the province, of the Crown, or the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And so, with respect to the term revenue sharing, we’ve been 

pretty clear that if it is formulaic, if it’s tied to natural resource 

revenue sharing, then that is not the position of the government. 

 

We are prepared to move forward, Mr. Deputy Chair of 

Committees, on these issues, including capacity building, 

including sharing in the benefits of a growing economy with 

First Nations people. You could make a strong case, when you 

look at the respective budgets of different ministries, that that 

happens obviously on a daily basis. 

 

All of us as the people of the province share in the resource 

revenue of Saskatchewan. We all share very directly in what 

comes from those revenues. We share in the health care that 

comes from those revenues. We share in the infrastructure that 

comes from that resource revenue. We share in the education 

that’s paid for by that resource revenue. 

 

Beyond that though, in terms of a revenue-sharing deal with 

First Nations and Métis people, we’ve said that is not an area 

that the government is going to be moving. We have laid out 

where we want to move, aggressively, with First Nations and 

Métis partners in this letter of December 22, which I can supply 

to the hon. member if he has not yet seen it. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Yes, Mr. Chair, in fact I have seen it, and I’m 

aware of the government’s list and I have been aware, and the 

Premier has been very definitive in this today, that his 

government does not foresee or . . . I don’t know why members 

continually chirp from their seat. 

 

Mr. Chair, the Premier has made a very definitive statement 

today . . . Well the member from Thunder Creek’s the expert at 

it and we’d appreciate more contribution in other regards. 

 

Mr. Chair, I did not hear in the Premier’s answer . . . I 

understand his position, well the position of your government 

that revenue sharing is not going to happen, and it may well 

have been the position of our government, but I tell you, new 

occasions teach new duties. And the fact of the matter is we 

have to go, I think, to a deeper explanation of the reason why. 

 

We have a circumstance, Mr. Chair, where more and more 

we’re recognizing that First Nations and Métis peoples 

represent a level of governance, and we respect that and we 

honour it. We respect the level of governance that is established 

by the province in terms of our municipalities. And we have 

over years developed significant revenue-sharing capacity. This 

government to its credit has in fact increased that capacity. 

 

I am not sure that we may continue with the position that 

former government and current governments have held in terms 

of a fair revenue sharing with our First Nations and Métis 

people. And so I would like to hear from the Premier more of 

his thinking on the rationale why revenue sharing should not 

occur with First Nations and Métis peoples. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well I agree with the hon. member. This is 

an important debate to have, and I hear in the hon. member’s 

question that . . . And I would presume as the outgoing leader, 

he’s probably not wanting to presume on whoever the successor 

is on this issue, and so it does become a bit of an academic 

debate in terms of what the opposition’s position might be, but I 

agree not an academic debate about what the position of the 

government is. 

 

And so let me just say that we will look forward to — before I 

get into the specifics — we will look forward to a clarification 

of the position, Mr. Deputy Chair, of the opposition, the NDP, 

on this issue of revenue sharing. You know, when we’ve talked 

about it with First Nations leaders, it’s frustrating for me 

because it sounds like we’re engaging in semantics when we 

talk about sharing benefits of a growing economy or capacity 

building amongst the First Nations and Métis people so they 

can be more significantly engaged in our economy. It sounds 

like semantics, but it is not. It is not. 

 

I seek the engagement, as Premier and we do as a government. 

And the Ministry of First Nations certainly seeks the greater 

engagement of First Nations and Métis people in our economy 

and understand that resource development affords the 

opportunity for that greater engagement. That’s why we’re 

looking in the discussions that will now follow, that will happen 

before the draft framework becomes a final plan for the 

government, the issues of capacity building, the issues of 

sharing in the benefits of resource development especially with 

respect to traditional lands. 

 

But I don’t think we necessarily agree that it follows 

automatically that First Nations, like municipalities, require — 

or at least the relationship requires — that kind of a 

revenue-sharing formula. I respectfully disagree on behalf of 

the Government of Saskatchewan. We know that municipalities 

are a creature of the province and First Nations are not. They 

are that; they are first peoples of this country and have a unique 

relationship with the Crown. Yes, in part with the province, but 

significantly with the national government. 

 

So I think we are going to agree to disagree on the specifics of 

perhaps where the member is coming from. But we agree, I 

hope, I think we agree in principle. The levels of sharing then, 



May 12, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3059 

of benefits might be different that we are envisioning when we 

engaged in this debate. But I hope that the hon. member and 

perhaps members opposite will clarify this position and that this 

will form the subject of an important debate that we can have 

around the issue. 

 

I will say again for the record, the long-standing legal position 

of the Government of Saskatchewan — including, I think, for 

the previous government which the hon. member has 

recognized — and of Canada is that First Nations surrendered 

the Aboriginal title when they entered into treaties, and the 

province took control and ownership of the lands and resources 

under the Natural Resources Transfer Act, the NRTA of 1930. 

Mr. Chair, that remains the position of the Government of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, it was our position, and it was my 

position, and I recall providing a similar answer. I urge the 

Premier and the government, given the significance to our 

province, to be open to all possibilities. Let us not close any 

doors in building a future for this province. 

 

Let me say this to the Premier and ask him this question. While 

it was not perfect, an important agreement was signed between 

all of the provinces and the federal government in Kelowna. We 

called it the Kelowna accord. Fair enough. The new 

Conservative government decided not to proceed with the 

Kelowna accord. I do recall the prime minister at the time 

saying that that government would in fact provide a similar 

level of benefit, particularly to the First Nations communities 

across Canada that would have been benefiting from the 

Kelowna accord. It would have meant some large amounts of 

federal monies to the First Nations communities of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

My question is to the Premier. In his judgment, has the federal 

government honoured its commitment after ripping up the 

Kelowna accord? Have we seen from Ottawa what he would 

hope to see in terms of support for our First Nations and Métis 

communities in the province, particularly First Nations in this 

regard? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair of Committees, I want to thank 

the member for the question and say this, that we voted — as 

opposition, I was leader of the opposition at the time — we 

voted with the government in this Assembly when the 

government chose to be critical of the federal government for 

not proceeding with the Kelowna accord. And the position, it 

has not changed. It’s quite apparent though that the Kelowna 

accord is not going to be revisited. That’s the case. 

 

So what we’ve tried to do, from a provincial standpoint, is take 

the key elements of the Kelowna accord especially in the 

context of discussions, First Ministers’ discussions that I’ve 

been able to be a part of recently in Ottawa and earlier this year 

and late last year. We’ve taken that opportunity — as the 

federal government was asking for advice about a stimulus 

package and about its funding priority for the budget — to 

indicate that we need to deal with a number of issues for First 

Nations in our province. Specifically we need to deal with 

infrastructure issues on-reserve. We need to deal with the issue 

of the boiled water warnings that exist unacceptably on-reserve 

in Saskatchewan. We need the federal government to be 

funding, to taking its proper place in funding those 

infrastructure needs. 

 

I took the position, on behalf of the province at that meeting of 

the premiers and the Prime Minister, that we needed some 

federal investment in housing. We still have a housing deficit 

on-reserve in our province. And I’m focusing on-reserve here 

knowing that the Kelowna accord was not limited to on-reserve 

but focused significantly on the on-reserve demands of First 

Nations, of our first peoples right across the country. 

 

And I was grateful when, you know, Chief Joseph — with 

whom we’ve had animated agreements and disagreements on 

certain issues — I was grateful that he referenced recently, in 

the wake of a federal government announcement for 60 million 

new dollars in Aboriginal on-reserve housing, I want to 

acknowledge the fact that the Chief singled out the work we 

were able to do as a government to bring that forward to the 

premiers and to the Prime Minister. I hope that helped. I think it 

did. 

 

It wasn’t just me either. It was other premiers as well. Paul 

Okalik, the former premier of Nunavut, spoke as eloquently as 

I’ve ever heard anyone speak to these issues at that meeting, as 

did other premiers — Premier Doer in Manitoba and others. 

And we also engaged with the federal government. 

 

So the principles of Kelowna, we continue to pursue. And we’re 

not, in some cases, waiting for the federal government, Mr. 

Chair. We have taken the lead of the former government which 

quite appropriately stopped worrying about the jurisdictional 

fight with Ottawa and started funding some specific things with 

institutions like the Saskatchewan Indian Institute of 

Technologies. We’ve tried to build on that investment, Mr. 

Chair of Committees. 

 

We have also moved with respect to on-reserve education. 

Some would say, well don’t do that; that’s the federal 

government’s responsibility. But rather than have this 

frustrating and inane discussion about, go to the feds, go see the 

province, no that’s a federal, we’ve moved forward with 

investments in terms of adult basic education on-reserve. There 

is more work to be done, but what we’ve tried to do as a 

government is proactively seek the funding. The same, I could 

argue, would be true of the FNUC [First Nations University of 

Canada] funding. And the leadership’s been provided by two 

ministers there. 

 

So we’ve tried to pursue the principles that were agreed to at 

Kelowna and with mixed results in terms of federal government 

response. But recently, some very positive indication that on a 

bilateral basis, we’re making progress and we’re getting some 

federal investment on-reserve in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair. I 

guess I’d pick up where the Premier and the Leader of the 

Opposition have left off with regards to the different efforts that 

have been made throughout the years to transcend jurisdiction 

— would be one way to put it — in terms of delivering services 

that are desperately needed by First Nations people in 



3060 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2009 

particular, but First Nations and Métis people in the province 

and the question of different things that you take on-reserve or 

not. I mean certainly we as a government, in the fallout after 

Kelowna, took a decision very consciously that we couldn’t 

wait on the feds any more, and we were able to take those 

decisions in terms of moving to funding on-reserve education, 

in terms of funding for SIIT [Saskatchewan Indian Institute of 

Technologies], in terms of building on funding that had been 

there historically for FNUC, in terms of building roads to 

reserves, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[17:15] 

 

Certainly one of the different areas that were actively under 

consideration concerned housing and health care. We looked on 

with great interest to see the expansion of service with Muskeg 

Lake in terms of the long-term care facility that is now 

receiving funding as part of a pilot by the provincial 

government. 

 

But another one that is in desperate need is housing, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And certainly we looked with great interest on the 

words of Chief Joseph and what he had to say about the work 

that the Premier had done, and we welcome that work as well, 

Mr. Speaker, in the official opposition. 

 

But I also note that in February of this year, when the talk was 

around the federal stimulus package and what was coming 

down the line there, that in the position that the provincial 

government had taken, the Premier was quoted widely in those 

days as saying “We are not calling on the federal government to 

do anything that we ourselves are not prepared to do.” 

 

At the FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations] 

special assembly in Prince Albert in the middle of February, 

there was a resolution passed by that assembly calling on the, 

referencing that very quote, Mr. Deputy Chair, and calling on 

the provincial government to, if there were dollars coming 

forward, to match them in terms of what the federal government 

was prepared to do. And certainly an obvious place to start 

there, Mr. Speaker, would be with regards to housing. And in 

terms of the $60 million that has been put forward for the next 

two years, was there consideration on the part of the provincial 

government to match those funds in keeping with the challenge 

of the Premier at that time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, we have, I think, kept the 

commitment we made. When I made those remarks that the 

hon. member is quoting from, principally they were about . . . 

they can be applied to the thing, certainly; I’m not taking issue 

with that. But principally they were applied to our request for 

the federal government to do something with respect to our 

cattle and hog sector and infrastructure investments. 

 

And the case remains today. We were not just asking the feds to 

act unilaterally. We were prepared to do our own part, and I 

think we’ve demonstrated that as a government with the 

stimulus package. It was our own stimulus infrastructure 

investment announced in January and then what we’ve done to 

try to help our cattle producers and our hog producers. 

 

The same can be said on the housing issue, I would argue, Mr. 

Chair. Whether it’s a St. Mary’s housing revitalization project 

for about $8.3 million that isn’t directed on-reserve but will, I 

think, be of significant help to many First Nations people that 

are living on the west side of Saskatoon or the $2.3 million, 

12-unit housing development which will provide housing for 

Métis community in Prince Albert that was announced February 

4, 2009, or student housing at SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of 

Applied Science and Technology] in Prince Albert for the 

Prince Albert SIAST students — again there will be 

non-Aboriginal and Aboriginal residents of that. But it’s going 

to benefit the increasing number of Aboriginal people that are 

attending our post-secondary institutions. 

 

I would also say this, Mr. Chair of Committees, that the 

significant investment that our government has put forward to 

invest to an increased housing allowances for those who are 

most vulnerable in our province — too many of them 

Aboriginal, First Nations, and Métis people — the increase of 

up to 32 to $119 per month and the housing supplement 

increased 36 to $136 per month. The amount of money we’ve 

invested in that all speaks to the fact that we weren’t just simply 

asking the feds to move on housing issues as well, that our 

provincial government is also prepared to act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

and thank you to the Premier for that response. I guess I’d like 

to return to the question of duty to consult and accommodate for 

a moment if I could, Mr. Deputy Chair. Certainly the Premier 

has made some acknowledgement of the difficulty that that file 

is in right now and the fact that we’ve had a deadline that had 

been established for feedback at the end of February being 

pushed back to June, and the different things that have taken 

place on this file over the past year. 

 

We’ve seen the blockades with Enbridge and the kind of 

uncertainty that that throws into the economy and the kind of 

division that that can represent in this province. We’ve seen 

different court cases come forward, Mr. Speaker, that again the 

First Nations and Métis people are trying to assert their 

constitutional rights and their rights as they see them under the 

duty to consult. 

 

We’ve seen on the other hand numerous, numerous permits and 

licences go out, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and again, First Nations 

and Métis people living in the midst of plenty in such poverty. 

And in terms of them wanting a fair share of the economy, if 

they’re not going to get it through a politically negotiated 

process, Mr. Speaker, they will avail themselves of other 

avenues. And we’ve seen some of that already. 

 

So in terms of where the talks are at right now, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, the Métis Nation of Saskatchewan has rejected the 

position of the province of Saskatchewan. The Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations has rejected the position of the 

province of Saskatchewan. Will there be any changes made to 

the position of the province of Saskatchewan in the days going 

forward to try and loosen or to break through this deadlock? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Chairman, there are unresolved 

issues and lots of work to be done. And I want to say this very 

publicly and on the record, the situation with respect to the 

various members of certain treaty regions, Treaty 4 in 



May 12, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3061 

particular, and others that were very much engaged with respect 

to the Enbridge project, made a case. Enbridge came to the table 

with goodwill. But a key facilitator in what was an agreement 

that has advanced both sides in this regard — a key facilitator 

and someone that I want to recognize for her leadership on that 

particular very difficult issue — is the member for Kelvington 

and the Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations, who very 

much was part of the solution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — There would be others who would want to 

foment some discord that may lead to other blockades or other 

issues. There may be others that want to do that, but I’m proud 

to be a part of a government and to be a colleague who is 

simply interested in finding a solution so that First Nations 

people can feel that they were fully engaged in that project and 

in others. 

 

To be sure, there are other permeating issues that are yet 

resolved. That’s why we’re engaged in this consultation 

process. That’s why we’re going to continue to engage with 

First Nations and Métis people, and I hope that our government 

will be coming to a viable solution here in the months ahead 

before the end of the year. 

 

And, Mr. Chair, it’s interesting that this line of questioning 

from members opposite today, in light of the fact, in light of the 

fact that I believe a leadership candidate for that party has set 

the cause of relationships between First Nations and non-First 

Nations back further than anyone else that I can remember. 

 

And you don’t have to take my word for it, Mr. Chairman. I 

actually happen to think, though he may not admit it, that that 

hon. member who asked the questions with sincerity, I believe, 

in terms of his file, also didn’t appreciate the actions of Mr. 

Lingenfelter when he took the people of Waterhen and Flying 

Dust for granted, Mr. Chairman. The record is pretty clear about 

what the chief of Flying Dust feels about that particular leader 

of the NDP. And for the sake of First Nations relations and that 

party, though it shouldn’t concern us necessarily . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — No you shouldn’t. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, the hon. member says, no it 

shouldn’t. But let me just say then, in hopefully with the spirit 

of goodwill, that the member for Nutana, the member for 

Nutana if she’s serious about better relations with First Nations 

and Métis people in this province, she better work even harder 

to get her candidate, the member for Wakamow, or any other 

candidate, elected the leader of the NDP who has set back the 

cause of First Nations people and their relationship with 

non-First Nations more than anyone I can recall in recent 

history, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I was quite 

interested to hear the remarks from the Premier, and certainly 

there’s a process under way that will deal with the 

circumstances around Meadow Lake and what’s happened there 

and certainly any improprieties there are wrong and should be 

rightly condemned. 

But I find it interesting to get a lecture on this score from the 

Premier, Mr. Speaker, because he’s got in his caucus a person 

who’s very consciously kept out of the members’ statements 

over the past week and a half, that lost as a Member of 

Parliament for Churchill. And his reaction to losing that 

election, Mr. Speaker, was to talk about how First Nations were 

banana republics and how the election had been stolen on 

reserves. 

 

So I guess if the Premier’s looking to come forward with 

something around, you know, condemning these kind of 

activities or things that would divide the people of the province, 

perhaps he could tell us what he thought about the remarks of 

the now member from Meadow Lake. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we’re going to find 

the exact quote. But as it turns out, there’s another individual 

who has been frustrated by the electoral process and made some 

comments with respect to banana republics. And the comments 

came from the NDP leadership candidate, Yens Pedersen — 

who facing this phony membership scandal on the part of Mr. 

Lingenfelter who took for granted the people of Flying Dust 

and Waterhen — had this to say. Yens Pedersen said, and I 

quote: 

 

“These are allegations of the most serious nature . . . They 

strike to the very foundations of our democratic process. 

This is the type of stuff that you expect to go on in banana 

republics and not in Saskatchewan.” 

 

That is your leadership candidate, your former president of the 

party, Mr. Chair. And so I would encourage members opposite 

to understand that when people are frustrated about electoral 

process, they might assign that kind of description to the 

process itself, and not to any particular group involved. 

Apparently you can do that if you’re a New Democrat, but you 

can’t if you’re a member of any other party. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair. I 

think the Premier’s stretching a bit to make the comparison, but 

you know, we understand how it’s very much in his interest to 

try and do that. 

 

I guess I’ve got something a little more recent, a little more real 

time in terms of the debate that’s been going on back and forth 

across this Chamber, Mr. Deputy Speaker. When the Leader of 

the Opposition and the Premier were talking about the question 

of resource revenue sharing, the member from Wood River was 

yukking it up about, well who wouldn’t want revenue sharing. 

You know, the Scottish people . . . Who wouldn’t want revenue 

sharing? 

 

So I guess, you know, does the Premier equate the question of 

resource revenue sharing with what’s happening with First 

Nations and Métis people in the province? Does he share the 

opinion of the member from Wood River in deriding it in that 

way? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, we’ve said pretty clearly 



3062 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2009 

and have demonstrated by the consultation process under way 

that we’re prepared to look at capacity-building issues. We’re 

prepared to work with First Nations and Métis people and 

companies to ensure that they’re engaged to a greater extent in 

the economy, that we are prepared to invest in post-secondary 

education for First Nations, to invest in education for First 

Nations, that we’re prepared to lead in terms of attracting 

housing investment from the national government and make our 

own investments as well, Mr. Chairman. We have indicated that 

what happened under the previous administration, a 

duty-to-consult agreement that didn’t involve any consultation 

with First Nations people, was not enough. 

 

But, Mr. Chair, I want to be very clear here, and I invite that 

member to be clear as well, because I assume, unlike the 

previous member, he’s not going anywhere. I assume that he’s 

going to be in this House or plans to be in this House for some 

period of time, even in the new caucus, led by the new leader. 

And so I invite him to go on the record now, on behalf of his 

party, as the First Nations and Métis Relations critic, as to the 

NDP’s position on revenue sharing in respect of the NRTA, in 

respect of what this provincial government believes to be the 

purview of the provincial government. 

 

We are not changing that position, notwithstanding our interest 

in engaging First Nations people. Will he do that? He wants to 

talk about what members may or may not have said on the 

record. Will he put something on the record in terms of his 

party’s position on revenue sharing for First Nations? Will he 

do that now? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Chair: — Order. I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — I’ve got a lot of questions and I’ve got a lot 

of things I want to say to the member from Swift Current, but 

because of the time situation I’m going to have to make sure 

that my questions are very short and succinct and to the point. 

But for the member from Swift Current, could you advise me as 

to, besides your own cabinet colleagues and your own MLAs, 

which other people do you consult when it comes to northern 

issues. 

 

[17:30] 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman of Committees, as you know, 

we have a minister in place who is working with respect to 

working on the issue of Northern Affairs. 

 

Mr. Chair, we have demonstrated action with respect to 

investment in northern Saskatchewan. I think back to the 

stimulus package that we approved in January where, from a 

population standpoint, a great disproportionate amount of the 

investment that we provided to municipalities for important 

municipal infrastructure projects happened as a result of this 

government’s efforts. 

 

Mr. Chair, we rely on the New North for important advice and 

counsel in terms of what’s needed from a local governance 

perspective, and especially some of the utility issues that are 

being faced by northern communities. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I look forward to questions from that member 

opposite because, you see, the difference between our side of 

the House and that side of the House with respect to Northern 

Affairs is that we haven’t just consulted with northern leaders 

and northern communities, we’ve acted. And I look forward to 

providing a list of that action and those investments to people of 

northern Saskatchewan. 

 

I look forward as well to the hon. member from Athabasca 

perhaps providing a bit of an update in this House as to whether 

or not he still supports his preferred leadership candidate, Mr. 

Lingenfelter, who would so take First Nations people at Flying 

Dust and Waterhen for granted. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, let me give the member from 

Swift Current a bit of advice in terms of what he’s done for 

projects or progress for northern Saskatchewan. So far we’ve 

seen from the Minister of Highways, cancelled road projects. A 

lot of projects were cancelled. We’ve seen our economic 

development regions cut down from four to two. We’ve seen 

our northern revenue sharing trust account capital budgets 

reduced, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We also will see that the latest effort of the Sask Party in 

northern Saskatchewan is to try and get FFMC [Freshwater Fish 

Marketing Corporation] to get rid of the monopoly without a 

game plan in place. We’ve also seen that they’ve cancelled a 

northern economic regional development fund, Mr. Deputy 

Chair. We’ve also looking at the whole notion of issuing 

permits without permission or knowledge of people impacted. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, you look at all the cancelled projects, all the 

non-action, and all of a sudden you begin to realize that the 

North is not being served — right from the Ministry of First 

Nations and Métis Relations to the Ministry of Highways. 

 

Now one of the questions that I was going to ask, in northern 

Saskatchewan there is some trouble brewing on this whole 

notion of duty to consult between the Métis people, between the 

First Nations people, and the municipalities. On this whole 

notion of duty to consult all three groups want to be in a 

position to negotiate on the duty to consult. 

 

To the member from Swift Current: what position are you 

taking when it comes to northern municipalities on the whole 

notion of . . . 

 

The Chair: — Order. There’s starting to be some conversations 

going on. I would ask the members to respect the member that 

has the floor. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, there’s a number of examples 

very recently of our government engaging with the northern 

municipalities. Obviously the duty to consult and accommodate 

involves the Métis Nation of Saskatchewan, and so therefore 

very directly and indirectly it involves Métis communities. And 

in some cases in southern Saskatchewan, Métis locals as well. 

 

I note with interest that since this government came to office, 

and perhaps it’s part of the discussions we’ve tried to advance 

with industry, that La Loche has come to an agreement with the 



May 12, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3063 

Oilsands Quest project. One that they’re excited about should 

. . . and we believe not should but when that project starts to 

bear fruit economically for the province. 

 

But I also want to acknowledge some of the, well the . . . that 

member has a habit of providing information which may not be 

fulsome to this Assembly. I think we saw that just moments 

ago, we’re kind of getting used to it by now. I think we all got 

used to the fact that, we’ve all read the Hansard of when he was 

a Liberal member and how he used to absolutely take 

broadsides at the NDP government about terrible roads in the 

North. And we can go through some of them if he likes. And 

how they ignored the North. 

 

And then he became the Highways minister and nothing really 

changed, Mr. Chair. He became the Highways minister . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — The member may want to . . . He never lets 

facts get in a good way of a rhetorical flourish. But that 

notwithstanding, the member may want to reflect on the New 

North grant that was offered in April to study feasibility for 

regional waste management for 50,000; improvement of 

electrical service to northern communities, $15 million; and 

STC [Saskatchewan Transportation Company] bus service up 

north to northern Saskatchewan that was expanded. Yes. 

Amazingly enough, that was that bus line that somebody said 

the government might privatize someday. More than that, we’ve 

expanded services and we’ve done it right up in northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Northern residents are going to benefit, of course, from 

investments in water and sewer projects. Improvements to the 

schools in Beauval, Buffalo Narrows, Pinehouse, and 

Ile-a-la-Crosse, $1.2 million — that’s May 2008. Cell coverage 

in Denare Beach, Pelican Narrows, and Pinehouse. You’d think 

that member, when he was on the government side, would have 

got that job done but they were too busy putting up them towers 

at a farm near Shaunavon for some reason. I’m not sure why. 

 

$22 million worth of highway improvements in Prince Albert, 

August 2008; government funding for a new school in La 

Ronge, $17 million, September 18, 2008. More money for 

northern taxi operators, September 2008; 133,000 for the 

building communities program and a new culture and 

recreational facility in Sandy Bay. And the list goes on, Mr. 

Chair of Committee. Northern grants capital program renewed 

for a total of $7.2 million, Mr. Chairman. 

 

There’s work to be done. We view the North . . . And I heard 

the Minister for Highways and Infrastructure, in the course of 

debate not very long ago, talk about the importance of investing 

in northern Saskatchewan because that’s so much of where the 

wealth of the province is. That’s where the economic activity is 

today in many respects and where it will be in the future, and so 

we have to make sure we’re investing in the infrastructure in 

northern Saskatchewan. We’re off to a good start, but I readily 

admit there’s more to be done, Mr. Chair. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the member from Regina Rosemont. 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. The Sask Party 

has provided a plan that provides very inequitable property tax 

relief to Saskatchewan residents. The facts are this: in 

Saskatoon and Regina, Saskatchewan’s two largest urban 

centres, property owners are receiving either a tax increase, no 

reduction, or a marginal reduction. More, that’s a status quo 

circumstance. There has been no significant reduction for 

property owners in either city. 

 

But using the government’s own data, property owners in the 

town of Canora, the Minister of Education’s riding, are 

receiving a 48 per cent decrease. Does the Premier think this is 

fair and just? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — You know, Mr. Chair, for far too long in 

this Assembly . . . And I haven’t been here that long. I’ve been 

here since 1999. But I certainly heard from my colleagues, the 

member for Kindersley who’s been here a lot longer, and 

member for Cannington, been here a really, really long time, 

but I know, I’ve heard them talk about how it was a little bit 

frustrating for them to see day after day the then governing 

NDP drive a wedge between rural and urban Saskatchewan, 

how they would pit rural against urban Saskatchewan day after 

day, both in their actions and in their speeches. 

 

Think about the question that that member just asked. The hon. 

member has apparently no regard for the fact that this is an 

assessment year. And so assessments are going to change in the 

province disproportionately, depending on where you are. If 

you are in an area where real estate values have climbed at a 

greater rate, assessments will have changed. And so therefore, 

had we not acted with our property tax initiative, taxes would 

have moved way up. But as we know now in terms of 

residences, for almost all on the residential side, taxes are going 

to go down, some more than others. 

 

In a place like Canora or any other small town — where there 

has been growth, by the way — they’re applying to our 

Saskatchewan infrastructure growth initiative to build new lots 

for homes. But still the growth has not been as exponential or as 

robust, I should say, as it has been in Saskatoon and Regina. 

And so therefore by definition, because of the forces of 

assessment, the same new tax system which seeks to address an 

injustice that I think is a holdover from the old system, and 

wants to do it over two years, by definition it’s going to have 

some areas — rural communities for example and even some 

cities that haven’t grown as fast — where assessments haven’t 

changed as much, some will get less relief than others. 

 

And in year two when we implement the plan, some of that will 

be addressed, but not all of it because we will still have this 

disparity in growth rates. That’s the reason for this, I would say 

to that member. That’s the reason for it. It isn’t because the 

Deputy Premier represents Canora, as he would incredibly point 

out on the floor of this legislature. What are you inferring, 

member? What are you inferring, sir — that the Deputy Premier 

orchestrated the property tax relief to benefit his home 

community at the expense of people in Regina and Saskatoon? 

 

I’ll tell you what the Deputy Premier of this province did. He 

led, together with the member of Rosetown, an aggressive 

consultation process on the issue of property tax. And more to 

the point, he led in the cabinet and in the caucus and later in this 



3064 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2009 

legislature the most long overdue property tax relief, the most 

long overdue tax relief this province has ever seen. 

 

We have moved, sir, in areas where you lacked the courage to 

do it, and I’ll defend our record on that issue with you any day, 

any week. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. It’s worthy to 

note that the deputy . . . 

 

The Chair: — Order. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — I guess I’ll bring to the attention of this 

Assembly that the Deputy Premier also rejected the actual 

Reiter report that was handed before him in that it, I’ll remind 

the Premier, that in fact it doesn’t cost less to deliver education 

in rural Saskatchewan; it costs more. 

 

But to another topic, Mr. Chair, as it relates to teachers within 

our province: is the per cent increase that was provided to 

nurses, through the collective bargaining process, what teachers 

can expect through their next process? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, I know the member is in a hurry 

to change the subject, but if I just may. There were some quotes 

I think he should remember with respect to this government’s 

move on property tax, which isn’t easy. I mean, there are 

businesses in this province who are looking at an increase 

because of assessment changes, and that’s why I don’t think our 

work will ever be done on the education portion of property tax. 

 

The good news is this: what we now have as a result of the 

actions of this government is a provincial tax, a provincial mill 

rate that we will be able to, as the province can afford it, adjust 

downward to ensure the competitiveness of our economy. But 

as for the steps we have taken, let me just say that the realtors of 

our province said, “It shows a government that isn’t afraid to 

tackle big issues and make tough decisions. That’s a very 

positive message after decades of delay.” 

 

Roy Challis of the School Boards Association said, “I think it’s 

better than the other way.” Dianne Woloschuk of the 

Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation said the government’s $241 

million increase to the operating grant is a positive indication of 

the government’s commitment to properly fund the pre-K to 12 

education system. And finally, from the Regina chamber, 

“We’re on the right track [he says of the province]. Before we 

were on the wrong track and now we’re now moving in the 

right direction.” With more work to be done, I readily admit to 

that hon. member. Phase 2 happens in a year from now. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I’m not going to negotiate any contracts with 

teachers or any public sector employees on the floor of this 

legislature. And obviously we understand the importance of 

being able to retain and recruit teachers to the province of 

Saskatchewan, as well as nurses or other professionals. And we 

will let those on respective bargaining committees do the work 

of collectively bargaining the contract between the teachers and 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Chair: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Premier will be 

surprised that my first question isn’t about health. I’m looking 

at the report from the Chief Electoral Officer that was tabled in 

the House last week. And it has come to my attention that — 

actually came to my attention through a constituent and has 

come to the attention of the Chief Electoral Officer also — that 

there has been . . . A defeated candidate has used the electoral 

list, the voters list as a marketing tool to promote his business. 

And there is a constituent whose name was on the voters list 

and nowhere else, but because of this invasion of their privacy 

is in danger. The name on the list was kept just to the voters list. 

Everywhere else it was not on the list. But because this person 

has now used the voters list as a marketing tool, this person 

feels that they are now in jeopardy — either their person or 

their property. 

 

I don’t think it’s funny. Those of you who are mocking this, I 

don’t think it’s funny. This person is extremely worried and has 

made the report to the Acting Chief Electoral Officer. And in 

the electoral officer’s report on recommendations on voter 

registration, there are four recommendations about the limits 

that a voters list can be used for. And I’m asking the Premier if 

he will support the recommendations of the electoral officer and 

actually make this happen, so the next election this will not be 

able to happen at all from now on. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — I would just say, Mr. Chair, that the hon. 

member raises a very important question if these events have 

transpired as she has highlighted them. And I think we all as 

individual members have an obligation and a responsibility to 

take these matters up on behalf of constituents. 

 

I’m just hearing of this for the first time. I’m guessing that the 

Privacy Commissioner would be a place for the member to take 

this matter up, for them to look at it very carefully. I would say 

that the same would be true potentially of the Chief Electoral 

Officer for the province. 

 

I would say that I think we all want candidates in political 

parties who respect the privacy of the voters list. That would be 

the case with our party. I’m sure it’s the case with the members. 

But I invite her to use those channels to pursue this particular 

issue. And again, I don’t know. Lacking the details or specifics, 

it’s difficult to comment further at this time. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s Loyal 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — I thank the Premier for his most recent 

response. I recognize that we are drawing close to the appointed 

hour, and of course we, in opposition, would love this to go on 

for hours more. 

 

That said, I do have one issue that I want to raise with the 

Premier because it’s not been clear the position of his 

government on this matter, and that is the potential or lack of 

potential of his government becoming a funding partner in any 

potential future nuclear reactor in the province. Now I’ve 

referenced comments that have been made by the minister 

responsible — that being the member from Thunder Creek — 



May 12, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3065 

on June 17 last year, 2008, when asked about the potential of 

the province having any involvement, any funding involvement 

in a reactor. He said, and I quote, “. . . the people of the 

province, zero . . . this is not going to be built with taxpayers’ 

dollars . . .” 

 

However, in November of the last year, November 27, that 

same member and minister said to the public, I guess all options 

are on the table. 

 

So we’ve moved from a position of a categorical no to a 

position of now saying on behalf of your government, Mr. 

Premier, that all options are now on the table. He did say at the 

time he still favoured full private sector funding, but he did 

indicate all options are on the table and it could be “a 

partnership.” 

 

Then on December 1 of last year, of 2008, the same minister 

said, “SaskPower could be involved. We are not philosophically 

hidebound to do it in any particular way.” 

 

And so we see some movement and shifting of the position. He 

does indicate at that same period of time, in December 2008, 

that he says, “When the people of the province are educated to 

the risks involved in cost overruns and so on, they will agree 

that the private model is the best way to go.”  

 

Well, Mr. Premier, you’ll know from the UDP report that a key 

finding of the UDP report would indicate that any reactor that 

has been built in recent memory, and I just quote the report: 

 

To date, the cumulative risks of nuclear new build have 

been too large for the private sector to bear alone and 

governments have played some form of facilitation in the 

implementation of nuclear powered projects in all 

jurisdictions. 

 

It’s a very straightforward question. To the Premier, Mr. Chair: 

what is the position of his government in terms of public 

involvement or public funding, taxpayer involvement or 

taxpayer funding, for any potential future nuclear reactor in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, the preference of the 

Government of Saskatchewan, should there ever be a nuclear 

power plant in the province — and we want to respect the 

deliberations of the UDP and the all-party committee of the 

legislature that’s going to be tasked with looking at not just 

nuclear power but solar, wind and other renewables, and 

hydrocarbons and hydro from other provinces — I would say 

that the preference of the Government of Saskatchewan is that 

the role of the government would be limited to a power 

purchase agreement, that we would be willing to purchase 

electricity from sources, from generators. That would be the 

case with respect to a potential nuclear reactor power plant, 

should one ever be sited in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I just have a 

quick question. I know we’re getting close to the end, but last 

fall, as part of the Throne Speech and part of the budget, the 

government announced great increases in terms of the 

Saskatchewan Income Plan, now known as the seniors’ income 

plan. And there were concerns raised at the time that, was there 

enough thought given to all the details of this plan. 

 

Over the course of the past few months we’ve had letters sent to 

our office concerned about some of the fine print. And what I’m 

talking about . . . And I know the government likes to talk about 

the fact that it’s doubled the number of seniors who are in the 

seniors’ income plan to 18,000, but we understand, and I’ve got 

the response from a written question that I asked about how 

many single seniors, type 1, living in special care homes receive 

SIP [seniors’ income plan], and it’s 730 in the past month. 

That’s almost 1 in 20 seniors who receive SIP are in the special 

care homes and, Mr. Chair, unfortunately these folks only can 

receive a maximum of $25 a month. 

 

And the letters we’re receiving as we see the promotions from 

the government that talk about “Seniors’ Chat” here — I’m 

quoting from the Minister of Health who talks about, “I’m very 

pleased to tell you about an exciting new initiative that provides 

a huge boost.” Well in fact it’s not a huge boost for 730 seniors 

and, in fact, the irony of this, Mr. Chair, is that many of these, if 

not all of them, in January received an increase on their fees at 

the special care home of $20 a month. So not only did they not 

see more money, they actually saw less money. 

 

And my question is to the Premier: will he look into this? This 

is one that many seniors are saying is grossly unfair. And will 

he look into it? Will the cabinet look into it and remedy this as 

quickly as possible? Thank you very much. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — I want to thank the member for his 

question. We probably don’t have to go into the past. At least 

I’m sure the hon. member doesn’t really want to revisit what 

has happened with the SIP program since 1992 when the 

consumer price index rose 41 per cent but the SIP was never 

increased by the government. 

 

We’ve not only increased the assistance, but the member will 

know we made changes to the threshold so that more would 

qualify, 10,000 more seniors will qualify. Now because this is 

dependent to some extent on the income for certain seniors, 

some seniors benefit more than others. Some seniors who have 

a higher income are going to benefit to a lesser extent than other 

seniors who have an income. 

 

So that’s one of the challenges with the program as it was 

constructed originally. I would say though that it’s more than 

passing strange that this could go unadjusted for a decade and a 

half, for a decade and a half by the previous administration and 

then the line of questioning or the line of attack or criticism is, 

well it’s not enough for everybody. 

 

I think you could fairly say there’s never enough in terms of 

what could be provided for people who have need, but there is 

an income testing component to this depending on what seniors 

earn, and we have 10,000 seniors who are now getting a benefit 

of some kind that never benefited before. And we have 

significant increases in the actual payment for others, not for all 

admittedly because of the income situation of each senior 

citizen. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s Loyal 



3066 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2009 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. We are rapidly 

approaching the appointed hour for our adjournment; therefore, 

I just want to take this opportunity before we depart, and I’m 

sure the Premier will want to do the same, in expressing our 

thanks as an opposition, my own personal thanks to the officials 

who have joined the Premier today in the Chamber, who have 

assisted the Premier in his answers and comments. But I want to 

say, Mr. Chair, that they are in many ways representative of the 

entire Saskatchewan public service and so, by issuing and 

offering our thanks to them in this Chamber today, we do offer 

thanks to the entire Saskatchewan public service. 

 

I want to extend best wishes to Mr. Garven as he returns to 

work at the University of Regina. I want to congratulate both 

the Premier and Mr. Moen who will be taking the responsibility 

of deputy to the Premier. I think on both cases a very wise 

choice — my congratulations to both. 

 

I have appreciated the time that the Premier has given to us this 

afternoon. I have memory of not being let off the hook quite 

this easy in terms of the time allotted, but I appreciate the 

Premier’s answers, I appreciate his stamina, and I do want to 

wish him well — at least up until 2011. So thank you very 

much, Mr. Chair. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, I want to take this opportunity, 

before we vote these estimates off, to thank the officials that 

have joined me here today, and I’m grateful for the help they 

provided. And I also especially, through Mr. Garven, thank the 

rest of the civil service of the province of Saskatchewan who 

have to deliver on the things that we decide on here in this 

Assembly and in the cabinet, and do so in a professional 

manner with service to the people of the province as their 

number one priority. 

 

I think it is still very true of Saskatchewan that we have a civil 

service that other provinces look to for leadership and example, 

and we only can hope to provide — all of us in this House, I 

know — provide the leadership that ensures that that tradition 

would continue. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I am particularly mindful of the fact that I’ve 

had two Premier’s estimate sessions with Garnet Garven who 

has served his province mightily as he helped the brand new 

government find its way and get established, and really laid the 

groundwork for us to be able to achieve the campaign promises 

that we offered up not very long ago now — just 18 months ago 

— and also to ensure that the footing we had was solid in terms 

of providing good governance, one that is, as he often would 

say, one that is reflective of the values of Saskatchewan people. 

 

And perhaps it’s a little unorthodox, but because this is the last 

opportunity I’ll have to sit beside him in estimates, I would just 

ask, invite my colleagues to thank Garnet publicly for the work 

that he has done. Thank you, Garnet. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, I’m going to have the 

opportunity I hope later this week to ask for leave to make a 

few comments about my colleague, the member for Riversdale, 

the Leader of the Opposition and the former premier, and I am 

looking forward to doing that. 

 

No matter what happens in the course of debate over estimates 

or whether or not, regardless of what might be read into 

comments from me or others, that there was much 

accomplished under the hon. member’s leadership for the sake 

of the province, things that we are benefiting from today as a 

government. No matter what may be read into that by members 

of the House or anyone else, I can just say for the record it is 

sincerely meant. We have had those conversations, frankly, 

privately. 

 

I am mindful of The StarPhoenix editorial as well, not long ago, 

that called us the luckiest government ever, the new 

government ever. Still, we are endeavouring to do the right 

things with that good luck on behalf of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And I hope to be able to add a little bit to these remarks about 

my friend, the hon. member for Riversdale, on the occasion of 

his last or near-to-last appearances in this Assembly later this 

week. So I thank him for the questions that he has asked today. 

I thank all members for their questions as well. And with that, 

Mr. Chairman, I guess we are prepared to vote these off when 

we have the opportunity to, after officials leave. Thank you 

very much, Mr. Chair. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Chair: — We’re on Executive Council. We’re under 

central management and services, (EX01) for the amount of 

4,875,000. Is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. Premier’s office, (EX07) in the sum of 

549,000, is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. Cabinet secretariat and cabinet 

planning, (EX04) in the sum of 1,516,000, is that sum agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. Communications office, (EX03) in the 

sum of 1,484,000, is that sum agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. House business and research, (EX08) in 

the sum of 481,000, is that sum agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. Members of the Executive Council, 

(EX06) statutory vote, is that sum agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 



May 12, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3067 

The Chair: — Carried. 

 

Resolved that there be granted to Her Majesty for 12 

months ending March 31, 2010, the following sums for 

Executive Council, 8,905,000. 

 

Is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. 

 

[Vote 10 agreed to.] 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I move that the 

committee rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The Chair: — It has been moved by the Government House 

Leader that the committee rise, report progress, and ask for 

leave to sit again. Is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. 

 

[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of committees. 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the committee 

to report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? I 

recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this House 

do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. This Assembly stands 

adjourned until tomorrow afternoon at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 18:04.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3023, 3024 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3023 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3023 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3023 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2024 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3024 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3024 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3024 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3024 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3025 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3025 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3025 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3025 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3025 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Two of Canada’s Greenest Employers 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3026 

 Tribute to the Best Neighbourhood in Saskatoon 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3026 

 Saskatchewan Co-operative Fisheries Conference 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3026 

 Celebrating Literacy and Fostering Learning 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3027 

 Family First Radiothon 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3027 

 United Way of Regina Tribute Luncheon 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3027 

 Saskatchewan’s Forest Industry 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3027 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Supply of Physicians for Stem Cell Program 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3028 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3028 

 Utility Rates and Greenhouse Gas Emissions 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3029 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3029 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3030 

 Effect of Power Generation on Greenhouse Gas Emissions 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3031 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3031 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3032 

 Environmental Plan 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3032 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3032 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Support for High-Needs Youth in the Saskatoon Area 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3033 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3034 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3034 

 Standing Committee on Human Services 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3034 

 Standing Committee on Private Bills 

  Allchurch ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3036 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 94 — The Profits of Criminal Notoriety Act 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3034 

 Bill No. 63 — The Saskatchewan Housing Corporation Amendment Act, 2008 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3035 



 

 Bill No. 66 — The Witness Protection Act 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3035 

 Bill No. 49 — The Ambulance Amendment Act, 2008 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3035 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 General Revenue Fund — Executive Council — Vote 10 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3036 

  Calvert ................................................................................................................................................................. 3037, 3045, 3056 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3043 

  Atkinson ......................................................................................................................................................................... 3045, 3052 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3048 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3051 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3054 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3059 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3062 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3063 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3064 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3065 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 


