




















































Hansard: May 07, 2009


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 60A  THURSDAY, MAY 7, 2009, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2995 

 May 7, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟ll just 

rag the puck for a while while our guest gets seated. Mr. 

Speaker, on August 26 — the year was 2008 — a new star 

began its ascendancy in the American political firmament. The 

occasion was the Democratic National Convention in Denver, 

Colorado, and the speaker — that rising political star — is our 

very honoured and special guest, Mr. Speaker. And if I may, I 

apologize for not requesting leave of a bit of an extended 

introduction and hope members will indulge me in that our 

guest is very special who‟s joined us today — both of them who 

have jointed us today. 

 

Governor Schweitzer electrified the crowd at the Democratic 

National Convention on that day with his speech. He was the 

talk of all of the pundits. I remember watching that speech, Mr. 

Speaker. I remember watching the CNN [Cable News Network] 

panel who had panned away from the speech. I remember Wolf 

Blitzer referencing the fact that the panel was missing maybe 

one of the best speeches of the convention. And then the talk of 

that particular speech, the content of it and how it was presented 

dominated a lot of the news of that day and the next day in 

terms of those of us who are political junkies and follow North 

American politics. 

 

He said, among other things in the speech, and I quote, “I am a 

rancher who has made my living raising cattle and growing 

wheat and barley and alfalfa in Montana, a beautiful place with 

soaring peaks and pristine rivers and endless prairies.” He went 

on to say, “I‟m probably a little biased, but I think it‟s the . . . 

[best] place in the world to raise a family, to start and to grow a 

business, and to build a community.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, with great respect to our guest, in that of course he 

is wrong. However he went on to say much that we agree with. 

Not only that, he went on to say much that inform our own 

actions, in forming our own decisions to work with the state of 

Montana and the governor‟s vision that Western North America 

can lead in the development of sustainable energy technology to 

provide a clean energy future for growing economies on our 

side of the continent. And in this we agree. In fact in this we 

have a partnership, I believe, that we‟re building together. We‟ll 

take the next step of that later this day. 

 

So I would ask all members to welcome the Governor of 

Montana. He is also the Chair of the Democratic Governors 

Association, Mr. Speaker, and has an impressive biography. 

Before he entered politics, he oversaw the building of a major 

irrigation project in several countries, supervised the building of 

Saudi Arabia‟s largest dairy farm. The governor has a global 

perspective on issues, Mr. Speaker, and he is a friend of our 

province. I think he‟s a friend of those who advocate for 

sustainable energy futures for provinces right now and places 

right now that rely heavily on hydrocarbons. 

 

And he‟s joined today by Nancy, his wife, the first lady of 

Montana, who herself has Canadian connections, I believe born 

in the province next door that we won‟t mention and then 

moved to Billings, I think, at the tender age of eight or nine if 

I‟m recalling correctly. 

 

And so these are wonderful guests. We‟re so very honoured that 

they‟ve joined us today in the Assembly. I appreciate the 

members‟ indulgence for this extended introduction and invite 

them to help me welcome the governor and the first lady of the 

great state of Montana to our legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join on 

behalf of the official opposition and bring greetings to the 

governor and his wife and welcome them here in Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I note that Governor Schweitzer is part of 

this burgeoning democratic presence in the United States, which 

is very, very important, I think, not only for the United States 

but for North America and for the world. And I think, with 

respect, I might suggest to Governor Schweitzer that he might 

like to have a name for that, and it‟s called the New Democratic 

Party. And so I think that if he wants to borrow something from 

Canada, he can do that. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, here in Saskatchewan we have . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, here in Saskatchewan we have 

many strong ties with Montana — economically, socially — 

but, I think, primarily in a lot of ways through our families. And 

I know in my family some of the people came north to 

Saskatchewan from Minnesota in 1903. Another group went to 

Havre, Montana and became strong citizens — Havre, in that 

area. And one of the most famous Montanan citizens was a 

fellow named Bill Farden who started Fishing & Hunting News, 

and that‟s one of my relatives that we‟re very proud of on the 

Canadian side of the border. 

 

But we also brought back from Montana, Louis Riel, and he 

caused all kinds of change in our province. And so I think that 

we need to thank Montanans for educating Louis Riel about 

how to work hard here. 

 

We also have one of our very famous writers, Guy 

Vanderhaeghe, who‟s written The Englishman’s Boy. And 

there‟s a movie about that, and that movie is primarily set in 

Montana and Saskatchewan. He‟s working on another book in 

that area. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, my point is, by mentioning all of these 

things, is that we have very strong ties to Montana from 

Saskatchewan, and we know those are going to continue in the 



2996 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2009 

centuries ahead. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Before I recognize other members, I as well 

have a couple of introductions I would like to make to the 

Assembly. Joining us today, and I‟d like him to give us a wave, 

is Mr. David Hamilton who is with us this morning. Mr. 

Hamilton‟s retired from the Legislative Assembly of the 

Northwest Territories where he served as Clerk and Clerk 

Assistant for 23 years, has also served as their Chief Electoral 

Officer. And members will also know Mr. Hamilton was here to 

oversee the Métis election a couple years ago. So I‟d invite 

members to welcome Mr. Hamilton to our Chamber. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Also seated in the front row we have a young 

gentleman and his fiancée who have joined us. I‟d like to 

introduce Captain Levon Bond and his fiancée, Amber 

Hagerman, who are seated in the Speaker‟s gallery, if they 

could give us a wave. 

 

Captain Bond was born and raised in Regina, is now working in 

Canadian Air Force Intelligence at the Canadian NORAD 

[North American Aerospace Defence Command] Headquarters 

in Winnipeg. As the senior intelligence duty officer, Captain 

Bond works with the intelligence, surveillance, and 

reconnaissance division. Captain Bond served in Afghanistan in 

2007 and is preparing to deploy to the Middle East to work with 

the United States Air Force as a part of Operation Foundation. 

 

Levon is in Regina visiting his father, Kerry Bond, who works 

for the Legislative Assembly in the broadcasting services 

branch. And also congratulations to Levon and Amber as they 

plan their wedding this summer. I‟d like to invite members to 

welcome the Bonds too. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was going to 

ask for permission for an extended introduction, but given 

what‟s transpired previously, I think I‟ll dispense with that 

formality. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to you and through you, today I have the 

opportunity to welcome seven individuals who are visiting and 

learning about Saskatchewan as part of the Canada School of 

Public Service Advanced Leadership Program. This program is 

designed to prepare talented federal and provincial leaders who 

already serve as very senior officials for the next level of 

leadership. These are the deputy ministers, the commissioners, 

and the military leaders of the future. And I will ask each of 

them to stand as I introduce them today. 

 

In your gallery, Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to introduce Anil Arora, 

assistant chief statistician, Statistics Canada. I‟d like to 

introduce Ian Burney, chief trade negotiator, Foreign Affairs 

and International Trade. Also with us today is Kin Choi, 

assistant deputy minister, Health Canada. We have Belaineh 

Deguefé, senior director, Elections Canada; Major General 

André Deschamps, assistant chief of air staff, Canadian Forces; 

Bob Paulson, assistant commissioner with the RCMP [Royal 

Canadian Mounted Police], and Gina Wilson, senior assistant 

deputy minister, Indian and Northern Affairs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask you and all of our colleagues to join me in 

welcoming these individuals to our legislature today. Thank 

you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In your 

gallery is another group of distinguished guests that really do 

represent the future of our province, and that is 13 students 

from Aden Bowman Collegiate in Saskatoon which happens to 

be located in the constituency of Saskatoon Nutana. These are 

grade 12 students, Mr. Speaker, and they‟re spending the day in 

Regina. And they‟re spending some time at this Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

Joining them in the gallery is Jeff Balzer and Katie Kehrig who 

are both teachers at Aden Bowman Collegiate. I‟ll be meeting 

with these distinguished guests after question period, and I 

think we‟ll have a picture and a few refreshments in the 

members‟ dining room. And I would ask all members of the 

Assembly to join me in welcoming these 13 grade 12 students 

from Aden Bowman and their teachers. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for First 

Nations and Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I‟m also very pleased today to have members from my 

constituency, grade 8 students from Porcupine Plain Composite 

High School, in your Assembly. There are 26 students and with 

them today we have their teacher, Lawrence Schmidt, and the 

chaperons, Kim Lechler, Suzie Pegg, Dean Frank, and Ivan 

Fletcher. 

 

These students are from one of the 20 communities in 

Saskatchewan who are benefiting from the major schools 

upgrade and build in our province. And I‟d ask all of my 

colleagues to join me in welcoming these students who will 

graduate from the brand new school in Porcupine Plain when it 

is finished by the time they get to grade 12 or sooner. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 

and through you, I‟d like to introduce two very special guests 

sitting in your gallery this morning that have come down from 

Saskatoon to watch this morning‟s proceedings. 

 

I‟ll ask them to give a wave when I introduce them. The first is 

Don Klassen. He‟s the owner-operator of Crestview Auto 



May 7, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2997 

Service in Saskatoon Centre, a shop that I‟ve taken my vehicles 

for over a dozen years. And the other is Mr. Rob Scott, the 

owner-operator of Glenwood Auto Service located in 

Sutherland. 

 

Now these men have come down to watch the proceedings. 

They‟re members of the Automotive Industries Association of 

Canada, a group that we don‟t hear an awful lot from but 

actually have a huge impact on our economy and our safety 

every day. And they‟re very interested in a recent initiative 

called Right to Repair. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, I‟ll be making a statement about that in the 

House in a few minutes. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, I understand 

there‟ll be members of the association watching from Calgary, 

Toronto, and Ottawa as I make this statement. So, Mr. Speaker, 

I ask all members to welcome these folks to their legislature. 

Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

among the distinguished guests in your gallery are some 

distinguished people from Moose Jaw. These are members of 

the Moose Jaw Right to Life, and I‟d ask them just to give you a 

wave as we welcome them to their legislature. 

 

They are Elsie Alexander, Angela Funke, Dennis Auger, 

Charlotte Dombowsky, Cathy Marr, Vicky Mayer, and Bernice 

Zagozeski. I‟d like all members to extend them a welcome to 

their legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my 

great pleasure today to introduce to you and, through you, to all 

members of the Legislative Assembly the grade 8 class from 

école Massey right here in Regina. The students are seated in 

the west gallery along with some of their parents and their 

teacher, Ms. Laurel LaBar-Ahmed. Give us a wave, kids. Show 

us where you are. Thank you very much. 

 

Recently my wife Jocelyn and I participated in the global food 

trivia contest held at the school during International 

Development Week. It was a fantastic event organized by the 

students themselves. Working with the Saskatchewan Council 

for International Cooperation, these young people put together a 

challenging quiz, just like a Jeopardy television show, that 

tested the knowledge of contestants about important world food 

issues, particularly in developing countries. Two hundred 

people from the community came to Massey School to watch, 

to learn, and to enjoy the great food and entertainment that were 

also part of the evening‟s program. 

 

After taking in today‟s session, the class will get a tour of the 

legislative building, and I will have an opportunity to thank 

them all for their hard work and keen interest in world affairs. 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all of us to welcome our guests to their 

legislature today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition that speaks to the need for the government to 

recognize the essential role of all health care providers as 

valued members of the health care team, speaking specifically 

to the members of SEIU [Service Employees International 

Union] west — members who are employed in Cypress, Five 

Hills, Heartland, and Saskatoon health authority — and the 

valuable care that they provide to residents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government needs to realize that utilization 

and the full range of professional skills offered by these 

providers and also commit to adequate funding and the 

installation of good faith in the collective bargaining process. 

And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to maintaining quality health care 

services and job security for all public health care 

providers. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present on behalf of workers and families in 

Moose Jaw. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I stand and present a petition 

in support of indexing the minimum wage. Mr. Speaker, we all 

understand that minimum wage earners would increase as 

indexing the minimum wage would help earners be able to 

maintain a standard of living as cost of living increases. And the 

prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to indexing Saskatchewan 

minimum wage to ensure that the standard of living of 

minimum wage earners is maintained in the face of cost of 

living increases. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the petitions are signed by residents of Saskatchewan. I so 

present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



2998 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2009 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for wage equity for CBO 

[community-based organization] workers. And we know that 

the workers and community-based organizations in 

Saskatchewan have traditionally been underpaid, and many 

continue to earn poverty level wages. Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to 

read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the development and 

implementation of a multi-year funding plan to ensure that 

CBO workers achieve wage equity with employees who 

perform work of equal value in government departments. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And these, Mr. Speaker, are folks come from Regina and 

Lloydminster. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present a petition on behalf of rural residents of 

Saskatchewan who question why the Sask Party government is 

leaving them behind with respect to providing safe and 

affordable water. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to financially assist the town of Duck Lake 

residents for the good of their health and safety due to the 

exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency and that this government fulfills its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good residents of 

Rosthern and Duck Lake. I so present. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition in support of fairness for students here in 

Saskatchewan through the necessary expansion of the graduate 

retention program. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately expand the graduate retention 

program to include master‟s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are 

students here in Saskatchewan, as well as a number of 

individuals who are health care providers, some who have 

graduate degrees. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

in support of a long-term care facility in La Ronge. The prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately invest in the planning and 

construction of long-term care facility beds in La Ronge. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by the good people of La Ronge and area. I so 

present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 

 

Mother’s Day 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 

weekend will be a very special one for women across our 

province as we celebrate Mother‟s Day. It is a time to thank 

those who brought us into this world for all their love, work, 

and sacrifice in this, the most important job in the world. 

 

Mother‟s Day traditionally falls on the second Sunday in May, 

the time of year when we see new life emerging all around us in 

this season of birth and renewal. Mother‟s Day is the busiest 

time of year for SaskTel as people across our province call 

home to speak with their mothers. As our province is growing 

again, it is important for people to remember where they came 

from, and days like these remind us to pause and give thanks to 

the people who are responsible for where we are today. 

 

On a personal note, Mr. Speaker, I am very fortunate to have 

my mother near. She lives in Estevan in her own home and 

enjoys relatively good health. I don‟t visit as often as I probably 

should. But I know she‟s watching today, so I‟d like to wish her 

Happy Mother‟s Day, Mom. I love you. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like all of my colleagues to join me in 

recognizing the hard work, loving care, and advice that mothers 

provide to all of us, regardless of how old we are. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Fair Access to Automotive Repair Tools and Software 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, we know our vehicle repairs are becoming more and 



May 7, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2999 

more complex, so we need better up-to-date information and 

technologies. Difficulties in obtaining this information has 

created significant consumer concern leading to the federal Bill 

C-273, the right to repair Act. 

 

Brian Masse, MP [Member of Parliament], members of the 

automotive aftermarket industry, the CAA [Canadian 

Automobile Association], the Retail Council, and Pollution 

Probe are all working hard to get this Bill, that ensures auto 

consumers have the right to repair their own vehicles, past 

second reading and into committee next Wednesday. 

 

Right to Repair will give fair access to the tools and software 

that independent auto repairers need to stay in business. It has a 

direct impact here in our province, with a growing number of 

vehicles being registered at an all-time high. 

 

Now Canadians are calling on their MPs to support this Bill, a 

Bill that will keep drivers in our communities more safe, paying 

competitive repair rates, and that will leave more money in their 

pockets. Mr. Speaker, our local repair shops have earned the 

trust of our communities. We know the local repair shop is a 

real indicator of the strength of our local economies, but more 

importantly, we entrust these good folks to look after the auto 

safety for our families and loved ones. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I must add too that this Bill is a Bill that 

crosses all party lines and a Bill that deserves all our support. 

So today, Mr. Speaker, I ask all members in joining me to make 

a phone call or an email this afternoon to your local MP and say 

let‟s get Bill C-273 into committee. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Women Entrepreneurs Week 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As a former reeve of 

a rural municipality and as a woman cattle rancher, it‟s my 

pleasure to stand today and recognize May 4-10 as women 

entrepreneurship week in Saskatchewan. Women Entrepreneurs 

Week is an opportunity to celebrate the successes and 

achievements of Saskatchewan women. Women entrepreneurs 

are playing an important role in the wide open future of 

Saskatchewan, and their contributions have made an important 

impact in making Saskatchewan the strongest economy in 

Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, approximately 30 per cent of all Saskatchewan 

businesses are owned by women, and these businesses employ 

thousands of people in every community in Saskatchewan. Mr. 

Speaker, women entrepreneurs are vital to Saskatchewan‟s 

economy. They are risk takers who seize opportunities and 

create ventures that benefit their communities. Their creativity 

and ingenuity turn challenges into opportunities, innovative 

ideas into commercial success. They have proven themselves to 

be extraordinary leaders and role models because of their strong 

commitment to mentoring and team building. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during women entrepreneurship week but also 

every day, we as a government applaud and celebrate their 

success and those who overcome failure to find greater success. 

I call on all members to join me in congratulating the great 

women entrepreneurs of Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

World of Whitetail 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It was my 

pleasure to attend the eighth annual World of Whitetail dinner. 

This event was very well planned, with a packed house and 

many great auction items. The proceeds of this dinner provide 

the World of Whitetail the opportunity to pursue its goals as a 

non-profit conservation organization. 

 

The World of Whitetail supports the conservation of wildlife 

and outdoor habitat. It promotes ethical and sustainable hunting 

practices. It enhances hunter-landowner relations, and most 

importantly, it provides outdoor education for young people. It 

recognizes that hunters have become essential partners with 

governing agencies in wildlife management. 

 

This organization was founded by local hunters and 

conservationists. I would like to recognize the executive of 

World of Whitetail: Joe Warbeck, president; Ronn Wallace; 

Harold Lang; Don Fenwick; Murray Everett; Bob Koroluk; Len 

Trevena; Greg Mallett; Gus Janczyszyn; Frank Laurans; and 

Kent Silzer. 

 

As a fellow hunter, I am thankful for the efforts of World of 

Whitetail and recognize significant value in connecting our 

young people to our natural environment. Ask all members of 

this Assembly to join with me in recognizing the executive and 

supporters of World of Whitetail for their meaningful 

contributions to our province. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood River. 

 

Campaign Controversy 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

the chief of the Flying Dust First Nation is speaking out about 

the Dwain Lingenfelter phony membership scandal. In today‟s 

StarPhoenix, Chief Norman says band members are very upset 

with Dwain Lingenfelter for his campaign signing them up en 

masse as members of the NDP [New Democratic Party] without 

their consent or knowledge. He said there are Flying Dust 

members of all political stripes, plenty of whom would be 

insulted to be signed up by the NDP. He said, and I quote, “„To 

me he has kind of burnt a bridge here to First Nations . . . I feel 

very insulted by his campaign strategy.‟” 

 

And like many other people, Chief Norman is questioning how 

these memberships were paid for, noting that it was the 

Lingenfelter campaign that paid for these 1,100 memberships. 

 



3000 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2009 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s worth noting what we haven‟t heard in recent 

days. We haven‟t heard a word out of the NDP‟s two northern 

members who continue to support Dwain Lingenfelter in spite 

of this tremendous insult to First Nations people. And nowhere 

in The StarPhoenix article does it say that Dwain Lingenfelter 

has called Chief Norman to offer an explanation or an apology. 

You would think that‟s the least he could do after insulting the 

Flying Dust First Nations in this manner. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Keeping Children Fit 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, a pilot project that will get kids 

more physically active during their time at school is in the 

planning stages in my community. Its objective is to reach 

elementary school children between pre-kindergarten and grade 

8. This is a new initiative in Moose Jaw that is seeking to keep 

children fit. 

 

The pilot project is being led by a partnership of the Five Hills 

Health Region, the Prairie South School Division, Holy Trinity 

School Division, Saskatchewan in Motion, and Moose Jaw in 

Motion. It will target six schools including the Empire 

Community School, St. Michael School, and École St. Margaret 

in Moose Jaw over the next two years to work towards 

sustainable daily physical activity for all students. Children 

within this age range require a minimum of 60 to 90 minutes of 

moderate to vigorous physical activity everyday for optimal 

growth and development. It is estimated that only 10 per cent of 

children and youth are currently meeting this requirement. 

 

Catalyst teams from each of the pilot schools will meet and 

create an action plan based on In Motion‟s behavioural change 

model. Each school‟s action plan will vary depending on the 

resources and the space available, but the goal is to ensure that 

students get 30 extra minutes along with the regular physical 

education curriculum. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask the members to join me in thanking all those 

partners involved in this important program and extend our best 

wishes to the participants. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Weyburn. 

 

Campaign Controversy 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, it is now day 3 of the search for 

the missing link. Dwain Lingenfelter is still nowhere to be 

found, and he‟s still not answering his cellphone, and he‟s still 

not answering questions about his phony membership scandal. 

Who was the mystery volunteer? How did this one person 

supposedly sign up 1,100 members on his own? How did he get 

his hands on $11,000 in campaign money to pay for these 

phony memberships? Mr. Speaker, Dwain Lingenfelter doesn‟t 

have any good answers to any of these questions, and that‟s 

why he‟s gone into hiding. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last night the NDP was supposed to be meeting to 

set the terms of reference of their investigation into the 

Lingenfelter phony membership scandal. Will the NDP be 

releasing those terms of reference today, and will they commit 

today to releasing the final report? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I have one more question for the NDP. Yens 

Pedersen has gone so far as to suggest that there might even be 

criminal activity involved. He has said that all NDP 

memberships have a spot at the bottom for the member to sign. 

He said, and I quote, “If someone is signing that on their behalf, 

it seems to me it is fraud.” Mr. Pedersen is a lawyer and a 

former NDP president, so he should know what he‟s talking 

about. So if their investigation finds any evidence of criminal 

activity as Yens Pedersen is suggesting, will the NDP refer the 

matter to the police? Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Support for Students 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, last fall the Minister of Advanced 

Education told reporters that he was lifting the freeze on tuition 

for post-secondary students and implementing what he called a 

tuition management system. Of course, he never succinctly 

defined the so-called tuition management system, so students 

have been worried how they will make ends meet. Mr. Speaker, 

the University of Regina has approved a 3 per cent increase in 

tuition for the coming year. 

 

To the minister: is the minister‟s idea of tuition management 

managing to make students pay 3 per cent more? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, absolutely delighted to 

provide an update. Kyle Addison, University of Regina student 

union president has said today, “„The tuition increase was 

anticipated by the students‟ union . . . I feel it is a good budget 

and [I] am excited to see this new year come into action.‟” 

 

Mr. Speaker, Barb Pollock, the vice-president for external 

relations at the University of Regina says, “„We got a generous 

increase in the provincial operating grant . . .‟” And, Mr. 

Speaker, the board Chair, Sue Barber, says, “„By watching our 

expenses in some areas, we are able to provide additional 

funding to strengthen services for students where there is strong 

demand.‟” 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is just reflective of the type of support that 

we‟re receiving right across the province, given our 

commitment and dedication to the hard-working students, 

scholars, and institutions right across our post-secondary 



May 7, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3001 

system. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, every day we see the Sask Party 

government ignoring the immediate needs of Saskatchewan 

students. Students are coping with rising costs for housing, for 

electricity, for home heating, and, this fall, for car insurance. 

The Sask Party appears to have a whole lot of management 

systems in place and the end result of these so-called 

management systems is the same. Saskatchewan students and 

their families are paying more and getting less. 

 

To the minister: why is the Sask Party so out of touch with 

students and their families? Why do they believe that making 

students pay more is a sign of good management? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — You know, Mr. Speaker, I‟m delighted to 

provide an update to the member. And that is, just last Friday I 

met with the new student executive at the University of 

Saskatchewan. And while we spoke about many things, being 

out of touch was not one of them. In fact I only assume that 

that‟s reserved for the members opposite. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let‟s just provide, let‟s just provide some increase 

as far as $665 million for institutional support, the $26.4 million 

booster shot, the $25.1 million regarding facility management, 

the 23.5 million on tuition support, the new student housing 

complex at the University of Saskatchewan, new student 

housing in SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 

and Technology] P.A. [Prince Albert] campus. Mr. Speaker, the 

18.5 million regarding the graduate retention program, not to 

mention the $2.2 million we put towards student loans for the 

first time since the mid-1990s. 

 

This government is committed to the students, to the scholars, 

to the institutions to ensure that our post-secondary is among 

the best in Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, educated people and their ideas 

are the foundation of a modern, knowledge-based economy, but 

enrolment at the province‟s universities was already on the 

decline before this announcement and now students will be 

forced to pay more. 

 

To the minister: why is the Sask Party squandering the 

prosperity they inherited and risking the future of our economy 

with short-sighted decisions like increasing tuition and forcing 

more debt on students? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, one of the sad legacies of 

having the members opposite in power was that 35,000 people 

left the province, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, that had an obvious 

effect on our population and enrolments in the post-secondary 

system. 

 

We saw these coming a decade ago, Mr. Speaker. They sat on 

their hands. What have we done, Mr. Speaker? We‟ve ensured 

15,000-plus people have moved back to Saskatchewan or to 

Saskatchewan for the first time, Mr. Speaker, through initiatives 

like the graduate retention program. 

 

What do the members opposite do? They scan the horizon for a 

potential leader that they can‟t find, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

we‟ll stand on our record any day. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon . . . 

Order. I recognize the member from Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Support for Unemployed Workers 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party likes to take 

credit for the economic expansion that began well before the 

last election, thanks to the NDP. But, Mr. Speaker, but, Mr. 

Speaker, they‟re less eager to take responsibility for what‟s 

happening under their watch in the real economy — thousands 

of jobs and families struggling to make ends meet. 

 

Just last week Statistics Canada reported that the number of 

workers collecting EI [employment insurance] rose by 28 per 

cent in February over the same period last year. The Petroleum 

Services Association of Canada forecast a 38 per cent decline in 

wells drilled in Saskatchewan in 2009. This equals job losses, 

Mr. Speaker, and job losses in the oil patch will soon spill over 

into oil field service sectors, resulting in thousands more laid 

off. 

 

To the minister: when will the Sask Party admit that things in 

the real economy aren‟t as rosy as they claim? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — You know, you know, Mr. Speaker — I 

thank the hon. member for the question — we‟re not immune to 

what‟s going on with respect to the global recession. We have 

said that consistently, month after month and day after day. The 

province of Saskatchewan is not going to escape a global 

recession. There have been layoffs. 

 

We are concerned about those families. We have the Minister of 

Advanced Education ensuring that ministry staff are deployed 

immediately after a layoff to link those who have lost their jobs 

with the jobs that are being created in the province. And on that 

point I would say this, Mr. Speaker, that while we‟re not 



3002 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2009 

immune to what‟s going on, I cannot conceive of a place in 

North America that I would rather be during this global 

recession than the province of Saskatchewan which is still 

growing, Mr. Speaker, despite the fact that almost every other 

province in the dominion is actually moving backwards. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we created 10,000 jobs year over year. Our 

unemployment rate is lowest in the country and, Mr. Speaker, 

again the rest of Canada is looking to Saskatchewan to be an 

economic leader. We‟re going to work very hard in terms of 

those displaced workers to continue the great momentum of the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I say again, thanks to the 

foundation laid by the previous NDP government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, the job losses in the oil patch 

are just the latest sign of what‟s happening in Saskatchewan‟s 

real economy . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, the real economy where 

Saskatchewan people live, pay the bills, and raise families. 

Since December there have been 3,300 jobs lost in 

Saskatchewan, the majority of them good paying jobs in sectors 

like potash. And the recent layoffs in the Meadow Lake and 

elsewhere have brought a number of job losses in the forest 

industry to over 1,500. 

 

The Sask Party recently announced the so-called rapid response 

teams to help workers at XL Beef. The opposition is glad to see 

the government is doing something to help laid off workers, but 

it begs the question, Mr. Speaker. To the minister: what is the 

government‟s definition of rapid response? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m happy to report that 

Saskatchewan has a new record, Mr. Speaker, and that is $804 

average weekly earnings, Mr. Speaker. We‟ve seen employment 

go up. 

 

We know we‟re not immune from what‟s going on, so we did 

establish a rapid response, Mr. Speaker. And what we‟re doing, 

Mr. Speaker, is, in co-operation, in co-operation with the union 

at XL Beef in Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker, our team went out. 

We‟re working co-operatively and collaboratively with the 

union members to ensure that we can transition those people as 

smoothly as possible. 

 

Our team is in action, Mr. Speaker. It just simply takes a phone 

call or an email and they will deploy to other communities 

across the province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, this has been going on for 

quite some time and this is hardly rapid response, given the real 

economy which has been shedding good paying jobs for months 

while this government issues news releases saying everything is 

fine and doing photo ops. 

 

And the Sask Party certainly hasn‟t been quick on the draw 

when it comes to the forestry crisis. Workers in Carrot River, 

Hudson Bay, lost their jobs a year ago. Layoffs were announced 

last fall in Meadow Lake. 

 

To the minister: where are the rapid response teams to help laid 

off workers in the forestry, potash, and manufacturing? And 

why is the Sask Party helping some unemployed workers and 

not others? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Mines. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

clearly in a number of industries, we‟ve seen some pullback. 

We are also seeing job numbers that are still very positive in 

Saskatchewan. Later this day we will see an announcement with 

respect to Carrot River and Hudson Bay which is going to be 

very positive for the people in that area. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — I would say, Mr. Speaker, that even though 

the province is experiencing job losses, the one job loss and the 

one person that seems to be lost these days is the missing link. 

Everybody is wondering where the next leader of the NDP is 

going to come from, Mr. Speaker. And I would dare say that we 

may not see the missing link return. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, those members would be well 

to pay attention to the economy of this province and quit 

worrying about that. They should worry about 2011 when they 

no longer will be there. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, the minister said that he‟ll 

work with these other . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I ask the member from Prince Albert Carlton 

to come to order. I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 



May 7, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3003 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, the minister said that he‟ll 

work with these other industries on request, but it‟s his 

responsibility to respond to the jobs crisis. We have no idea 

what he has done for workers who may be in need of help. Has 

the government advertised in the communities, many of them 

rural, who have been affected by these layoffs? 

 

This province, this government hasn‟t even followed the 

example of other provinces like the BC [British Columbia] 

Liberals who are calling on Ottawa to improve EI benefits for 

unemployed workers — this at a time when the number of 

people collecting EI in Saskatchewan has increased by 28 per 

cent. 

 

To the minister: why have they been so slow to respond to this 

job crisis? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, we can talk about the 

thousands of jobs that are available still in Saskatchewan. We 

can talk about the progress that‟s being made. 

 

But the claim that‟s just been put forward by the member 

opposite, Mr. Speaker, as far as not undertaking activity — just 

this morning, Mr. Speaker, I‟ve sent a letter directly to HRSDC 

[Human Resources and Skills Development Canada], Mr. 

Speaker, to say please, is there a way that we can ensure that we 

can get those EI payments moving more quickly within 

Saskatchewan? If we can be of assistance to do that, please let 

us know. That letter has already gone out, Mr. Speaker, and I‟m 

happy to table it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Carbon Sequestration Project 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We continue to 

welcome the Governor of Montana here, and we understand 

that in about an hour he and the Premier will be signing a 

memorandum of understanding respecting a 

Montana-Saskatchewan carbon sequestration project. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the taxpayers of Saskatchewan deserve, from an 

open and honest and accountable government, to know the 

details of this project. Will the Premier make the full MOU 

[memorandum of understanding] public before signing this 

project? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — I thank the member, I thank the member for 

the question. First of all, the substance of the MOU has been 

made very, very public already, both by the Governor of 

Montana who‟s been interviewed about this issue in the United 

States media, and the project we‟re working towards together, 

and of course our government. The minister responsible, 

myself, we‟ve been also very public about the concept that we 

are pursuing. 

 

This will be a memorandum of understanding. These are the 

principles under which we are going to proceed to see if we can 

put together a world-leading demonstration project in carbon 

capture, Mr. Speaker. There will be, Mr. Speaker, negotiations 

that ensue. They‟ll be transparent. They‟ll be public. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would point this out as well. When the previous 

administration, quite rightly, moved toward the carbon capture 

initiative in Weyburn, all of the costs were not known. It is new 

technology, Mr. Speaker. They couldn‟t possibly have said, 

neither could EnCana, neither could Royal Dutch Shell or Shell, 

say here‟s what the cost will be exactly. It was new technology. 

 

We‟re going to move forward together though, Mr. Speaker, 

with more knowledge than any other jurisdiction has because of 

the leadership position we have. We will report to the public. 

It‟ll be transparent. And this province — and I‟d argue the state 

of Montana — will be international leaders in clean coal and 

carbon capture technology. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We understand from 

the Governor of Montana through a March 31 Associated Press 

story that private energy companies will in fact be partnering in 

this project. On May 5 the Premier said no one, other than 

Saskatchewan, has put up any cash into this project. There are 

no private companies involved yet on May 5. 

 

To the Premier: are there private companies partnered in this 

project, and who are they? Or is his communication with the 

Governor of Montana less than adequate? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I would just say this with 

respect to the hon. member‟s question. We‟re going to work 

very hard to build partnerships to continue to ensure 

Saskatchewan is an international leader in clean coal technology 

and carbon capture sequestration. You know, Malcolm Wilson, 

the director of the University of Regina‟s office of energy and 

the environment, has said many things. He‟s an international 

expert in the area. He‟s working on this project. He said, you 

know, it‟s a lot more costly to do nothing than it is to take 

action now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[10:45] 

 

We want to ensure that our economy continues in terms of the 

momentum, that we have affordable and sustainable energy for 

future generations. We‟re going to work to build partnerships 

with the private sector. But we are going to move forward, Mr. 

Speaker, and again be a leader in the country. We‟re going to 



3004 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2009 

continue on this side of the House to focus on carbon 

sequestration. We‟ll leave the candidate sequestration to the 

members opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On this side of the 

House we‟re going to continue to seek answers to legitimate 

questions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: — On March 26 the federal government . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, on March 26 the federal 

government committed up to $30 million to a dormant polygen 

plant project at Belle Plaine. We know the 

Montana-Saskatchewan project has suffered a near-death 

experience recently on the floor of the Montana state 

legislature. But the Premier has assured us the project is alive 

and well. 

 

To the Premier: how is it that Saskatchewan can get up to $30 

million from the federal government for a dormant project at 

Belle Plaine, but he can‟t get a commitment for any money at 

all from the same federal government for a project that he 

claims is alive and well? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We know we have 

to continue to work very hard to get federal dollars into the 

province. But we are kind of proud of our record already, 

though there‟s more work to do. Because not only can we 

attract funds from the federal government for existing projects 

— I think we will with respect to the joint initiative with 

Montana — we‟re also able to attract some investment for 

dormant projects that we do hope will continue, obviously after 

the global recession has eased. 

 

I would say this to the hon. member. The questions they‟ve 

been asking are reasonable when it comes to the costs. We‟re 

going have a very transparent process going forward. What isn‟t 

reasonable, I don‟t think, what we hear from members opposite, 

is that they‟re trying to always play both sides of the issue. 

They‟re worried, they say, about electrical rates for the future, 

but they want us to have higher emissions targets which would 

increase the rates for people of the province, electrical rates for 

the people of our province. 

 

That member seems to be now opposed to carbon capture and 

sequestration. The NDP energy and climate change plan from 

just a little while ago said carbon capture and storage is critical 

technology; we‟ll continue to research these technologies and 

rely on them to capture carbon. Mr. Speaker, that‟s what they 

used to believe. I don‟t know what they believe today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well let‟s recap the 

situation to date. On January 30 this project was announced 

with a total cost of 170 million — 60 million from the state of 

Montana, 60 million from Saskatchewan, and 50 million from 

private investment. March 9, five weeks later, the cost had 

spiralled to $250 million and then April 8, four weeks later, the 

cost became 270 million and the funders changed. 

 

More recently Brady Wiseman, a representative of the Montana 

state legislature, said, and I quote, “Talk of cost for this project 

is entirely premature. They‟re just making it up. They don‟t 

know what it‟s going to cost.” 

 

So my question to the Premier is: what is this going to cost 

Saskatchewan taxpayers? Why is the government signing an 

MOU when they have absolutely no guarantee made public of 

any private investment or any commitment for money from the 

Canadian federal government or the American national 

government? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, that is entirely the point of the 

MOU. The MOU lays out the position that the province of 

Saskatchewan and the state of Montana are going to work 

towards the successful completion of the project. And part of 

that successful completion will be Obama administration 

stimulus funding from the Montana side and national 

government funding from our federal government here in 

Canada. That‟s part of what the MOU is all about, Mr. Speaker 

— moving forward, taking the next step. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‟ve been very clear about cost to the 

government. And I would say this with respect to Mr. Wiseman, 

who I‟ve not yet met and I hope to some day because I think I‟d 

like to tell him a little bit about what has been happening in 

Saskatchewan for eight years in terms of carbon capture. It is 

his position that this is all unproven technology. We‟ve been 

sequestering millions of tonnes of carbon successfully and 

enhancing oil recovery for eight years. The good news from 

Saskatchewan is that this technology will work, that we can 

continue to lead the country, together with partners from other 

places like the state of Montana. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government is looking forward to the future. 

We will move to make sure Saskatchewan‟s in a leadership 

position while that party is consumed with internal leadership 

issues. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier‟s time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 



May 7, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3005 

Nutana. 

 

Departure of Deputy Minister 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, on Monday of this week the 

Premier announced that Garnet Garven, the deputy minister to 

the Premier, would be leaving. Usually a departure like this is 

made after the session adjourns. To the Premier: given that Mr. 

Garven‟s departure was sudden and unexpected and only 18 

months after he left his job as dean of business at the University 

of Regina, will Mr. Garven be receiving any severance and if 

so, how much? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m grateful for 

the service of the former dean of the University of Regina, 

Business Administration, in serving as a deputy minister — my 

deputy minister — for the first 18 months of the government 

and helping with the transition of this new government from 

that old government, Mr. Speaker, the former government. And 

I‟m grateful for the work he‟s done. 

 

He‟s resigned, and so there‟s not a severance package when 

there is a resignation. He is going to be pursuing some other 

exciting academic endeavours, Mr. Speaker, that I think will 

benefit, frankly, the province of Saskatchewan and other 

jurisdictions, in terms of public policy development for the 

country. 

 

But the short answer to the question, to the hon. member, is that 

there will be no severance. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, we‟re told that Garnet Garven 

will be going to the University of Regina where he‟ll be 

establishing a western branch of the Public Policy Forum. 

 

To the Premier: is his government providing any money for the 

establishment of the Public Policy Forum branch so that his 

deputy minister will have a soft landing when he hits the 

University of Regina? And if they are providing money, how 

much are they providing? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the Public Policy Forum of 

Canada has in the past received funds from the Government of 

Saskatchewan, as it has from other provincial governments and 

the federal government, to do just that — develop the public 

policy of the country and provide public policy innovation. 

 

There will be, I think, an opportunity for Saskatchewan to be 

the Western presence for this very auspicious and important 

Public Policy Forum of Canada. We will be looking at funding 

some specific work that Mr. Garven may be involved with — 

no final decisions have been made there today, Mr. Speaker — 

not unlike, frankly, what we did with the former deputy 

minister to the premier. When we took over as a new 

government, the province had been very well served by a 

former deputy minister, Dan Perrins, who‟s also helping with 

the UDP [Uranium Development Partnership]. We funded at the 

Johnson-Shoyama institute, we funded a opportunity for Mr. 

Perrins to continue his public policy leadership. 

 

I think it‟s an important kind of development and approach to 

this sort of thing, and provides for a legacy for the province in 

terms of public policy and also ensures that Western Canada, 

specifically Saskatchewan, has a leadership role in the national 

Public Policy Forum of Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, we know that Dan Perrins was 

a career civil servant and for the government to sever him, the 

severance would have been in excess of over $1 million. In the 

case of Mr. Garnet Garven, he has been with the province of 

Saskatchewan for 18 months. 

 

Now 10 days ago, we submitted written questions about 

contracts that were awarded to Garven & Associates. Three 

days ago, out of nowhere, the government announced that 

Garnet Garven resigned his duties as deputy minister to the 

Premier. 

 

So to the Premier: is there a relationship between the written 

questions asked about Garven & Associates and Garnet 

Garven‟s resignation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the answer is no. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Now, 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier earlier said that a number of contracts 

would be entered into with this Public Policy Forum. 

 

Now we know that Garnet Garven today is leaving his duties as 

deputy minister to the Premier without any kind of severance 

payment. He goes at the end of May. We know that he is going 

over to the University of Regina to establish this Public Policy 

Forum. Can the Premier enlighten us as to how Mr. Garven is 

going to make his living, when the Government of 

Saskatchewan is not forthcoming in terms of telling us how 

much is going to go to the Public Policy Forum for Mr. 

Garven‟s light landing, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 



3006 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2009 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, you know, the hon. member‟s 

pursuing an interesting line of questions, including the one just 

before this, Mr. Speaker, where she makes some pretty serious 

aspersions, at least indirectly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We know that Garven & Associates was unrelated to — well 

related as a brother, but not Garnet Garven that she‟s speaking 

about in the question, so that people tuning in understand what 

she‟s doing — was hired by that former government to the tune 

of hundreds of thousands of dollars, and these contracts were 

tendered and won competitively. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, what we have here is a New Democratic 

Party that is desperately trying to change the channel, Mr. 

Speaker. They‟re trying to change the channel from their own 

record. That member talked about the foundation of the 

economy they left us. They left us the worst job creation record 

in Canada — ‟01 to ‟07, 35,000 fewer Saskatchewan people. 

 

The reality today is a growing province that continues to lead 

the country. That‟s what we‟re focused on. What they‟re 

focused on is the missing link and one of the biggest political 

scandals, again courtesy of the NDP, this province has ever 

seen, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Ministerial . . . Order. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

SaskTel Invests in its Network 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. More great news from SaskTel, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to inform the House of a very important and positive 

development for the people of our province. On Tuesday, May 

5, I had the pleasure on behalf of the Government of 

Saskatchewan to announce SaskTel‟s plan to invest $220 

million in its Saskatchewan network. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — SaskTel staff work very hard to 

improve, expand, and maintain the communication networks 

that keep Saskatchewan people in touch with one another and 

the world beyond. Each year SaskTel makes an investment in 

its network, and earlier this week, Mr. Speaker, I joined with 

President Robert Watson — and CEO [chief executive officer] 

— to announce that SaskTel will invest $220 million in its 

network. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am sure you will agree that SaskTel‟s investment 

in its infrastructure is money well spent. It brings world-class 

communication services to businesses, schools, homes in every 

region of our province, Mr. Speaker. This infrastructure is what 

allows productive people in every corner of our province to 

reach out to each other and to the world to learn, to share, and 

to do business, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The three major components of the announcement included 

SaskTel‟s satellite high-speed Internet service, 55 new cellular 

towers, and a new universal mobile telecommunications system, 

UMTS wireless network. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as part of the rural infrastructure program that was 

announced last fall, SaskTel recently signed an agreement with 

Barrett Xplore to deliver SaskTel satellite high-speed Internet 

powered by Xplornet to rural areas that do not have access to 

SaskTel‟s other high-speed Internet services. And SaskTel will 

be launching SaskTel satellite high-speed Internet service next 

month. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our announcement also included the 55 locations 

that will receive new cellular service over the next three years. 

In 2009 SaskTel will spend $37.6 million to expand and 

improve its wireless network. That includes the addition of 12 

of those 55 new digital cellular sites across the province. 

 

In addition to these initiatives that I‟ve mentioned as part of the 

rural infrastructure program, SaskTel will be making a very 

significant technology advancement to ensure its cellular 

network remains leading edge and becomes compatible with the 

latest standard of networks around the world. 

 

Over $172 million in total will be committed to the construction 

of UMTS, the new standard in cellular technology wireless 

network worldwide. We are proud that SaskTel has made the 

commitment to deploy high-speed Internet and cellular service 

to areas announced this week. Every dollar, Mr. Speaker, 

invested in SaskTel‟s network is a dollar invested to provide 

better service in Saskatchewan to Saskatchewan people. That‟s 

why this government, through SaskTel, makes its investment in 

Saskatchewan‟s network a very high priority. 

 

I am confident that the work SaskTel has done in the past, and 

continues to do, will ensure that tomorrow‟s leading-edge 

communications, whatever they may be, will always be 

available to all residents of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I 

congratulate SaskTel and the work it does to successfully 

maintain a world-class network for the people of Saskatchewan 

in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[11:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the hon. 

minister for providing a copy of his statement before the session 

started today. Mr. Speaker, we‟re pleased to see these 

investments in communication and telecommunication efforts 

right throughout Saskatchewan. We take a great deal of pride 

that SaskTel has a reputation of providing service to rural and 

remote areas of this province and has been a leader in providing 

those services. 

 

A small example is that it‟s now at least a half a dozen years 

ago when we had already provided 93 per cent of 

Saskatchewan‟s population with cell coverage. That‟s no 

comfort for the 7 per cent that weren‟t covered on it but, Mr. 



May 7, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3007 

Speaker, we know that SaskTel has a long history of first-class 

services. 

 

We also know that no other jurisdiction in the world has been 

able to provide Internet services in the manner that SaskTel has 

provided it, where we have literally communities with hundreds 

of residents that have high-speed Internet coverage today, and 

we‟ve got suburbs in New York that have no Internet service 

yet. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we‟re pleased that we‟ve been on the 

vanguard of advances in technologies. And we‟re pleased that 

in Saskatchewan this has been able to be accomplished because 

we have a publicly owned Crown corporation that can act in the 

interests of Saskatchewan people. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we support the investments that continue to 

keep us at the vanguard of technology for Saskatchewan people. 

We will, as we go forward, have some specific and some 

pointed questions about the relative investments by taxpayers 

versus investments by SaskTel in support of this business plan. 

Given the massive manipulation of these types of investments 

by the Devine administration in the 1980s, and given the close 

links of the now government to the then administration, the 

discredited administration, we will be paying attention to those 

details. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟ll end where I began by saying that we support 

this enhancement of services to the people of rural and remote 

Saskatchewan in particular. It is nice to see SaskTel continuing 

to be absolutely a world leader, the greatest little telco in the 

world, and that we‟re pleased with today‟s announcement. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Forest Industry Development Framework 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 

morning I‟m very pleased to rise to comment on the 

government‟s forest industry development framework that I 

released earlier. 

 

As all members are aware, forestry is an industry in transition, 

not just here but all across North America. Forest companies 

around the world are facing challenges in the global 

marketplace, and problems of the last few years in the US 

[United States] housing market have only added to those 

challenges. 

 

More than 200 forest-related facilities have closed in Canada 

over the past five years. So clearly the recent hardships our 

industry and its workers have endured are not unique to 

Saskatchewan. But out of these hardships a new industry is 

emerging here and elsewhere — an industry moving from its 

reliance on commodity production to one delivering 

market-driven, value-added products. And our government is 

helping the industry in that transition by using the levers that we 

have at our disposal in the areas of regulation, taxation, 

infrastructure, research, and development. 

The framework that I released today contains statements of 

broad policy direction on forest management, economic 

infrastructure, taxation and regulation, and knowledge and 

research. It outlines key actions that we intend to take to help 

industry achieve new growth and development. 

 

Among those actions are a review of sustainable cut levels 

associated with the forest management agreement areas as they 

come open for reallocation; preparation of a northern resource 

development infrastructure plan; encouragement of a new 

multi-stakeholder FMA [forest management agreement] and 

forest management certification; and continued research in 

value-added production, agroforestry, and biomass energy. 

 

The framework also encompasses a number of our recent 

actions as government on forestry. These include the process 

we‟ve undertaken to assign the P.A. FMA to a new manager, 

and our contract with FPInnovations to analyze our value-added 

market opportunities in association with our industry. 

 

Something this framework does not have, Mr. Speaker, does not 

have the government making equity investments in or grants to 

forest companies for their projects. We‟ve been quite clear since 

we were first elected that we will not risk taxpayers‟ dollars in 

that regard. The framework signals our intention to the industry, 

how we will work with it — and forest area communities as 

well — how we will work with all forestry stakeholders to 

ensure that the Saskatchewan industry that emerges from these 

recent challenges is fully competitive in the global marketplace. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our forestry resource is of a high quality, and our 

industry has some of the most modern and efficient facilities in 

the country. Our industry is in a good position to rebound and to 

emerge even stronger through new products, new energy 

developments, and full utilization. And I trust that all members 

will be supportive of the framework of the government‟s 

actions to help the industry reposition itself for those assuredly 

better days ahead. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — I want to thank the minister for providing me 

with a copy of his statement just before the House. I‟ve said 

many times in the Chamber that we need a plan. I‟m not sure 

that this is a plan, but it‟s something. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there have been more than 1,500 jobs lost in the 

forestry industry. The Sask Party may think that this is rapid 

response, but it‟s hardly the rapid response they promised 

before the last election. 

 

I quote from the speech the Premier gave to the North 

Saskatchewan business association in December 2005: 

 

At the outset, we will direct Enterprise Saskatchewan to 

establish sector teams for the economic sectors that 

business has told me can drive true job creating economic 

growth in Saskatchewan. 

 

Each team will have one month to prepare its first 

inventory of the barriers to growth holding that sector 



3008 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2009 

back from reaching its full potential. 

 

We don‟t need to appoint a forestry task force as the 

Premier did in the wake of the recent Weyerhaeuser 

announcement — one will already exist. 

 

These sector teams will report publicly, and the new 

government will respond publicly with its plans to deal 

with those barriers to growth within two weeks. That is 

one to two months for the first action on barriers to 

growth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it took them 18 months to come up with a bunch 

of statements that are, at best, generalities. That‟s not the one or 

the two months they promised in the 2005. 

 

I now want to comment on a few of the issues the minister 

raised. He talked about creating of the new multi-stakeholder 

FMAs. This might be an improvement over the things were 

sometimes done in the past. Certainly it‟s better than giving a 

single company like Weyerhaeuser a veto over the use of our 

forest resources even when they‟re not using them, but we‟ll all 

wait to see what happens. After all, it wasn‟t the NDP who 

signed over control of a big part of our forestry to 

Weyerhaeuser and made it impossible for the Saskatchewan 

people to benefit from our timber resources even when 

Weyerhaeuser wasn‟t using them. What the minister‟s friends in 

the former Devine government . . . Saskatchewan people own 

the provincial forest. Mr. Speaker, they deserve to be beneficial 

fully from these resources. We will see if that‟s what this 

government has in mind. 

 

The government talked about a northern resource infrastructure 

development plan. They also harped on about the fact that they 

won‟t be investing in the forestry companies, but the devil is 

always in the details, Mr. Speaker, with these sort of things. We 

don‟t know for example how much they will spend on roads 

that will in many cases be used primarily or almost exclusively 

by the forest industry. They talk about value-added products 

and biomass energy. Again these sound like good things, but we 

don‟t know the details. 

 

We don‟t know for example if they will be using waste wood to 

generate biomass energy and making use of every part of the 

tree. We don‟t know what they mean by value-added products. 

Do they mean building furniture? Do they mean building 

affordable housing in northern Saskatchewan from the wood? 

We need more details, Mr. Speaker. I‟ll just close . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, order. Order. The 

member has a right to respond to the ministerial statement 

without a lot of interference and taking away the ability of other 

members to hear. The member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — We don‟t know what they mean by 

value-added products. Do they mean building furniture? Do 

they mean building affordable housing in northern 

Saskatchewan for the wood? We need more details, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I‟ll just close, Mr. Speaker, by saying that the forestry is about 

more than numbers and a lot of little cuts. It‟s about people, 

their families, and their communities. Hundreds of families in 

Hudson Bay, Carrot River, Big River, Meadow Lake, Prince 

Albert, La Ronge, and elsewhere are suffering. Those families 

are struggling to make ends meet, struggling to pay for the 

rising cost of keeping the lights on or heating their homes. They 

deserve more than words, Mr. Speaker. They deserve action. 

Put them back to work as soon as possible. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answer to questions 371 to 372. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 371 to 72 tabled. I recognize the 

Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 

facilitate the Standing Committee on Human Services to discuss 

education issues, I move that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has ordered that in order to 

facilitate the work of committees this House do now stand 

adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. This House stands adjourned 

until Monday afternoon at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 11:14.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2995 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2995 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2996 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2996 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2996 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2996 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2996 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2997 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 2997 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2997 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2997 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2998 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2998 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2998 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2998 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Mother’s Day 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2998 

 Fair Access to Automotive Repair Tools and Software 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2998 

 Women Entrepreneurs Week 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2999 

 World of Whitetail 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2999 

 Campaign Controversy 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2999 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3000 

 Keeping Children Fit 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3000 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Support for Students 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3000 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3000 

 Support for Unemployed Workers 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3001 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3001 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3002 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3002 

 Carbon Sequestration Project 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3003 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3003 

 Departure of Deputy Minister 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3005 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3005 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 SaskTel Invests in its Network 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3006 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3006 

 Forest Industry Development Framework 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3007 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3007 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3008 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 


