




















































Hansard: May 13, 2009


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 63A  WEDNESDAY, MAY 13, 2009, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3069 

 May 13, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

Clerk: — Members, I wish to advise you that Mr. Speaker will 

not be present today to open today‟s sitting. 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, through you and to you to the rest of the Assembly, I‟d 

like to introduce some special guests from the MS [Multiple 

Sclerosis] Society that are seated in your gallery. 

 

And I‟ll name them, if they just want to give a wave as I name 

them. First of all is Brian Duck who is a volunteer, government 

relations Chair for the MS Society, Saskatchewan‟s division; 

Erin Kuan who is the director of major gifts, national marketing 

and adviser, Saskatchewan division‟s office out of Saskatoon. 

Ken Mayhew is the chief development officer for the MS 

Society of Canada out of the national office out of Toronto; 

Susan Murray, a volunteer, director of the MS Scientific 

Research Foundation from Toronto; as well as Jack Aldcorn 

who is the president of the MS Society here in Saskatchewan, 

and Lindsay Bryson who is the communications director for the 

MS Society here in Saskatchewan. 

 

I have the opportunity of meeting with them later on today, 

after question period I believe. They are also putting on a 

reception for all MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] 

so hopefully we‟ll have many attend that reception to listen to 

their concerns. As I say, I‟ll have the opportunity as minister to 

meet with them prior, and then we look forward to the general 

reception with all the MLAs. So if I could have all members 

welcome them to their Assembly. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I‟d like to join 

the minister in welcoming our guests from the MS Society. And 

I look forward to seeing them today at the reception. I want to 

thank you on behalf of the official opposition for all the work 

that you do in your various capacities to help with MS research, 

education, and to help people who are living with MS. Thank 

you very much, and welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social 

Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It‟s 

really an honour for me to stand today to introduce a number of 

people who are both in your gallery and on the floor of the 

Assembly. This is many members of the disability income 

program task team. 

 

So with us today we have Merv Bender, community Co-Chair, 

representing the Prince Albert & District Community Service 

Centre and the Disability Income Support Coalition or known 

as DISC. We have Daryl Stubel, government Co-Chair, 

representing the office of disability issues within my ministry. 

Also representing DISC is Bev Duncan, Saskatchewan Voice of 

People with Disabilities; Clarence Neault with the Gary Tinker 

foundation; Michael Richter, South Saskatchewan Independent 

Living Centre, and Maritza Tello with Phoenix Residential 

Society. 

 

From the Ministry of Social Services, workers that have worked 

very hard with this Sask team are Jim Browne, Alan Hickey, 

Alan Jones, Doug Scott, Craig Torgunrud, and Lynn Tulloch. 

 

Unable to be with us today but were members of the task team 

are Dave Nelson of the Provincial Inter-agency Network on 

Disability, Ian Wilkinson of the Saskatchewan Abilities 

Council, Elaine Naytowhow of the Sturgeon Lake First Nation, 

and Randy Passmore of Social Services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to welcome the chairperson, Judy 

Hannah, and many other members of DISC who have joined 

with us this afternoon. These individuals were instrumental in 

developing the framework for the new income support program 

for people with disabilities that I announced earlier this 

morning. So thanks to their partnership with the disability 

community and our government, we are celebrating a milestone 

today with disabilities in Saskatchewan. 

 

So could all members please join me in welcoming all of these 

individuals to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to thank 

my colleague, the member from Saskatoon Centre, for giving 

me the opportunity to join the minister in welcoming the guests 

in the gallery and on the floor of the House on behalf of the 

official opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at this time I would like to single out one of the 

organizations in this important group, the Gary Tinker 

Federation, for the hard work that they do for people with 

disabilities in the North. I want to focus some attention on some 

of the work they do, Mr. Speaker, especially with learning 

disabilities. I commend the job they are doing. It‟s important. I 

just want at this time to acknowledge the work that they 

continue to do, the importance of northern people with learning 

disabilities, and the work they do with all northern people with 

disabilities. 

 

But for myself, as a member and the past Chair of Gary Tinker 

Federation, it is an honour to have them here today and to see 

the important work they are continuing to do. 

 

So at this time, I would like to acknowledge Gary Tinker, also 



3070 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2009 

Clarence Neault. Welcome to your legislature, and thank you 

for the work you do on behalf of northern people with 

disabilities and especially the ones with learning. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of First 

Nations. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟d like to join 

with my colleague, the Minister of Social Services, and the 

member from Cumberland, to welcome these special people in 

the House today and to acknowledge Gary Tinker. I had the 

opportunity to meet Gary a number of years ago and learned 

that he had walked from La Ronge to Regina to raise awareness 

of people with disabilities. 

 

On August 1 of this year will be the 20-year anniversary of that 

walk that Gary made. And he has done so much for people, not 

just in the North but for across the province. He is a delightful 

young man. And you don‟t have to spend very much time with 

him to realize that he may have a physical disability, but those 

of us who don‟t have his attitude have a real disability. So thank 

you very much for all the work you do. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s my pleasure to 

introduce to you and through you to all members of the 

legislature the Kiwanis Builder‟s Club from Davin School. And 

they‟re sitting in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. They are four grade 

5 students from Davin School, and they‟re accompanied by 

Larry Johnson, Lorraine Johnson, and Kathleen Gieg. And there 

were supposed to be quite a number of others, but a band 

concert intervened and so quite a few people had to play in the 

band. So this is a very strong representation of a bigger 

program. But I‟d ask all members to welcome them to the 

legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 

Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I‟d 

like to introduce to you and through you to all members of the 

legislature, I actually have three groups, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The first group I‟d like to introduce are from the hog industry 

across Saskatchewan: Jay McGrath, director of Sask Pork — if 

they could wave in the back row up there when I introduce 

them — Lambert Houwen from Regina with Hypor Canada, Dr. 

Patrick Charagu from Regina also with Hypor Canada, John 

Wurz from Sonningdale, Casey Schmidt from Humboldt, Ivan 

Stomp from Leroy, Neil Ketilson, general manager of Sask 

Pork from Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we‟re doing today is we put together a press 

release trying to assure the public on the safety of pork right 

across Saskatchewan and across Canada at a time, as we know, 

when that industry didn‟t need any downturn in their markets. 

Actually with the H1N1 influenza has certainly hurt their 

industry. 

 

And what we‟re doing today is reassuring the public and the 

consumers out there of the safety of pork. Our pork in 

Saskatchewan is probably as good as any in Canada, and for 

that matter, right across the world. And we‟re trying to 

highlight that today. 

 

I also would like to say, Mr. Speaker, when the BSE [bovine 

spongiform encephalopathy] hit the cattle industry, consumers 

in this country and this province came to the forefront and 

bought beef more than they normally would. And I‟m hoping, 

on behalf of the producers we have here today, that that happens 

again with the pork industry and pork products. I ask everyone 

today to welcome them to their legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, while I‟m on my feet, I 

also, in the west gallery, would like to introduce to everyone 

two school groups who had a joint effort to come into Regina 

from my constituency. The first one is the Grayson School — 

24 students from that school, Principal Ben Appell, and teacher 

Tara Gerspacher. Also, from Stockholm, the Macdonald School 

students, 16 of them. Gwen Kada is their teacher, and their 

chaperone is Ms. Lavendure. I‟d like to ask everyone to 

welcome them to their legislature, and I hope they enjoy their 

trip in. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It‟s a 

pleasure to be able to introduce to you and through you some 

constituents of mine who have joined us today in your gallery. 

They are here with the House of Prayer that have been doing 

their very, very dutiful job to be with us and to offer some 

prayers, I‟m sure for wisdom and other things for legislators. 

The folks from Swift Current that are here are Pastor Wendel 

Quincy and his wife Maureen, as well as Mike and Bonnie 

Johnston, from the constituency of Swift Current. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are many exhortations to prayer for 

those in leadership or government in the Scriptures. I think my 

favourite is what Paul told Timothy was that he ought to be 

praying for those in leadership that we may live quiet and 

peaceful lives. To me that Scripture says we ought to pray for 

those in government so they don‟t mess things up too badly. 

And in that spirit, we welcome them to their Legislative 

Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Sutherland. 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I would 

like to introduce to you and through you four people from 

Montmartre, Saskatchewan, who are actually constituents of 

Mr. Speaker. And I would like to introduce them to you now. If 



May 13, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3071 

you want to give a wave? 

 

Patsy Fisher, she‟s a town councillor and Co-Chair of the 

Montmartre centennial committee; Jolene Dusyk, a member of 

the centennial committee; Norma Englot, she‟s the mother of 

Michelle Englot who we know from curling, and was my 

babysitter which is why she‟s a little grey. And my Auntie 

Patsy, a resident of Montmartre, Auntie Patsy Pulai. Welcome 

to your legislature. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I‟d like to 

echo the welcomes on behalf of a couple of the members on this 

side of the House. One is a long-time family friend. Bev 

Duncan is in your gallery. Welcome, Bev. As well, a long-time 

constituent, a family friend as well, a neighbour from the lake, 

and I believe the principal for all three of my children — Mr. 

Ben Appell in the west gallery, does a lot of great work in the 

Grayson area now, formerly Yorkton school system, a 

constituent of Yorkton. And don‟t let the snow on the roof fool 

you, Mr. Speaker, he is very young at heart. Welcome, Ben. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

rise to present a petition that speaks to the need for the 

Government of Saskatchewan to recognize the essential role of 

all health care providers as valued members of the health care 

team, and specifically the members of SEIU [Service 

Employees International Union] West. And the government 

needs to realize the utilization and the value of the full range of 

professionals skills offered by these health care providers, and 

that there needs to be further promotion through the 

commitment of adequate funding and the installation of good 

faith in the collective bargaining process. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to maintaining quality health care 

services and job security for all public health care 

providers. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I so present on behalf of Saskatchewan 

citizens in Swift Current, Maple Creek, Regina, Saskatoon, 

Dundurn, and Aberdeen. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Fairview. 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I stand 

and present a petition in support of indexing the minimum 

wage. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we all know that the indexing of the 

minimum wage would ensure that the minimum wage earners 

would be able to maintain a standard of living as the cost of 

living increases. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to indexing Saskatchewan 

minimum wage to ensure that the standard of living of 

minimum wage earners is maintained in the face of cost of 

living increases. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I present this petition on behalf of residents of Balcarres and 

Regina. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

rise today to present a petition in support of wage equity for 

CBO [community-based organization] workers. And we know, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that many of the folks who work for 

community-based organizations, the low wages result in high 

staff turnover. The subsequent lack of caregiver continuity has a 

negative impact on the quality of care clients receive. And, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I‟d like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the development and 

implementation of a multi-year funding plan to ensure that 

CBO workers achieve wage equity with employees who 

perform work of equal value in government departments. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, these folks come from the city of 

Saskatoon. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

rise today to present a petition on behalf of rural residents of 

Saskatchewan who question why the Sask Party government is 

leaving them behind with respect to providing safe and 

affordable water. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to financially assist the town of Duck Lake 

residents for the good of their health and safety due to the 

exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency, and that this government fulfills its 



3072 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2009 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good 

residents of Saskatoon and Duck Lake. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition in support of fairness for students here in 

Saskatchewan through the necessary expansion of the graduate 

retention program. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately expand the graduate retention 

program to include master‟s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who have signed this petition are 

students from the universities here in the province, as well as a 

number of health care professionals who have graduate degrees 

and are practising here in Saskatchewan. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition to repair Highway No. 123 that goes to the community 

of Cumberland House, Saskatchewan. The petition is signed by 

the leadership and the community members of the village of 

Cumberland House and Cumberland House First Nations. The 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the Sask 

Party government to stop denying the money that was 

allocated to the highway and commit to immediately 

providing the repairs to this highway that the people of 

northeast Saskatchewan were promised. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by the good people of Cumberland House and area. 

I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Multiple Sclerosis Awareness Month 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Since the late 

1970s, May has been observed across Canada as Multiple 

Sclerosis Awareness Month. During the month of May, efforts 

are made to increase awareness of this disease through 

fundraisers and educational programs. By wearing the red 

carnation today, we are all demonstrating our support for these 

efforts. 

 

MS is a disease of the central nervous system and is the most 

common neurological disease affecting young people in 

Canada. Unfortunately there‟s no known cure at this time. 

 

MS is more often diagnosed between the ages of 15 and 40, but 

has now been diagnosed as young as three. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, there are between 50 and 75,000 Canadians living with 

MS, many of them here in Saskatchewan. There are 1,000 new 

diagnoses each year, and this is a startling statistic. Many of us 

know someone who suffers with this disease and its debilitating 

effects. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I ask all members to thank the staff and 

volunteers of the Saskatchewan division of the MS Society of 

Canada, and especially those that are in the gallery here today, 

for the work that they do to help people living with MS, as well 

as the education and research needed to understand and 

eradicate a disease. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Batoche. 

 

Multiple Sclerosis Society Working Towards a Cure 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government, I 

would like to commend the MS Society for the important role it 

plays in funding research to develop new and better treatments 

with the cure of MS as the ultimate goal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, multiple sclerosis is a complex disease of the 

central nervous system. The disease most commonly affects 

young adults between the age of 15 and 40, but also affects 

children and the old. The disease is unpredictable, affecting 

individuals‟ vision, hearing, memory, balance, and mobility. It 

affects their physical, emotional, financial, and lasts a lifetime. 

 

We do not know what causes MS, but the evidence points to 

multiple factors involving both genetic and environmental 

components of the cause. The disease has no cure. Conventional 

treatment approaches in MS focus on slowing disease 

progression and alleviating symptoms experienced. Women are 

more than three times as likely to develop MS as men. Atlantic 

and Prairie regions have higher rates than other regions. 

 

The Saskatchewan division of the MS Society has been 

supporting research in multiple sclerosis and providing 

much-needed services and programs to people with MS and 

their families since 1981. Thank you to all the people who carry 

on the fight against this terrible disease. We all look forward to 

the day we can rise in this House and announce that we have 

found the cure for MS. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw Wakamow. 



May 13, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3073 

Elks Lodge Aids Hearing Impaired Youth 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Members of 

the Moose Jaw Elks Lodge No. 7 have helped to improve the 

hearing of one of our city‟s young residents. The Elks‟ national 

mandate is to assistant with deaf detection and treatment in 

children. 

 

Geno Schneider, who will be three this month, recently had a 

frequency modulated, or FM receiver system donated to him by 

the lodge with the help of the Royal Purple Fund for Children. 

Geno was born with mild to moderate hearing loss and he‟s not 

completely deaf, but can only hear certain tones. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we speak what we hear and if we‟re not hearing 

all the sounds we need to develop, then there will be delays in 

learning. Geno‟s condition set him back but the family 

approached the Elks Lodge and requested support. 

 

FM systems are an additional expense on top of personal 

hearing aids and are often not covered by insurance. They work 

like a small radio transmitter and receiver. While at daycare, 

Geno‟s aide wears the small FM transmitter with a microphone 

which signals to the receiver. The receiver is attached to the 

bottom of Geno‟s hearing aids. It is enhancing his hearing, 

speech development, and language skills. His mother and 

daycare workers have already seen an improvement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in thanking the 

Moose Jaw Elks Lodge No. 7 for their continued contribution to 

Moose Jaw, our province, and for giving the gift of hearing to 

Geno Schneider. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Sutherland. 

 

Montmartre Celebrates 100th Anniversary 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

share the story of Montmartre, Saskatchewan. Its namesake, 

Montmartre, Paris, France is located on the highest point in 

Paris. In 1893, Hector Fabre, the first Canadian high 

commissioner to Paris, said to Pierre Foursin, a French pioneer, 

“You probably regret leaving your dear Montmartre. Go afar 

and choose a height of land. Build there your house and call the 

place Montmartre.” 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, he did just that, but in 1908 the 

railroad built their track 2 miles south of the settlement. The 

pioneers literally picked up the school and church and moved it 

downhill to the train tracks, completing the townsite in 1909. 

 

In 1962, the mayor of our Montmartre, Dr. Lionel Prefontaine, 

and his wife Rita, went to Paris, France where they met the 

mayor of Montmartre, France. The two mayors exchanged 

paintings of their own Montmartres and an official sisterhood 

was born. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today Montmartre, Saskatchewan is a vibrant and 

beautiful community whose citizens are proud of their history. 

It is increasing in population, and new businesses are opening. 

The centennial committee has worked tirelessly at planning the 

celebrations which will be held on July 3, 4, and 5. There will 

be a myriad of entertainment and activities including a 20-foot 

tall Eiffel Tower made of steel that Malory Englot, a local 

businessman, designed and built and is giving to Montmartre. I 

wish to thank Montmartre and wish them the best on their 100th 

anniversary. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres. 

 

In Anticipation of Mosaic 

 

Ms. Morin: — [The hon. member spoke for a time in German.] 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is the greeting which we offer to guests of the 

German pavilion at this year‟s 42nd annual Mosaic Festival in 

Regina. The event takes place from June 4 to 6 at 18 different 

host pavilions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mosaic is a feature event that is looked forward to 

every year that provides visitors a glimpse of what it would be 

like to travel to the various host cultures‟ countries. Guests of 

the German pavilion, for example, can expect a delicious pig 

roast, bratwurst, schnitzel, sauerkraut, rouladen, along with of 

course a fine selection of German beers. Then guests can enjoy 

an assortment of German tortes while they watch the 

performances of the dancers and singers. For those that want to 

participate in the dancing, Mr. Speaker, they can do so in the 

beer tent with a traditional German band. 

 

Each pavilion offers the same amount of variety. So to truly, 

fully enjoy the full experience, Mr. Speaker, visitors can 

purchase a three-day passport which allows them to travel by 

bus from pavilion to pavilion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mosaic is a huge undertaking by both the 

organizer of the event — the Regina Multicultural Council 

under President Michael Cassano — as well as all of the host 

pavilions and their teams of volunteers. 

 

I would like to ask all of my colleagues to join me in 

congratulating all participating pavilions and the Regina 

Multicultural Council for what is guaranteed to be yet another 

wonderful success, as well as offering best wishes to Andrew 

and Ida Grzesina, the ambassadors to the German pavilion and 

Katrina and Alexander Volman, the youth ambassadors. Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Weyburn-Big Muddy. 

 

Leadership Campaign Controversy 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Lingenfelter phony 

membership scandal isn‟t going away. Yesterday NDP [New 

Democratic Party] leadership candidate Yens Pedersen repeated 

his call for Dwain Lingenfelter to quit the race. 

 



3074 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2009 

The deadline for the report on the Lingenfelter phony 

membership scandal has now passed. But the question remains: 

will the NDP make this report public? We all know the NDP 

has a long history of covering up wrongdoing. So are they 

going to release the phony membership report, or are they going 

to cover it up? 

 

One columnist today writes that there is no good outcome for 

the NDP, but the best of all the bad outcomes is to release the 

report and let the chips fall where they may. Another columnist 

yesterday wrote how this scandal is another huge step backward 

for the NDP, and I quote: 

 

. . . Lingenfelter . . . first elected to the provincial 

legislature more than 30 years ago, is not exactly the 

candidate of changing times. Back to the ‟70s is more like 

it. What‟s disappointing is that this, from all indications, is 

the best . . . the NDP has to offer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s the same old NDP. They‟re the party stuck in 

the past about to elect a leader stuck in the past. At the very 

least, will the current leader of the NDP do the right thing 

before he leaves office and demand that his party release the 

Dwain Lingenfelter phony membership report? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Northern Athlete Earns College Scholarship 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Northern athletes 

are challenged to compete in sports by travelling great distances 

and having rare hours of practice before playing against 

southern teams whose players have played together for years. 

 

Frieda Daigneault of Ile-a-la Crosse has a granddaughter who 

plays hockey in Hay River, Northwest Territories. There, few 

girls play hockey so Frieda‟s granddaughter, Michelle, played 

contact hockey with the boys from the ages of 7 on to 14. Speed 

was Michelle‟s advantage against hard-hitting opponents. 

 

Finally at 14, by moving to Edmonton, Michelle played with 

the girls‟ teams. And her proud parents, Alec and Trina, drove a 

24-hour round trip to watch her play and practise. At 16 

Michelle moved to Ottawa to play with the Nepean Junior 

Wildcats, and her parents would not see her until the end of the 

season as the distance was too great. 

 

Michelle plays at national tournaments including Canada 

Winter Games. And at the National Aboriginal Championships, 

Michelle has made the first line all-star every year since she 

was 14 — including this year. 

 

Next year, Michelle will play for an American college with a 

scholarship. She will obtain a university education. It will mean 

she will see very little of her family for many years. The North 

is beautiful but demanding, especially on its children who must 

sacrifice contact with their culture, family, and friends for sport 

and education in the world beyond. 

 

I am proud of Michelle Daigneault whose family is rooted in 

Ile-a-la Crosse and to tell her that her parents and grandparents 

wish her Godspeed in her dreams and hopes. Michelle, keep 

going strong as we‟re all behind you and we‟re very proud of 

you. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Seniors’ Income Plan 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, last fall the Sask Party announced changes 

to the senior income plan with great fanfare. But, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, there‟s one group that isn‟t benefitting from the 

changes. Seniors receiving level 2, 3, or 4 care in long-term care 

facilities or hospitals, those seniors still receive no more than 

$25 a month or as little as $5. To the minister: why were these 

seniors in special care homes forgotten by this government? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social 

Services and Housing. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I‟ve said 

many times in the House, the party that forgot seniors, quite 

frankly, is sitting on the other side of the Assembly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — The seniors‟ programs were not 

looked at or addressed for 16 years under the NDP. So what we 

did was we increased the Saskatchewan Income Plan, or the 

seniors‟ income plan. We increased it by 110 per cent. It is 

income dependent as that member well knows. 

 

Level 1 and 2 care was not funded under their government. We 

have not changed that program. But anyone with an income that 

qualifies for the seniors‟ income plan will qualify. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I‟m really proud of the 

work we have done for seniors and under the former premier 

when we announced the universal senior drug plan that cost 

over $50 million, not 10 but 50 million, and benefited 115,000 

seniors — not 10,000 — 115,000. But you know, Mr. Speaker, 

this is a common excuse from this minister to talk about 

holdovers from past practice. But that doesn‟t answer the 

question of why didn‟t she change it when she was making 

other changes to the program. To the minister: why are some 

seniors winners and others not? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



May 13, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3075 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Social 

Services and Housing. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — With the initiatives that we took in this 

government, in a very short time period of being a government, 

added 10,000 more seniors who would receive income support 

than under that government, he stands there and he said he‟s 

proud of their record. Well let‟s just talk about their record for a 

minute. Let‟s talk about the gold plan that they gave to seniors. 

What did that give seniors? Well it gave them a free provincial 

park entry. It gave them a free angling licence, and it gave them 

a pin. That‟s what they did for the seniors of our province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, on this end we have 10 

million. On this end, we have 15 million. But, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I want to talk about another issue that came up. On the 

same day that changes came into effect, January 1, the monthly 

rent in one woman‟s long-term care facility increased by $20. 

And long-term care facility fees can increase on a quarterly 

basis, so these seniors are no better off. 

 

More importantly there is a natural human need to retain some 

dignity and have control over how even a small amount of 

money gets spent. Maybe it‟s a small luxury, a convenience, 

perhaps a small birthday present for a grandchild. But many 

seniors in care can no longer afford to do these things. To the 

minister: will she admit that she was wrong and give these 

seniors in care homes the same benefits as other seniors? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Housing 

and Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, we have said time and 

time again — and not just this minister but minister after 

minister in this House has said — you know, give us some time. 

We have invested a lot of money through my ministry in 

particular, through many ministries, to clean up the mess that 

we inherited from that government. Let me see. That was the 

party, when in government, that was going to increase — 

increase — the care home fees for the seniors. They were going 

to do that quite considerably without caring it was 90 per cent 

of the income, that they were going to do until they got caught. 

That‟s what they were going to do for the seniors of the 

province. Beyond that they did nothing but a nice, shiny gold 

pin. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Fees for Park Usage 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, under the Sask Party, 

families are paying more for everything. This weekend, they 

will pay more to go to the park. Last December the Premier 

described the fee hikes as reasonable. And the minister went 

even further saying, quote: “People thought that maybe it‟s so 

cheap that maybe we‟re not going to come to visit the parks.” 

The Sask Party‟s excuse was that the government has to spend 

money on parks, the same type of excuse they always give. It‟s 

an excuse that‟s beginning to wear thin. To the minister: why is 

the Sask Party‟s solution always the same — make families pay 

more? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, 

Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This 

government has provided over $700 million in tax cuts to the 

people of this province, Mr. Speaker. The camping fees in the 

province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, are the second lowest 

in the country and we‟re very proud of that. They‟re something 

that we‟ve kept affordable for Saskatchewan families. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I just want to add in here that our sites, our 

sites for requests are double compared to the sites for 2009 over 

2008, Mr. Speaker. The people of this province are recognizing 

the value of camping fees and camping sites in the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and they‟re coming in droves, far 

over what we experienced last year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — There‟s a little more chatter going on. 

I‟m finding it increasingly hard to hear. I recognize the member 

from Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, other governments don‟t 

agree that paying more will help families appreciate their parks 

more. Earlier this week, the federal government announced a 

freeze on entry fees for national parks and national historic 

sites. Saskatchewan MP [Member of Parliament] Gerry Ritz 

said, quote: “This fee freeze will encourage more people to visit 

while vacationing in our region.” Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I asked before. Keep the 

chatter down so people can hear in the gallery. I recognize the 

member from Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, normally the Sask Party marches 

in lockstep with their Conservative cousins in Ottawa. To the 

minister: why is it that the one time the Sask Party charts a 

different course from their friends in Ottawa families end up 

paying more? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, 

Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Under the 

government of the members opposite, minimal park upgrades 

for our provincial parks under the NDP. Our government, Mr. 

Speaker, has committed to more park upgrades in a year and a 

half than the NDP did in four years, Mr. Speaker. The members 

opposite left our parks in such a condition, the requirement of 



3076 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2009 

this government to upgrade them into the beauties that they 

actually are, Mr. Speaker, have been quite astronomical. We 

have committed over $20 million to go to our provincial parks 

over the next four years, over the next year and a half or two 

years, and this will continue, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, families aren‟t just paying 

more to go to provincial parks. In Regina they‟re paying more 

to enjoy Wascana Park. As of April 1, organized events 

requesting space in Wascana have to pay a new $25 application 

fee. Area usage fees can be as high as $400 a day. Next year 

they‟re introducing something called a lake access fee. And 

even charities would be charged $100 to hold events in front of 

their Legislative Building. To the minister: why is the Sask 

Party making charities and community organizations pay more 

to hold events in Wascana Park? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, 

Culture and Sports. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — I‟m going to return back to the question the 

member opposite had earlier, Mr. Speaker, and then I will 

answer the other question, Mr. Speaker. The . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — All park fees and camping fees collected in 

our provincial parks are returned back into the Commercial 

Revolving Fund which again goes into supporting our 

provincial parks, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In answer to his last question, Mr. Speaker, I‟m going to say 

that the Wascana Park is governed by the Wascana Centre 

Authority, and as such I‟ve had no discussions with respect to 

them, dealing with them respecting the fees the member is 

referring to. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it seems that the style of 

answering questions that the Premier had yesterday is now 

spilling over to the ministers. He answers the question the 

second time after another question has been asked. But I‟m 

going to go on with another question. 

 

The Sask Party claims that the new fees for Wascana Park are to 

cover added maintenance costs. But their budget for 

maintenance isn‟t any larger this year than last year. 

Fundraisers like the Canadian Cancer Society Relay For Life 

have to pay more for access to the park. Meanwhile the Sask 

Party blows more than $7 million on the Vancouver Olympics. 

 

To the minister: why do families have to pay more for 

necessities and for simple pleasures like going to the park when 

the Sask Party has money to burn on pet projects and photo 

ops? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, 

Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — I‟ll respond to the member‟s comments 

about pet projects. So I gather then he thinks that tax cuts, $700 

million worth of tax cuts and projects are something that is 

considered under his particular comment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all people in Saskatchewan can use Wascana Park 

for free. They always have and they always will, Mr. Speaker. 

What the member is referring to is something that‟s dealt with 

under the Wascana Centre Authority. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres. 

 

Greenhouse Gas Emissions 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the member for The 

Battlefords asked the Minister of Environment what her 

government was doing about renewable energy. She replied 

with a laundry list of programs that she said totalled more than 

2 billion. As someone who‟s sat around the NDP cabinet table, 

Mr. Speaker, many of the programs she mentioned sounded 

very familiar. Two billion dollars a year, Mr. Speaker. This 

minister wants us to believe that she scrapped the NDP‟s 

climate change targets because those targets would cost 

SaskPower $65 million a year. But she says she‟s spending $2 

billion a year on renewable energy already, so that can‟t be the 

reason. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: what is the real reason the Sask 

Party abandoned the NDP‟s climate change targets? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, if the member opposite 

would have been listening, a big chunk of that money that I was 

talking about is going to go to a clean coal project which I‟m 

pretty sure the NDP walked away from. It had nothing to do 

with anything that their government did since they abandoned 

clean coal for this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But again back to the member‟s $320 million fund. Mr. 

Speaker, I think the NDP would have a little bit more credibility 

if they weren‟t riddled with contradictions on this file. The NDP 

Environment critic has a little list of where this $320 million is 

going to go to. They can‟t keep their stories straight week by 

week and not even within their own question period because the 

member for Coronation Park said yesterday that that $320 

million would have gone directly to SaskPower to offset 

emission reduction costs, Mr. Speaker. So before they start 



May 13, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3077 

throwing accusations about funding, perhaps they could get 

their own stories straight. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Political rhetoric is the best this minister has to 

offer when they broke their promise to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, how they choose their so-called 

targets isn‟t the only unanswered question. Saskatchewan 

people find many elements of the Sask Party‟s so-called plan 

deeply confusing. 

 

The Sask Party talks about an initial price of $15 per tonne for 

companies that exceed their maximum allowable emissions. Mr. 

Speaker, I know that this figure is not in the legislation, but then 

neither are the minister‟s so-called targets. And she says we 

should take her at her word, that those targets are firm. So the 

price must be firm as well, I‟m assuming. To the minister: how 

did she decide on an initial price of $15 per tonne? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I said all along that the 

position of our government is to balance the economy with the 

environment. And we have to consider making sure that 

Saskatchewan, while we currently are leading the country, Mr. 

Speaker, that we remain in a good position. And we will make 

sure that the decisions that we make keep Saskatchewan 

competitive. 

 

But as for targets, Mr. Speaker, NDP leadership candidate Yens 

Pederson said just yesterday targets are but a signal of how 

seriously the government takes the problem. He said, Mr. 

Speaker, the real issue is not a target but action. 

 

So the difference between the NDP leadership candidate‟s 

position and ours, Mr. Speaker, is not only do we have targets, 

but we will be taking action. We have legislation. We will have 

regulations, something that the NDP absolutely failed to do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Apparently the minister can‟t answer the 

question that was posed to her despite the fact it‟s her Act under 

her ministry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we don‟t know how this figure was chosen. 

There‟s nothing in the background material released with the 

minister‟s legislation to justify this recommendation, and the 

formula for determining the price is complicated. We don‟t 

know if the government has any data on the impact these 

provisions could have on how much companies will pay. We 

don‟t know what will be considered appropriate offsets. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: is there any data at all backing up 

the suggested $15 per tonne charge, or did the Sask Party just 

copy what Alberta is doing? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, the decisions 

that we will be making are going to be laid out in our 

regulations. The regulations will be discussed in a series of 

consultations with industry and environmental NGOs 

[non-governmental organization]. The member opposite knows 

that the carbon compliance price is not in the legislation; it is in 

the regulations. And that will be done in consultations with 

others. But, Mr. Speaker, if the member opposite is worried 

about what . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Just to remind the 

opposition, they‟re cutting into their question period. I 

recognize the Minister of Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — But, Mr. Speaker, going back to the 

NDP‟s absolute contradictions on positions, the member from 

Regina Lakeview just stood up and was worried about the cost 

to Saskatchewan families. Well, Mr. Speaker, their whole plan 

was, and I quote, “And this is one area where people can 

contribute, is to actually pay for new production which is near 

zero emissions.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, that was his position when he was the NDP 

Environment minister. He has no place to be worried about the 

position of Saskatchewan families today when he was going to 

make them pay. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party could have 

maintained the 32 per cent reduction by 2020 and taken the 

$320 million that the former administration left them to offset 

the cost to Saskatchewan ratepayers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, there are also questions around 

enforcement. After all, meaningful action to address climate 

change will mean a significant change in how people do 

business . . . and if there needs to be meaningful penalties for 

non-compliance, if this is going to work. But the Sask Party 

wants an equivalency agreement with Ottawa, to eliminate, 

quote, “the need for criminal provisions for non-compliance 

under the Canadian Environmental Protection Act.” 

 



3078 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2009 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: how can we trust this government 

to get results on climate change when their starting point is 

letting people off the hook for breaking the law? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m pretty shocked by the 

member opposite‟s position that she‟s going into this expecting 

every industry, including SaskPower, to break the law. That‟s 

their suspicion of industry in this province? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite can‟t keep her story 

straight. Yesterday she said that $320 million was going to be 

used for technology, for carbon capture, for other things, and 

today she‟s saying that they‟re going to use it for offsets within 

SaskPower. They have no position because they don‟t know 

what their position is, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her 

Majesty‟s Official Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, unfortunately 

we‟re not going to be able to use it for anything and neither are 

they because they‟ve already spent it. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do 

have some questions to the Minister of Environment around the 

equivalency agreement. 

 

But before I ask those questions, I have this very simple 

question. Could she look in her files, pull out a yellow sheet, 

and read from the yellow sheet to tell us precisely how she set 

the value of $15 per tonne for carbon. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, as I‟ve said, we will be 

consulting with industry and environmental stakeholders going 

forward on the regulations that go along with our legislation . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the 

Minister of Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I would point out in a 

letter that I wrote — and I‟m sorry; I don‟t have it on a yellow 

sheet — but I would point out in a letter that I wrote to the then 

Environment minister, the member for Regina Lakeview, 

asking about the NDP government‟s position. He said that the 

NDP government would be buying offset credits at a price of 

$15 per tonne. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her 

Majesty‟s Official Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am pleased to 

hear the minister now volunteers she learned that figure from 

the New Democratic Party government at the time. They also 

apparently learned appropriate targets to be set. So if they‟re 

going to keep this promise, why will they not keep the promise 

of the targets they portrayed in their campaign to the people of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I know that members 

opposite like to ask us to table stuff, and I‟m willing to table 

this if they‟re interested, and they can discuss their own $15 per 

tonne. But, Mr. Speaker, our position has been clear that the 

position that our government will take is to balance the 

economy with the environmental protection of this province, 

and that is the position that we have taken. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yesterday on CBC [Canadian Broadcasting 

Corporation] David McLaughlin, the president and CEO [chief 

executive officer] of the National Round Table on Environment 

and the Economy said that “Understand that it‟s not just going 

to be environmental concerns. We do have to factor in 

economic concerns.” He goes on to say, Mr. Speaker, and I 

quote, “Starting out, I think it‟s legitimate what the 

Saskatchewan government is talking about.” 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her 

Majesty‟s Official Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, having listened to that 

very same interview, the minister may want to look at the entire 

transcript. 

 

I want to move to the question of the equivalency agreement 

with Ottawa. Will the minister stand in her place today and 

admit there is today no equivalency agreement with Ottawa — 

that it is her hope that one can be negotiated perhaps as early as 

this fall? 

 

In that circumstance, Mr. Deputy Speaker, my question to the 

minister is this. Can she be unequivocal in her response today, 

that whatever equivalency agreement that she is able to 

negotiate with Ottawa will be equivalent to the federal plan no 

matter who will be the federal Government of Canada? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I have been consistent all 

along that what we announced on Monday is that the federal 

government, the Minister of Environment, the Hon. Jim 

Prentice and I have signed an agreement in principle to work on 

an equivalency agreement that would allow Saskatchewan to 

establish a technology fund for reinvestment in technology for 

Saskatchewan. That is the program that we are working on. 

That is the equivalency agreement that we will be working 

toward. And I am confident in my negotiations with Minister 

Jim Prentice that that is the negotiations which we will reach, 



May 13, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3079 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her 

Majesty‟s Official Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is clear 

that the minister and the Sask Party government want to 

establish an equivalency agreement with the federal 

government, the current federal Conservative government. 

 

Just yesterday, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the federal watchdog, the 

Commissioner of the Environment and Sustainable 

Development in Canada, says that the federal plan is extremely 

lacking, lacking on a number of points. But one very significant 

point is that the federal plan has no way to report on reductions 

in greenhouse gas emissions — no way to report because they 

have no way to measure. Now we are going to sign an 

equivalency with that kind of plan. I hope not, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

So my question to the minister is: does she today, can she 

provide to this House and the people of Saskatchewan today a 

report on how she intends to measure greenhouse gas emission 

reductions? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m not sure that there is a 

clear understanding of what the equivalency agreement is. It 

will allow Saskatchewan to regulate. It is a 

made-in-Saskatchewan plan based on equivalent outcomes. 

And, Mr. Speaker, to get a baseline information on the 

emissions currently in our province, we are going to be 

engaging third party verification for sectors to determine what 

those emissions are, and we‟ll be reporting year over year to see 

what the reductions are, Mr. Speaker. So I can offer up some 

officials in my ministry to go over the technical information if 

the members opposite are interested in that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We are not signing on to the federal plan. We are signing an 

equivalency agreement for a made-in-Saskatchewan plan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her 

Majesty‟s Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the minister had 

suggested, the Sask Party government had suggested they have 

adopted the federal targets for emission reductions. We do not 

know — apparently this is to be established in regulation — we 

do not know the baseline on which the Sask Party intends to 

operate from, but we have not heard, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 

have not heard yet how they intend to measure. 

 

The Government of Canada has said, the environmental 

watchdog, it is impossible for us to measure reductions. Now 

the minister says that she may have a plan on how to do this. So 

my question, I guess, to the minister is: will she share her plan, 

her understanding, her ability with the national Government of 

Canada so that they might in fact measure reductions? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I‟m thankful for the 

member opposite‟s confidence in my abilities that I could 

perhaps help out the federal government. But again, Mr. 

Speaker, the equivalency agreement will allow Saskatchewan to 

have a made-in-Saskatchewan plan. Saskatchewan will be the 

regulator. We will have third party verification on emissions in 

our province, Mr. Speaker. We will have a technology fund for 

re-investment in technology in our province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I can understand the members opposite 

being a bit concerned about an equivalency agreement because, 

Mr. Speaker, it is something that, considering their negative and 

contrary relationship with any federal government, the NDP 

would never have been able to achieve. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social 

Services and Housing. 

 

Income Support Program for People with Disabilities 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m pleased to rise to 

inform the House that earlier today our government launched a 

historic new income support program for people with 

disabilities. The new program will be implemented beginning 

October 1, 2009. The implementation of this new program 

means that thousands of people with disabilities in 

Saskatchewan will no longer need to depend on social 

assistance for their basic living cost. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — For years people with disabilities and 

their organizations have been telling government that they 

needed a new, dignified, less intrusive income support program. 

So in this year‟s Throne Speech, we promised to ensure that 

people with disabilities in Saskatchewan receive the support 

they need. Today‟s announcement represents another promise 

kept by our government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — The new program will be separate 

from the existing Saskatchewan assistance program and will be 

based on the goals and principles recommended by the 

disability income task team. Mr. Speaker, the two primary goals 

of the new program will be to ensure a socially acceptable 

income for people with disabilities and to encourage and 

empower people with disabilities to participate fully as possible 

in their community life. 

 



3080 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2009 

On October 1 of this year, an estimated 3,000 Saskatchewan 

people with disabilities will begin to receive benefits through 

this new program. A new community advisory committee will 

work with ministry officials immediately to develop an 

assessment process to ensure additional individuals can be 

added continuously. Over time enrolment in the new program is 

expect to reach between 8,000 and 10,000 people. 

 

I believe our announcement in a historic new income 

replacement program represents a milestone for people with 

disabilities in Saskatchewan. I am proud that our government is 

delivering on a commitment to ensure that people with 

disabilities can participate as fully as possible in our society. 

 

Once again I wish to thank the members of the disability 

income task team, the Disability Income Support Coalition, and 

those community members and ministry staff who participated 

in consultations earlier this year. Their input has been 

invaluable in shaping the new future, as we begin today, for 

people with disabilities in Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And I want to first thank the minister for sharing the ministerial 

statement. This is indeed a very good announcement, and I too 

want to join in with the minister in congratulating the task team, 

both the public servants and the community folks, who made 

this a reality, their hard work and diligence on this very 

important piece of social policy. 

 

I also want to take a moment to thank the members of this 

Disability Income Support Coalition for their hard work and 

their tenacity to see this through. It‟s a network of people who 

were deeply committed to see this happen, and it‟s the first step. 

Second steps are actually happening and we see . . . on the 

journey to make this a reality for those living with disabilities. 

 

I will have to take a moment to review the report. It is on the 

website. I did take it down and I did take a look at it. I‟m very 

glad to see the community advisory committee established, as 

this kind of work needs to be monitored — not only in the 

beginning stages but throughout the years — as this is an 

important piece. 

 

You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, our role in opposition is to 

ensure transparency, accountability, and fairness in all that 

government does, and we will continue to do that. But the aim 

for all of us here in this House is to help the province of 

Saskatchewan serve all of its citizens well so they can become 

full participants in our society. 

 

Some specific areas that I‟ve heard concerns about, and we will 

be watching and continuing to monitor, is adequacy of income. 

And I see that recommendation 26 speaks specifically to 

indexing. And that one is a very important one because I think 

that takes the politics out of some of these things. Also we‟ve 

talked a lot about adequate transportation and housing. 

Accessible, safe, and affordable housing is so important. And I 

see recommendation 28 talks about support for employment and 

education opportunities, so important for those living with 

disabilities to become full participants of our society. 

 

And also, Mr. Speaker, as we‟ve raised in this House on a few 

occasions this is very important to serve the basic needs of 

people living with disabilities. But we know at the UN [United 

Nations] level, and Canada as well, is talking about the 

declaration on the rights of people living with disabilities, and I 

think on this moment too, I would urge the minister to raise this 

again with her counterpart at the federal level. 

 

So once again, I thank the minister for this announcement and 

the opportunity to respond to it. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 

Education. 

 

Allocation of Child Care Spaces 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, on Monday of this week I had the pleasure of 

joining Jeff Fox, CEO of the Moose Jaw YMCA [Young Men‟s 

Christian Association] and Jennifer Petracek-Kolb, director of 

the Play N‟ Learn Child Care Centre in Moose Jaw. I was there 

to celebrate the first allocation of the 1,000 new child care 

spaces announced by our government in the provincial budget. 

 

[14:30] 

 

I was very pleased to attend this celebration during Early 

Learning and Child Care Month. Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is an 

important month to acknowledge as we take time to recognize 

and thank early childhood educators for the important 

contributions they make to Saskatchewan‟s children and 

families. In Saskatchewan, with our growing economy, we have 

an ever-increasing demand for early learning and child care as 

more parents want to enter the workforce or pursue 

post-secondary education. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we recognize the value of our early 

learning and child care opportunities for our youngest citizens 

in supporting positive social and emotional development, early 

literacy, and school achievement. This is why early learning and 

child care is a priority of our government. 

 

In the first year of our mandate, we added 500 licensed child 

care spaces. This year I was very pleased to announce that we 

have added an additional 1,000 licensed child care spaces at an 

investment of $4.2 million. The 1,000 new funded spaces will 

bring our total number of licensed spaces to 11,400 by the end 

of 2009-10. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Moose Jaw YMCA 

received 120 of those new spaces. And they will be opening up 

two new child care facilities. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Funding for each new child care space 

includes capital support of $3,360 per space for development 

and an additional $615 per space in start-up funds for the 

purchase of furnishings and equipment. As well, $246 per space 

is provided to purchase materials to enhance early learning 



May 13, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3081 

achievement. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to point out a few other 

enhancements for early learning and child care which will 

support the provision of quality services to Saskatchewan 

children. Early learning and child care received an additional 

$1.2 million to support the training of early childhood 

educators, and there was also $375,000 for child care for 

children with exceptionally high, diverse needs. Child care 

centres received a 7 per cent annualized CBO lift in 2008-09 

and an additional 3 per cent in 2009-10 to support recruitment 

and retention of early childhood educators. Better wages 

support the recruitment and retention of trained staff, which I 

recognize is a challenge right across Canada. 

 

I want to congratulate the Moose Jaw YMCA for their 

tremendous commitment to fulfilling the need for child care in 

their home community. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, communities across Saskatchewan are in 

need of licensed child care. Over the next few months, many 

communities in Saskatchewan will also be allocated new 

spaces. Community celebrations will be held when these new 

spaces open. It is our goal to have all of the new spaces open 

before the end of the fiscal year. Children and parents in Moose 

Jaw were extremely pleased to see this quick action by our 

government, and I‟m sure many communities will be wanting to 

expand on their own initiatives. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, while we celebrated this investment in 

Moose Jaw, this investment in quality early learning is truly an 

investment in the future of our province. Thank you very much, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

would like to thank the minister for sending across a copy of his 

statement today. And I have to say that I was very pleased to 

hear the announcement the other day that was made in Moose 

Jaw of 120 new licensed child care spaces. It‟s good news for 

Moose Jaw families, and it truly is good news for children in 

our community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is a couple of concerns though. Looking at 

the minister‟s comments, he makes a statement that “In the first 

year of our mandate, we added 500 licensed child care spaces.” 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, those are purely spaces on paper 

that were announced last year, and they have yet to be 

implemented, and Saskatchewan families across this province 

are waiting. 

 

Then again this year we‟ve seen 1,000 spaces announced, 

bringing the total number — and this is out of the minister‟s 

notes — the total number of licensed spaces to 11,400 by the 

end of this fiscal year. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when the 

minister was in committee and then again in this House, he has 

quite clearly stated that in actual fact in this province today 

there is 200 less child care spaces than what there was when 

that government was elected. 

So, Mr. Speaker, when he is announcing new spaces, I wish he 

would wait to celebrate until he is cutting the ribbon and 

children are coming in the doors because that‟s the important 

part for Saskatchewan families, is they need the spaces — 

actual spaces, not just paper spaces. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these are the comments of the minister. You 

don‟t have to take my word for it. You can easily . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Well the member from Indian Head, the 

Minister of Health, says good. Well that‟s fine. You know, he 

can look in Hansard and he can quite clearly see . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. I recognize the member 

for Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, when we went through 

committee and we talked about the loss of spaces and what has 

been holding up last year‟s announcement of spaces from being 

implemented, the minister gave some very valid concerns and 

talked about the issues and the excuses for not one of last year‟s 

announced spaces actually being up and running and open to 

accept children in this province or to support Saskatchewan 

families. And one reason that he gave was the difficulty in 

recruiting and retaining workers in this sector. Now it‟s just a 

suggestion but, I mean maybe, just maybe, the minister could 

look to support increased wages to help solve this issue instead 

of announcing new paper spaces, and Saskatchewan families 

wouldn‟t have to wait so long. 

 

And I know he talked about the 7 per cent that was put in and 

the loss that we‟ve seen in home daycares which are important 

in various areas across this province because not all areas are 

conducive to child care centres where there is large number of 

spaces. Many areas across the province rely on child care 

homes. So maybe he needs to look at adding a little bit more 

into the wages in this CBO sector to make sure that we aren‟t 

still waiting even longer and that he actually meets his targets of 

11,400 spaces at the end of this fiscal year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the capital grants, the furnishing grants, these are 

all very welcome in this sector. The training for early childhood 

educators is also welcome, and I‟m very pleased to see that the 

minister has continued on with these initiatives and investments 

that were begun about three years ago. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, there is one thing I have to say. I do welcome 

the announcement in Moose Jaw. And I have to say that Jeff 

and Jennifer that are in charge of the Play N‟ Learn and also the 

young parents‟ centre that has opened in Moose Jaw, who have 

applied for these spaces and are working to put them in place, 

they are very dedicated. They are very organized, and they are 

hard workers and very good planners.  

 

So I‟m sure they will easily meet the minister‟s projection of 

having these spaces up and running in our community of Moose 

Jaw well before the date or at least by the date — I don‟t want 

to put any additional pressure on them — but at least by the 

date that‟s been announced at the end of this fiscal year. I know 

the work that they have done so far in our community is 

appreciated. They are very dedicated to the children in our 

community and that shows in the centre and the work they do 

on a day-to-day basis. So we‟re very pleased to hear that. 

 



3082 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2009 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, overall the announcement is very 

good and all of us who are concerned with Saskatchewan 

families who are waiting for opportunities to enter the 

workforce or waiting to build their careers will also appreciate 

the minister‟s announcement, and look forward to the actual 

implementation of the spaces. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I wish to 

table the answer to question 373 through 391. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled 

questions 373 to 391. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

would like to ask leave to move a motion in regarding the fall 

sitting days. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 

asked leave to move a motion. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Sitting Days 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

move: 

 

That notwithstanding rule 3(2) of The Rules and 

Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 

the first sitting day of the fall period of the third session of 

the twenty-sixth legislature shall commence on 

Wednesday, October 21, 2009, and the fall period of the 

parliamentary calendar shall be adjusted to incorporate 25 

sitting days with the fall period being concluded on 

Wednesday, December 3, 2009. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 

moved: 

 

That notwithstanding rule 3(2) of The Rules and 

Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 

the first sitting of the fall period of the third session of the 

twenty-sixth legislature shall commence on Wednesday, 

October 21, 2009, and the fall period of the parliamentary 

calendar shall be adjusted to incorporate 25 sitting days 

with the fall period being concluded on Wednesday, 

December 3, 2009. 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Before we commence with adjourned 

debates, pursuant to section 286, The Election Act, 1996, I am 

submitting 95 hard copies of the Report of the Chief Electoral 

Officer, volume II, Campaign Contributions and Expenditures, 

Twenty-Sixth Provincial General Election November 7, 2007. I 

so table. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 80 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Norris that Bill No. 80 — The 

Construction Industry Labour Relations Amendment Act, 

2009 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 

Albert Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m pleased to enter 

the debate on Bill 80 this afternoon. 

 

And unfortunately — as was the case with Bills 5 and 6, the 

Bills that the Minister of Health suggested wouldn‟t need 

legislation — unfortunately there‟s been no consultation with 

groups respecting Bill 80. There was no consultation at all prior 

to its introduction, during drafting, or at any other point. And 

it‟s become the norm for this government to do that. 

 

Now if I could, I‟d like to set the climate a little bit under which 

this legislation is introduced. Now we have a boom that began 

in Saskatchewan prior to ‟06. We had massive growth in 

industry and construction and we had a construction trades 

group, highly skilled, hard-working people, who responded to 

the demand and have done exceptional work in this province to 

build this province physically. Now that‟s what they‟ve done in 

response to the boom. 

 

Additionally it‟s interesting what the impetus for this Bill might 

be considering there hasn‟t been a strike in this industry since 

1982. So was it the labour unrest that caused the Bill to be 

introduced? Frankly the legislation is regressive and dangerous 

for a number of reasons. 

 

[14:45] 

 



May 13, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3083 

Plain and simple truth is, if the apprenticeship system and 

construction unions work together to create a pool of highly 

skilled, highly educated workers in this province, Bill 80 as it 

stands today will decrease the number of people at the top of 

their trade and decrease the frequency and quality of good 

training in these trades. If you decrease training and training 

opportunities, you decrease the level of skill of the workforce, 

you decrease the quality of the work; therefore you decrease the 

safety for the people of the province. 

 

It‟s interesting that this Bill all but guarantees a decrease in the 

quality of work. It forces present unions to abandon their focus 

on apprenticeship and training and focus only on the lowest bid. 

It‟s a race to the bottom of wages, work quality, and 

apprenticeship and training. It guarantees that common 

standards are used across the board, most of which will be 

lower standards and not higher standards. 

 

Now I guess it‟s not surprising, when you‟ve got a Premier who 

says that they‟re going to go to war with the working men and 

women of this province, that you‟d introduce a Bill like this. 

 

I found it interesting in a piece of legislation that I scrutinized, 

specifically the Labour Market Commission. Now the Labour 

Market Commission by all accounts was working well. It was a 

commission where business, organized labour, and government 

all agreed that it was working well and serving the province 

well, but they made the mistake of including the word labour in 

the title and so it had to go. Irrespective of the fact it was 

working, irrespective of the fact that the Chamber of Commerce 

of Saskatchewan wanted it, liked it, and agreed it was working, 

they made the mistake of including labour in the title so it was 

trashed. It‟s unfortunate that they would take that attitude to the 

working men and women in this province. 

 

Now I just want to add one thing and that‟s that, you know, 

being a New Democrat means that you‟re responsible for 

legislation. You‟re responsible and you have to work hard to 

ensure that all of the people of the province of Saskatchewan 

benefit from government. 

 

Now the same is not necessarily true obviously with this 

government, considering they‟re going to go to war with the 

working men and women in this province. And it was telling. 

During the election we had two forums in Prince Albert, one of 

which was sponsored by the chamber of commerce, and one of 

which was sponsored by labour. 

 

Now the chamber of commerce put on their forum first and I 

was pleased to attend — considering that we‟d done such hard 

work on the royalty regime structure in this province, on 

manufacturing taxes, on personal income taxes. The business 

tax review lowered business taxes. So we set the climate for the 

economic boom that this province sees today. And the Liberal 

candidate showed up. The Green Party candidate showed up. 

The Sask Party candidate showed up. And we were there, and 

we had a healthy debate. 

 

But you know, when it came to the labour-sponsored event, the 

Green Party was there; the Liberals were there. We of course 

showed up. But the big cop from Prince Albert — afraid to go, 

afraid to show up at a labour-sponsored debate. 

 

So it‟s no surprise at all that they would introduce this 

legislation today considering the massive unrest. We haven‟t 

had a strike since 1982, but they‟re going to beat up on working 

men and women in this province. And I guess it‟s proven 

through this Bill. It‟s unfortunate. 

 

Now the member from Prince Albert Carlton says that I‟m 

grandstanding. But he wasn‟t there. Everybody showed up, but 

he wasn‟t there. So it‟s not grandstanding at all; it‟s mere fact, 

and I‟m just pointing it out. And he doesn‟t like it. That‟s not 

my problem. 

 

Now Bill 80, as I‟d said, decreases apprenticeship and training 

opportunities. It decreases opportunities for Saskatchewan 

firms. Interestingly in committee I witnessed the Minister of 

Highways brag about how the increased activity in construction 

in Saskatchewan would largely be taken up by Alberta firms. 

And consistent with the Minister of Highways, this minister has 

introduced legislation that helps enable out-of-province firms to 

take work from the hands of Saskatchewan people. At they‟re at 

least one thing — they‟re consistent. 

 

Now Bill 80 does a number of things, most of which are 

negative, and I will allow another member from our esteemed 

party to continue the debate. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

One of the ideas that the public might have about the impact of 

the Legislative Assembly on their lives is that they equate the 

budgets that we put forward with their pocketbooks because 

they will know from experience that sometimes taxes go up in 

budgets; sometimes taxes go down in budgets. But nevertheless, 

it‟s the budgets that affect people‟s pocketbook. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I just want to point out that — and even for 

the edification for the member from Saskatoon Northwest — 

that it‟s not just budgets that affect people‟s pocketbooks. 

Legislation can also directly, substantially affect people‟s 

pocketbooks. And so people don‟t need to feel poorer or richer 

simply because of budgets that are passed in this province. They 

can also be affected very, very directly by legislation that is put 

forward by the government. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is one of those pieces of legislation that 

very directly, very substantially affects people‟s pocketbooks. 

No ifs and buts, no questions about that — none. 

 

Mr. Speaker, everyone who has looked at this legislation 

concedes that this is a piece of legislation that will reduce the 

powers of trade unions in Saskatchewan. This is a piece of 

legislation that is to the benefit of those companies that employ 

those workers and, at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, this 

means less money in the pockets of workers. This is why so 

many workers are upset about this piece of legislation because 

they know it will affect them directly where it hurts — in their 

pocketbooks. 

 

It really means a lower standard of living for our construction 

workers in our province. They know it will affect them that 

way. They know it will affect their families. This, they know. 



3084 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2009 

And they know also that this is no surprise coming from the 

Saskatchewan Party because the Saskatchewan Party has 

always, always in their history — and their precursor, the 

Progressive Conservatives or whatever name they go by, Mr. 

Speaker — the right wing has always stood up for the bosses 

and the right of the bosses to operate in our province and 

always to the detriment of the workers. And that is why it is no 

surprise that this piece of legislation would come from the 

Saskatchewan Party . . . 

 

The Speaker: — If members would like to have a debate 

amongst themselves, I would ask the members to sit down 

behind the bar rather than across the floor. I recognize the 

member from Regina Douglas Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — So, Mr. Speaker, if people want to know 

about why this piece of legislation has resonated so poorly with 

so many working people in Saskatchewan, it is because they see 

it as having a direct impact on their pockets. They see it as 

having a direct impact on the livelihoods. They see it as having 

a direct impact on the standard of living of their family. That‟s 

what this is all about. 

 

What this Bill is all about, it takes . . . If you can conceive of a 

set amount of money that is expended on projects that are 

affected by this Bill in our province — let‟s say, take for the 

sake of argument, that it‟s $2 billion — it means that $2 billion, 

now less of it will flow into the pockets of the workers. More of 

it will flow into fewer pockets, those the pockets of the bosses 

that own the companies. And that is what this Bill is all about. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, one of the reasons I raise this, it‟s not just a 

question of fundamental unfairness in my view, but it‟s also a 

question of why in the world that, given what is taking place in 

the economy, when you need to find measures that help to 

stimulate the economy — and every economist will tell you it 

makes a lot of sense to put more money into more peoples‟ 

pockets as opposed to reducing the amount of money in many 

people‟s pockets and concentrating that in a few pockets — 

why in the world would you come up with this legislation at 

this time in our history? 

 

I can‟t think of a more badly timed piece of legislation than this 

piece of legislation. This is a government that at the beginning 

of the year prided themselves on, we‟re going to advance 

money out of this current budget year. We‟re going to move it 

out of the next budget year into the current budget year so that 

money will be available to stimulate the economy. That‟s our 

greatest challenge; that‟s what we need to do. But then they 

come forward with this piece of legislation that does exactly the 

contrary. 

 

So we know where they stand in terms of stimulative impact on 

the economy, Mr. Speaker. This is a straight ideological Bill 

that suits their political thinking. They don‟t really care about 

the impact it has on the economy. And this will be a poor 

impact on the economy, because everyone knows that if you‟ve 

got 1,000 people with X amount of money in their pockets, they 

are more likely to spend it than two or three people that have 

that money in their pocket, Mr. Speaker. And so everyone 

knows that. They know that, but they don‟t really care about 

that, and that‟s why wrong-headedly they‟re pursuing with this 

piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

This is bad, bad policy. This is bad, bad timing, given what is 

taking place in the world economy. And as the government is 

fond of saying, we‟re not immune to what is taking place in the 

economy. It affects us here in Saskatchewan as well, and we‟re 

seeing some indications of that, Mr. Speaker, but the 

government is unmoved, unfazed. They don‟t really care. 

They‟re going to proceed with this piece of very bad legislation. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this is a party that, since taking office, has 

prided itself on acceding to whatever wishes the public might 

have, because frankly they‟ve had the money to spend on 

favouring many priorities that Saskatchewan people had. 

They‟ve taken a populist approach. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this is a Bill that goes, I think, in the wrong 

direction. This is a Bill that they will find out will not resonate 

very well with thousands and thousands of construction workers 

in Saskatchewan who will feel their pockets have been picked 

by the Sask Party government. And they want no more of this 

government. Mr. Speaker, that concludes my remarks. Thank 

you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

make a few comments for the record on Bill 80, The 

Construction Industry Labour Relations Amendment Act, 2009, 

CILRA, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we all know this Bill was introduced on March 

6 by the Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and 

Labour. Now this Bill, as we‟ve heard many speakers before, 

drastically, Mr. Speaker, drastically overturns the orderly 

functioning of the construction industry in this province. And 

now this is the third Bill presented by this minister which, to 

say the least, has sent a chill through the unionized sector of this 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the stakeholders in the construction industry in 

this province are telling us that this Bill has the potential to add 

a great deal of instability to the industry. This Bill will impact 

on wages, safety, the apprenticeship programs, and the quality 

of the work, Mr. Speaker. They have also said, which we have 

also heard within the Assembly here, that they were not 

consulted about any of the changes, nor did they receive any 

indication that the changes were coming, nor did they feel that 

the changes were necessary, nor had they met to indicate that 

they require changes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House we are not opposed to 

changes. We‟re not opposed to improvement, but at least on this 

side of the House, Mr. Speaker, we believe in talking to the 

people of this province, unlike those members opposite and the 

Sask Party members opposite who continuously have shown us 

their lack of consultation with the people whenever they think 

of bringing forward legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I have said, we believe in consultation and our 

record on this issue is clear. We consulted in the early ‟90s on 

the changes to The Trade Union Act and the CILRA has gone 



May 13, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3085 

through many changes. But at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, 

we had systems both within The Trade Union Act and within 

the CILRA that I believe were workable systems, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:00] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, all parties did not necessarily agree with 

what they wanted the system to look like or how it worked. But 

again the system worked. And we believe it created stability in 

the industry, which with today‟s changes will not lead to 

stability, Mr. Speaker, but in fact instability. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would just . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — How do you know that? 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — . . . For the members here, like to read into 

the . . . The member asks, how do I know that? Here‟s a quote I 

would just like to read from Kerry Westcott, United 

Brotherhood of Carpenters and Joiners Local 1985, an 

organizer, what he has to say about this. Now he says this, Mr. 

Speaker, under the heading, “Do we need a change in how 

bargaining works for the building trades?”: 

 

Like the essential services act, Bill 80 is a solution to a 

non-existent problem. The organized building trades only 

do about 20 per cent of all construction work. Eighty per 

cent is already non-union or is contested spin off 

contractor‟s work. The 20 per cent we do perform tends to 

be the most complex work. The building trades have the 

capacity to do large complex jobs and complicated large 

mill renovations under „shut-down‟ time constraints. What 

is to be gained by further marginalizing the building 

trades? What is the problem the Sask Party government is 

trying to fix? 

 

Bill 80 is designed to put the building trades at the far 

margins of our industry. And we will be unable to 

influence wages or conditions in our industry.” 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the members asked about the destabilization. 

Well here are people who worked there, unlike that member and 

the other members sitting out there who have absolutely no idea 

of what is going on. This person says, who works in the 

industry, he says that Bill 80 is designed to put the building 

trades at the far margins of our industry and it‟ll be very 

destabilizing for labour relationships and apprenticeships. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, they asked about who . . . How do we know 

that? Because we talk to people in this province, and when they 

tell us that these are some of the impacts . . . Unlike the other 

members who simply go forward and put forward wild ideas 

about how things should work. And I think that the chickens 

will come home to roost over there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now in terms of the chickens coming home to roost, because 

Mr. Westcott goes on to say: 

 

There will be wildcat strikes, jobsite confrontations, 

neglect of the apprenticeship system, and way lower 

wages for all construction workers, union or not yet union. 

 

Now I think that would perhaps answer that member‟s 

questions, the part-time Minister of Labour who is trying to 

make now, at this point in time, trying to make some sense of 

all of this. Because it‟s questionable, I guess, whether he saw or 

understood or perhaps maybe he didn‟t even read this 

legislation. Now, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, our approach 

would have been to consult prior to the change. 

 

Now again, this minister talks or they‟ve . . . obviously the 

communications department has gotten together and said, how 

are we going to sell this so we really don‟t have to talk about 

what this will do to the people of Saskatchewan? And they 

came up with the idea to talk about it as freedom of choice. And 

again, every once in a while, Mr. Speaker, they talk about 

democracy. But their idea of freedom of choice means in this 

case dismantling of the proud history of the building trades in 

this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and they boast of the democracy. But you know, 

anybody who knows this, knows this is a clear case of union 

busting. They‟re trying to dismantle and get rid of unions. Mr. 

Speaker, it is difficult to comprehend the approach taken by the 

Sask Party government. And I don‟t care whether they can paint 

it and their communications department can do whatever they 

want to it, but this is what it is. It is an attack on the working 

men and women of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there was no consultation. As I said, there‟s just 

been an attack on the building trades unions. And, Mr. Speaker, 

in listening to the part-time Minister of Labour answer 

questions around the Bills he introduced, Bills 5 and 6 — and I 

believe the member from Prince Albert said particularly Bills 5 

and 6, now 80 — it makes us . . . Here we understand that he 

absolutely has no idea what he is talking about or what he is 

doing. That‟s clear from his words, from his written statements. 

That goes without saying. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, what is here is the history books. And the 

history books are going to clearly show that at the time that the 

Supreme Court of this country is dealing with freedom of 

association and extending to the trade unions of this country the 

right of free collective bargaining, Mr. Speaker, also the most 

powerful nation in the world and its president, Barack Obama, 

are promoting the Employee Free Choice Act. And now here 

we have this part-time minister who is lost within all of this, not 

understanding his place in this history, and he‟s marching off 

totally in the opposite direction. He‟s doing the opposite thing 

of what is happening in the United States of America and what 

our Supreme Court is saying that he should do. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, maybe this part-time Minister of Labour is 

just simply walking around in circles and now what he thinks 

maybe what he would do is if he . . . perhaps if he thinks if he 

can talk about freedom of choice and democracy long enough, 

maybe eventually he even himself will believe that all of this, 

all of these Bills, actually make sense. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite seem to lack the ability to 

understand that when you consult, that what democracy truly is 

about is the ability to consult with the people. And not only is 

that lost on this part-time Minister of Labour but on the, I would 

say, on the entire Sask Party. 

 

Now let me explain in a little bit more detail to that part-time 



3086 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2009 

minister and the Sask Party members that this, as I heard 

mentioned earlier by the member from Regina Douglas Park, 

that there are a whole bunch of people that this is not going to 

exactly play well with. And I think that this, if I may, Mr. 

Speaker, this is going to help put those folks into opposition. 

 

And you know, I have been listening over the last few days in 

terms of the members‟ statements that they have been making, 

and I would say that what is happening is that, if you listen 

carefully in the way they‟re phrasing the members‟ statements 

and in their attacks, that in fact what they‟re actually practising 

for is the opposition. I think they‟re practising for the 

opposition, Mr. Speaker, and they should continue to do that. If 

I was them, I would definitely continue to do that. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as I was just beginning to explain to those 

members about the recent Supreme Court ruling, I would just 

remind them about that ruling because perhaps a number of 

them have not heard about that. And there was a press release 

released on June 8, 2007, and I would just like to read that into 

the record: 

 

This morning‟s ruling by the Supreme Court of Canada, 

which affirms a challenge to Bill 29 brought by the 

Hospital Employees‟ Union, the BC Nurses Union, and 

the BCGEU, is a major victory for the labour movement 

that will restrict government‟s future ability to strip away 

collective bargaining rights . . . 

 

Bill 29, the Health and Social Services Delivery 

Improvement Act, is the controversial 2002 legislation that 

removed or rewrote contracting out, seniority and other 

provisions of health care and community social services 

collective agreements. The legislation restricts free 

collective bargaining on many of these issues. Bill 29 also 

excluded health care and community social service 

workers from the successorship provisions of the BC 

Labour Code. 

 

In a 6-1 decision, the Court held that freedom of 

association as guaranteed by Section 2(d) of the Charter 

includes a procedural right to collective bargaining. In 

doing so the Court has overturned previous decisions that 

rejected any protection for collective bargaining. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this right of collective bargaining in the workplace 

is now protected under the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 

This decision overturns 20 years of legal decisions that, as far 

as labour was concerned, gave no meaning to the Charter‟s 

protection of freedom of association. 

 

Mr. Speaker, members over there should understand that these 

are important rights now enshrined, now enshrined, in our 

constitution. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as the Supreme Court said, in the 

government to the BC [British Columbia], it was wrong for 

them. It was wrong for them to tear up agreements that were 

negotiated with unions and that they could not make legislated 

changes that would make null and void those agreements 

without negotiating with the unions. That is what the Supreme 

Court decision was all about, Mr. Speaker. It said that collective 

bargaining, that you had to collective bargain any changes 

within collective agreements, that you could not simply pass 

Bills and make changes without first talking to the people who 

you had agreements with. 

 

Now the court in its decision thereby not only conferred the 

right of freedom of association but extended to the unions the 

right to collective bargaining. Mr. Speaker, this right is now 

enshrined in our constitution and the rights which this 

government should respect, something which seems, Mr. 

Speaker, from the actions of, as I mentioned the part-time 

Minister of Labour, something which is completely lost on that 

part-time Minister of Labour. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I secondly spoke and made mention of President 

Obama‟s administration putting forward the Employee Free 

Choice Act, Mr. Speaker, and I would just like to tell you a bit 

about what President Obama had to say about the free choice 

Act. Speaking to the Washington Post he said: 

 

Here‟s my basic principle [he said] that wages and 

incomes have flatlined over the last decade. That part of 

that has to do with forces . . . beyond everybody‟s control: 

globalization, technology and so forth. Part of it has to do 

with workers have very little leverage and that larger and 

larger shares of our productivity go to the top and not to 

the middle or the bottom. [He said] I think unions serve an 

important role in that. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the important part he said: 

 

I think that the way the Bush Administration managed the 

Department of Labor, the NLRB, and a host of other 

aspects of labor management relations [they] put the 

thumb too heavily against unions. I want to lift that thumb 

[he said, Mr. Speaker]. There are going to being steps that 

we can take other than the Employee Free Choice Act that 

will make a difference there. 

 

I think the basic principle of making it easier and fairer for 

workers to want to join a union, join a union, is important 

[he said]. 

 

That‟s what he said, Mr. Speaker: 

 

I think the basic principle of making it easier and fairer for 

workers who want to join a union, join a union, is 

important. And the basic outline of the Employee Free 

Choice are the ones that I agree with . . .” [But he said] I‟ll 

certainly listen to all parties . . . 

 

And those are the words of President Barack Obama, President 

of the United States of America. And yet, Mr. Speaker, this 

part-time Minister of Labour should note . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. I just want to remind the 

member I think in times past we have been . . . It‟s been brought 

to the attention of members that we‟re to address the members 

in the Chamber by their proper title. And by referring to 

individuals as part-time members, I do not believe references 

proper title, so I remind members and will call you on that again 

if it‟s raised again. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 



May 13, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3087 

Minister of Labour should note that this Bill will allow workers 

to join unions if the majority of employees sign cards of support 

without the necessity of voting by secret ballot. Mr. Speaker, 

that should be . . . Perhaps the members who would hear that 

that this Bill, that this Bill that‟s being now put forward in the 

United States of America by President Obama‟s administration 

will allow workers to join unions if the majority of employees 

sign a card of support without the necessity of voting by secret 

ballot. Imagine that, Mr. Speaker. Just imagine that, Mr. 

Speaker. The United States of America is passing legislation to 

have unionization by card signing, and our Minister of Labour 

has taken that right away from workers right here in 

Saskatchewan. That same right that the President of the United 

States is putting forward for the American workers, here in 

Saskatchewan the Sask Party is taking away. 

 

And on top of it all, if you think, Mr. Speaker, that that is not 

showing disrespect, they are saying that this is more 

democratic. They have the audacity to stand there and say that 

this is somehow more democratic, more democratic than the 

United States of America. This will be a good one for the 

history books, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would say that that Minister of Labour 

lives in denial. And denial is a fact that it matters which 

approach you take in industrial relations. On the record, in 

committees, over and over he says that it does not matter. He 

tells the public, Mr. Speaker, that he is more democratic than 

the government of the United States except that his policies are 

the same as the George Bush policies, and we all know what 

happened to George Bush, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I would also say for the record that the Minister of Labour 

probably thinks of himself as holding somewhat liberal views, 

but I think he‟s shown himself quite clear the conservative that 

he is. And, Mr. Speaker, perhaps he doesn‟t understand the 

policies that he‟s putting forward are the same as the George 

Bush anti-union policies the American people rejected in the 

last American election. And I think it would be well worthwhile 

for the Sask Party to pay attention to that. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, imagine the history books, what they will say 

about this regressive legislation and the Minister of Labour. 

What will the scholars in this area say when they see at the 

same time that the Supreme Court of Canada and the 

Government of the United States were creating true freedoms 

and equality for the working people and our own Minister of 

Labour, right here in Saskatchewan, was marching most 

certainly to his own drummer in the opposite direction. 

 

Now what is at times lost on the members opposite, the Sask 

Party, is that this province attained this economic growth under 

the existing labour laws — laws based on equality and fairness, 

Mr. Speaker. And now what direction is the Sask Party now 

taking us? And what will the future look like in a few years, Mr. 

Speaker? Can you really have a functioning system, economic 

system, without, Mr. Speaker, without the buy-in of the people 

of this province, without the buy-in of the workers? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what is unbelievable is the calling of these 

actions democratic and freedom of choice. Nobody is going to 

believe that, Mr. Speaker, and I would say to that minister, to 

ask him how he could be so out of step with the world around 

him. And it isn‟t enough that he would just trample on the 

democratic rights of workers in this province with Bill 5, the 

essential services and Bill 6, amendments to The Trade Union 

Act. He wasn‟t done yet, Mr. Speaker, because now they bring 

forward Bill 80, a Bill which will dismantle the proud traditions 

of our trades in our province. 

 

But he isn‟t talking about democracy this time, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, he isn‟t talking, he isn‟t talking about democracy, 

but this time the communications department has come up with 

something different. It has come up with something different, 

and they‟re now calling it freedom of choice. And freedom of 

choice he‟s talking about is for employers having the freedom 

to bargain on their own and employees having the right to join 

the union of their choice. Now this in and of itself, Mr. Speaker, 

is fine, and it doesn‟t sound like it‟s a huge problem. But what 

he is trying to say to the people of this province also as well is 

that there should be parallel models of certification existing 

simultaneously. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it‟s a complex issue, but until you 

understand the workings of the construction industry, all of this 

so far might sound quite fine. But at closer look, Mr. Speaker, it 

is quite clear that what‟ll be happening here is this has major 

impact and implications for the lives of the people involved in 

the construction industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s when you understand the impact of these 

changes on the building trades unions of this province and 

understand that in time that they will disappear, Mr. Speaker, 

that in fact what is in this Bill is a complete dismantling of the 

industry as it now is today. And are we ready to have them 

disappear, Mr. Speaker, to be wiped from the face of this 

province? 

 

Now what I would say to these members, what is happening 

here — and say to the people of this province — what is 

happening here is he is doing what the Grant Devine 

government didn‟t quite accomplish because all the Devine 

government did in the ‟80s was cause us to lose a generation of 

tradespeople in this province, Mr. Speaker — a generation of 

tradespeople leaving this province; a generation of tradespeople 

losing their apprenticeships in this province; Mr. Speaker, 

tradespeople leaving in droves. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, history is unfortunately repeating itself. And 

this callous attitude of this party and this Minister of Labour 

and the Premier who‟s determined to continue his war on the 

working people of this province and those Devine Tories — or 

whatever else we have over there who changed their name and 

now are disguised as the Sask Party members — they are here, 

and they‟re here to do it again, Mr. Speaker. They‟re here to 

finish the job. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I spoke of the trades disappearing, and what 

do we lose? What do we lose here? We lose our neighbours. We 

lose our friends. We lose the contributions of these working 

men and women to this province. We lose the charitable and 

volunteer work that we do. And, Mr. Speaker, all under the 

heading of the Sask Party‟s freedom of choice to develop by 

their communications department. 



3088 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2009 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what also this Bills allows, it allows 

certification by project by project. And now again, a 

project-by-project certification, an idea in and of itself is 

probably . . . If you look at The Trade Union Act, each 

workplace is organized as one workplace by certification. 

 

The difficulty in the construction industry is that projects are 

completed and then work sites change. And so within the 

industry, they had developed a procedure by which they would 

stabilize this so that if an employer was unionized, they would 

move that unionization, move that union certification from site 

to site. So then when you put it now and you say, well now we 

can organize by project by project, what will happen, Mr. 

Speaker? Will that mean that individual construction companies 

can come, attempt to organize, then unions attempt to organize 

on the site? Perhaps even before they can organize a union, the 

project will be completed and so there will be no union there. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, this allows for the opting out, in most 

cases, of the established employers who are part of REOs 

[representative employer organization] to opt out and then have 

separate certifications with unions. It also allows, Mr. Speaker, 

one union to come in and organize all the trades in one work 

site under one union, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now all of this leads to one thing, Mr. Speaker, it leads to the 

dismantling of the construction industry and the unions 

involved and employers as it exists today, and it makes it 

difficult to negotiate. When it‟s more difficult to negotiate, Mr. 

Speaker, it drives down wages, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, again I ask, why when the Supreme Court of 

this land thinks that collective bargaining is important, why 

does this party— the Sask Party — why do they fear collective 

bargaining? Why do they fear creating a level playing field for 

the party so that they can reach their own agreements? Why do 

they have so little faith in the people of this province? The 

construction industry is unique, and we should respect that and 

be mindful when we set out to make changes, Mr. Speaker. We 

should consult with people, and we should talk to them. 

 

Now if you, threaten, Mr. Speaker . . . We all understand. 

We‟ve all been involved in negotiations on different issues. 

And, Mr. Speaker, if you threaten the very existence of one 

party, obviously how can this be considered creating a level 

playing field? We lose, Mr. Speaker, because under this 

freedom of choice Sask Party style, we lose the collective 

bargaining process. We lose because not only the dismantling 

of the trade unions and the proud history of these organizations, 

but we also see the reduction of wages — of wages — Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a recipe for the race to the bottom, the race 

to the bottom to see who can do it cheaper because when you 

have, as we put forward, amounts of money — be that with the 

recent announcement, the provincial government‟s $500 million 

infrastructure booster shot, and combining that with the 1 

billion already committed to the infrastructure — we have 

money out there, Mr. Speaker. And now we bring this Bill in so 

that we can reduce the costs of labour. 

 

The costs of labour, Mr. Speaker, they‟re expecting the men and 

women of this province . . . And what they‟re doing, I would 

say, is taking advantage of the working men and women in this 

province by driving down the costs. So they are trying to save 

and get more work out of the working men and women in the 

province when in fact, what does collective bargaining do? 

Collective bargaining is an attempt, Mr. Speaker, an attempt to 

create a fair agreement. 

 

At the end of that fair agreement, Mr. Speaker, done in the way 

that it should, what occurs is that you have a productive 

workforce. What is totally being lost on these members and this 

government is that you have a productive workforce, you have a 

committed workforce, and you get quality work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that‟s why when they say . . . And they talk about 

the freedom of choice. It has nothing to do about the freedom of 

choice. This is just a badly packaged deal which is all about 

getting it done more cheaply in this province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the minister in releasing this Bill put a 

backgrounder in with it as well. And in that backgrounder, it 

says in there, Mr. Speaker, that he wants done things quickly by 

attracting, and I quote from the Minister of Labour, his own 

material: “. . . [encouraging] additional construction companies 

and employees into the province and by encouraging more 

competitive bidding on projects.” Well stop and consider what 

is being said. And again I quote from the minister‟s material: 

“. . . [encourage] additional construction companies and 

employees . . .” so that we can do this quicker, Mr. Speaker. So 

that they could do it quicker. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, when I read that and I think about it, it 

sounds to me like we don‟t have enough employees here so we 

will have to bring some in from out of the province. And the 

question is, will those companies or will those employees stay 

here? 

 

Construction workers follow the work. Will we have 

out-of-town licence plates, Mr. Speaker, everywhere? And will 

those wages, as income taxes, will they flow out of our 

province? And will workers in Saskatchewan union halls be 

sitting on their hands while outside contractors bring in their 

own employees? And will these outside contractors, Mr. 

Speaker, as I spoke previously, be paying the rates our workers 

have negotiated through fair collective bargaining? Because 

that‟s why it becomes so important for this party opposite to 

dismantle and create an unlevel playing field — so that there 

cannot be fair and collective bargaining. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said, our workers in Saskatchewan here are 

sitting on their hands while outside contractors bring in their 

own employees. And again my concern here is, what rates of 

pay will be paid? What impact — as Mr. Westcott said — what 

impact will the rates that we now have bargained in our 

industry, what impact will they have on these new people 

coming from outside the province? Will they be lower? Will 

any of that money stay here? What taxes will we collect? Or 

will most of that booster shot money and most of the money 

that we have put in leave the province? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, with Bill 80 I think the Saskatchewan Party 

has made it clear what they are trying to do. And I‟m not really 

certain what message, when this message finally gets out to the 

people of this province, what message is there here. 



May 13, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3089 

The government says they have a booster shot for the province. 

And, Mr. Speaker, this booster shot . . . And I think it‟s been 

well established now that they got this from the management of 

the province by the former NDP government. They say they 

also receive some federal funding. And they want everyone to 

come here so that all these projects can be done cheaply and 

quickly. And they are saying if you bring workers from outside 

this province and they later leave, that‟s okay. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, what about the working families of this 

province? This is their booster money. This is their booster shot 

money. And, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party had zero to do with 

the accumulation of this money. It was the hard-working 

families of this province who suffered through the hard Tory 

times of the ‟80s and then persevered while we dug our way out 

in the ‟90s. 

 

And now they are spending the money created by the people of 

this province and saying that the Sask Party did it all and going 

on each day about their booster shot, when it is the hard work of 

the NDP government and the people of this province. And that, 

Mr. Speaker, and that is what we hear continuously, day after 

day, coming from that other side. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people have often told me that they simply can‟t 

expect those kinds of statements coming as they do from the 

other side. And, Mr. Speaker, it is that they could so easily 

throw money around like that while here we have over 3,300 

people receiving employment insurance benefits, and that they 

can talk about bringing people from other provinces when our 

own citizens sit receiving EI [employment insurance] benefits, 

Mr. Speaker, to some is bordering on outrageous. And yet how 

smugly they dismiss all of this with their calls of freedom of 

choice. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as mentioned earlier by one of the former 

speakers, I think that people will see through this. People will 

see through this. And, Mr. Speaker, for myself I can hardly wait 

for 2011 because I think at that point in time, Mr. Speaker, 

people will see this, and I believe that what they will do here is 

they‟re going to show these folks the door. I think they‟re going 

to do that. 

 

[15:30] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what is to me also most disconcerting — 

and I can‟t imagine that it‟s anyone‟s intention to create an 

unsafe work site — but, Mr. Speaker, I‟m concerned. All this 

rush to get things done quickly, as the minister wants and as he 

stated in his background, all these things to get things done 

quickly raises a few questions. 

 

Will there be sufficient staff over at the occupational health and 

safety branch to do the appropriate checks, and has the minister 

made sure that his department will be able to handle this 

expected influx of new companies and employees? Now, Mr. 

Speaker, during the budget or during the estimates I did not 

hear the minister propose any huge increase of money for the 

extra positions at the occupational health and safety branch. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I wonder whether all the inspections that 

need to be done will be done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, perhaps we missed something or perhaps we were 

not there, but we also hear that there is overwork at the 

department. And, Mr. Speaker, I‟m not certain what we do with 

this huge influx that this party talks about, a huge influx of 

outside contractors and employees who they are going to allow 

to do these projects as quickly as possible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all lose. We all lose when that Sask Party 

government dismantles the building trades. We all lose. And 

yet, Mr. Speaker, they do not think that this is a serious, serious 

issue. To think, Mr. Speaker, that you can simply put forward 

ideas and get things done cheaply or quickly and that that is an 

answer, misses a large point. 

 

You build a workforce, Mr. Speaker, with respect. You build a 

workforce by paying decent wages, by providing decent 

benefits, and providing safe workplaces, Mr. Speaker. And you 

do that because, as the Supreme Court of Canada has agreed, 

you do that by building on a foundation. A foundation of 

respect, Mr. Speaker, a foundation that says, a foundation that 

says that you respect your fellow citizens, a foundation that says 

that you have a right to collective bargaining, a foundation that 

says, Mr. Speaker, that you do not, that you do not weaken one 

party so as to create an unlevel playing field. 

 

But you look to equality and fairness, Mr. Speaker. You look to 

equality and fairness because at the base of it . . . And that is 

why, that is why I believe those judges, in the six to one 

decision, said that, we believe that collective bargaining should 

be, that collective bargaining should be part of our constitution, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that is the way that this country is going. That is the way 

that the United States of America are going. But they believe in 

equality and fairness, and yet here in Saskatchewan we have 

turned and we‟re going in the opposite direction. 

 

What happened? What really happened in the United States? 

Why did the American people rise up and say enough was 

enough, and elect a new president? And why did immediately 

after did we change some of these basic fundamentals of the 

workplace? Because you have to have a workplace to have a 

healthy economy, and this is what‟s missing. 

 

It is not only the business community. And we have to respect 

our people in the business community, Mr. Speaker. We have to 

respect the people in the business community and do the right 

things for them, which when we were in government we did in 

terms of changing the tax regimes and continually working to 

make improvements in that area. But you cannot do that by 

showing a disrespect for the working people of this province. 

 

Now we hear at times that they talk about the union bosses and 

this is only somehow that this will take away the power of the 

union bosses or that this hurts the union bosses. Mr. Speaker, 

this does not hurt the union bosses — and I‟ll come back to 

talking about the union bosses in a second — but this goes and 

hurts the people on the jobs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all lose. We all lose with this kind of 

legislation. We all lose because built into there is a disrespect. 

Built into that that tells you and I, Mr. Speaker, that says to us 

that craft unions, that crafts, Mr. Speaker, the proud crafts of 

carpentry, the proud crafts of everything, that that no longer 



3090 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2009 

counts, Mr. Speaker. It no longer counts in the province of 

Saskatchewan because what you can do now, Mr. Speaker, is 

put everybody together. 

 

Now the Minister of Labour talks about, Mr. Speaker, he talks 

about that we would put people together and that somehow this 

will work better. But, Mr. Speaker, you have to get the buy-in 

of the people. You have to get the buy-in of the people. 

 

I think we all understand that if you go out and try and build 

something or accomplish something, that we first consult and 

we try and get the buy-in of the people so that we‟re all onside 

and moving in the same direction. And that is fundamental. 

That‟s so fundamental that, in fact, however . . . Perhaps not so 

fundamental that we need to put that in the constitution, but that 

idea of having to have a buy-in of all people so that we‟re all 

going in the same direction, so that we all have the same goals 

— that, in the end of the day, is what we should be trying to 

accomplish. 

 

And yet what do we have here? We have received numerous 

phone calls. We have received numerous people asking for 

petitions. We have spoken to numbers of people and they are 

not happy, Mr. Speaker. And these are not just — like the folks 

across would say — the union bosses. And I would have those 

members across the way . . . And also understand that union 

bosses, as they would like to so many times call them, are 

taxpaying members of this province as well. 

 

And so at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, what do we have? 

What will, as I spoke previously, what will the history books 

say about this attempt? And hopefully it won‟t be successful, 

Mr. Speaker. Hopefully this attempt will not be successful in 

dismantling the great traditions of our crafts, the great traditions 

of our craft unions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these go back to history, go back a long time in 

history — years — to the great buildings that have been built, 

whether they be the cathedrals, the great cathedrals of the past 

or whatever: these are crafts. And everybody understands the 

crafts and how people honoured that and how they were proud 

to be part of crafts, and that went over to be proud to be part of 

craft unions. 

 

They are going to the very heart of that and can you expect, Mr. 

Speaker, that people will accept that? It doesn‟t surprise me that 

people that feel so passionate that perhaps you feel some of that 

anger and some of that disappointment as I speak to you here, 

Mr. Speaker because I‟m trying to relay to the members 

opposite of the feelings of the people and the thoughts of these 

people who . . . This is their life, and you are taking it and 

tearing it apart. And for what reason? Because nobody gave 

them a call, nobody wrote them a letter, nobody called a 

meeting to ask, here‟s what we‟re going to do. And what we‟re 

going to do is, we want to get to this place and we want to try 

something new with you. What do you think? 

 

Now that seems quite reasonable. I think in a common sense 

way that‟s all that people expect. That‟s all that the 

hard-working men and women of this province expect is that 

you would give them a call. That you would say to these 

people, we want to do something different. We want to try 

something. We think this isn‟t working. 

And you might, while you do that, sit down with them at a 

meeting and say, here are the reasons why we think this isn‟t 

working. And I would bet, Mr. Speaker, that you would have a 

reasonable response. You would have a reasonable response 

from these people because they are reasonable people. They‟re 

hard-working people of this province. They‟ve made what this 

province is, and they don‟t deserve what is happening here. 

They do not deserve what is happening here, Mr. Speaker. This 

is callous. This is arrogant. And, Mr. Speaker, this is 

dismissive. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, in that backgrounder . . . And I am 

astounded and I would encourage the members to read the 

backgrounder to this Bill because I had to reread it a few times 

to make sure that I quite understood what was being said. 

Because surely . . . And they spoke in this backgrounder, 

“rebuilding Saskatchewan‟s infrastructure” and they talked 

about the government‟s main priorities is rebuilding 

Saskatchewan‟s infrastructure. And again the government 

talked about: 

 

We are spending a record amount of money to address a 

significant backlog of projects in transportation, health 

care, education and other areas. But those projects, and 

others undertaken by the private sector, are not proceeding 

as quickly as they could [and they say] in part because of 

a shortage of skilled labour. Projects have been delayed 

and there have been cost overruns. 

 

Well here‟s what they say these amendments will address: 

“These amendments will enable work to get done more quickly 

by attracting additional construction companies and employees 

into the province and by encouraging more competitive bidding 

. . . ” 

 

Now what does that mean when you say this will get it done 

more quickly, encourage more competitive bidding? 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is my point exactly. The workers of this 

province through collective agreements — as I spoke before — 

through sitting down between unions and employers, sitting 

down and negotiating collective agreements have achieved rates 

of pay accepted by their members through democratic votes at 

meetings. And instead of contacting them or instead of 

negotiating this at the bargaining table, the government is 

saying we need to do this quickly. There are cost overruns, and 

here‟s what we are going to do. We‟re going to bring in Bill 80 

and we‟re going to make it so that we can have more 

competitive bidding and we can bring in more people. 

 

Now nobody is opposed in this province to having people come 

and work here and create homes and raise their families. 

Nobody is opposed to that. But, Mr. Speaker, the intent of this 

is not to do that. The intent of this, Mr. Speaker, the intent of 

this is to do this more quickly and more cheaply. And I would 

say to you that that is a recipe for problems, a recipe for 

problems. Because nobody was contacted, and that shows no 

respect. We can talk about respect, Mr. Speaker. We can talk 

about respect from me talking about the minister, but there is a 

different kind of respect. 

 

And that is the respect when you put this in writing, and the 

impact this has on the working men and families of this 



May 13, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3091 

province. And they don‟t have, Mr. Speaker, somebody there to 

stand up on their behalf and say, you can‟t do that in this 

province. You can‟t do that. They have the Supreme Court of 

Canada. They have the court system that they can go to, Mr. 

Speaker, and they can say . . . They can take an action in the 

courts and take that action and try and stop this. But that‟s a 

difficult, long, and expensive process. 

 

So they don‟t have that. So what you have is a government that 

has a huge hammer, and the courts have recognized this and the 

courts have said that you can‟t quite do some of these things. 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, the court system is a long and 

arduous process that takes a lot of time. 

 

But I think it‟s quite clear that why Bill 80 was brought in is to 

get the work done more quickly. Mr. Speaker, when you do that 

— and maybe while I‟m on the topic of getting this done more 

quickly, and we‟ve talked about the traditions and the quality 

and the craftsmen and the traditions that are here — what about, 

Mr. Speaker, another simple thing like pride in a job well done, 

Mr. Speaker? What about pride in a job well done? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t think that minister or the Sask Party 

government believe in quality. Now I think by Bill 80 and what 

we‟re hearing back, is I know that people don‟t feel they have 

any respect for them. But, Mr. Speaker, it is truly, truly a sad 

day for this province when we sacrifice quality of work. Now 

I‟m not saying that if we do the jobs more quickly we‟ll 

sacrifice that, but I wonder. I wonder, Mr. Speaker, and that 

goes to earlier in my statements regarding safety. Mr. Speaker, 

we continuously talk about working safe. We talk about 

working carefully. And here we have, we need to get this done 

quickly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the other things that we lose under this Bill 

is we lose in the whole area of apprenticeships, our 

apprenticeships programs. Mr. Speaker, if you marginalize and 

reduce the pay and make effective these unions, I think we 

probably all, we at least on this side, understand it. I think the 

members opposite on the other side would probably quietly 

acknowledge it — at least I would hope they would quietly 

acknowledge it and not be out front about it. But if we 

marginalize and reduce the pay and make ineffective these 

unions . . . Because that has been what all three Bills have had 

the effect of doing. Mr. Speaker, the craft unions are the ones 

who play an integral role in helping train the future 

tradespeople in our province. 

 

Now I mentioned already how we lost a generation of 

apprenticeship people — a generation not only of 

apprenticeship, but a generation of tradespeople in this 

province. We lost them when the Devine Tories brought in their 

spinoff companies and changed the last time they changed this 

Act. Now they‟ve left this Act in and left the idea of spinoff 

companies there, but the effect is even more dramatic. Even 

more dramatic, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just returning to the apprenticeships. Mr. Speaker, 

in this kind of scenario, where we‟re trying to achieve cheaper 

wages, where we‟re trying to do things quicker, what about the 

quality of work for the province and what about the training? 

What happens to the training of our future craftspeople? What 

happens to our apprenticeship programs when you marginalize 

the very people who are training, when you marginalize the 

very people who provide money and time, and spend the time 

with these people to train so that we can have quality 

tradespeople in the future? 

 

This is one of the things that is happening here. This 

ill-thought-out legislation with one goal in mind of getting it 

done quickly and cheaply — the result, Mr. Speaker, the result, 

Mr. Speaker, is quality of workmanship will go down. And we 

will feel this in years to come. Because people will go to work. 

People will accept jobs because they have to work. And we do 

have 3,300 people receiving employment insurance. But I 

would say, Mr. Speaker, that ultimately workmanship will 

suffer, training of apprenticeships will suffer, because again, if 

you put a Bill forward and you show . . . Part and parcel of that, 

if people are saying that they feel that there‟s no respect for 

them, what will you get in return, Mr. Speaker? What will you 

get in return? And the message, I guess, is quite clear. I mean 

when the Premier, I guess, is talking about going to war with 

labour, with the working men and women of this province, I 

guess, what more can you expect? 

 

Mr. Speaker, who will be at the bargaining tables if we 

marginalize these people? Who will be at the bargaining tables 

and who will be there arguing about ratios of apprenticeship? 

Do we have no concept, Mr. Speaker? Does the Sask Party have 

no concept about discussion, no concept about sitting down 

with people and saying . . . Are they afraid to sit down to say 

and work out . . . Because that‟s bargaining. That‟s 

consultation. That‟s basic. That‟s basic to all of us here in this 

province. No concept to sit down . . . But, Mr. Speaker, who 

will go and argue for ratios? Who will give the input, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

We all understand one thing, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, if we 

go to build a fence in our yard, Mr. Speaker, if we go to farm in 

our fields, Mr. Speaker, if we go to build a house . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Yes, you‟d know about that. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — We go, we go, Mr. Speaker, and we talk to 

people that know about that. And I heard, what do I know about 

that? Well that‟s right, Mr. Speaker, because I wouldn‟t pretend 

to know about that. But that is what is happening here. They‟re 

pretending to know about something which they know nothing 

about, Mr. Speaker. They know nothing about and nor do they 

consult and nor do they ask the people of this province — the 

craftspeople of this province — as to what they should do. 

 

Instead they spend time in their communications department, 

Mr. Speaker, coming up with phrases of freedom of choice. 

Freedom of choice. It‟s interesting that the American . . . that 

Barack Obama would use that in terms for the workers, because 

that is what equality and fairness is, Mr. Speaker. That‟s who 

they should take a page out of. But instead, no, Mr. Speaker, 

they‟re heading for dark days because they do not believe in the 

respect for the workers of this province. They do not believe or 

understand what it means to respect the working men and 

women of this province. Because they‟re caught up, Mr. 

Speaker, they‟re caught up in an ideology that says quicker and 

cheaper is better. If we can get this done quicker and cheaper, 



3092 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2009 

that is the end goal. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we suffer. We all suffer. And it is a sad day 

for this province when we bow to that kind of ideology. So, Mr. 

Speaker, the Supreme Court of Canada says that collective 

bargaining . . . because they respect, they know what respect is, 

Mr. Speaker. And the United States of America and the 

president, Barack Obama, understands what respect for the 

working men and women of the North American continent is, 

but there is a spot in this country, there is a province where that 

is obviously . . . Somehow there‟s a lack of understanding 

around that respect. 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, it‟s all about democracy, and that is not 

democracy, Mr. Speaker. They can spin that whichever way 

they want but, Mr. Speaker, people are talking out there. People 

are calling. I‟ve had the opportunity of meeting hundreds, 

hundreds of people, Mr. Speaker — hundreds — to talk about 

the Bills that this minister has put forward. And they‟re 

unanimous. They‟re unanimous about what they think about 

these Bills. Now, Mr. Speaker, I‟ve not seen such a group so 

eager to change sides in this legislature, but I think that that‟s 

what these people are doing because I think people have now 

turned and are working very hard to see those members not be 

there after 2011. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, that government, willing to sacrifice, willing 

to sacrifice quality, Mr. Speaker, willing to flood the market 

with employees and, Mr. Speaker, I wonder about this. I 

wonder about this strategy, and I wonder, you know, because I 

hear the member talking from there. But I wonder. We‟ve often 

heard the members across the way talking about, bragging 

about going out of province and doing fundraising and then 

coming back and being smug about how much money they had 

raised. Mr. Speaker, you might wonder if this is maybe 

payback. Is this payback, Mr. Speaker, to that and, Mr. Speaker, 

Mr. Speaker, is this payback? Mr. Speaker, is this payback for 

those fundraising junkets that they were taking, that they were 

taking. Is that? Is that, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s interesting when we start talking about money 

and paybacks. We have finally gotten the attention. I wish we 

would get the attention of these folks when we‟re talking about 

more loftier ideals like decisions of the Supreme Court of 

Canada and loftier ideals about equality and fairness and loftier 

ideals about fair collective bargaining, but it seems their only 

interest in is the issues around money. 

 

Well what about the money and the fair wages to the workers of 

this province who make this province what it is? Every day they 

go to work and they make this province. And they get a Bill like 

Bill 80 and Bill 5 and 6, which reeks with disrespect, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But those hundreds of people that I‟ve been talking to outside of 

this legislature and the hundreds that are sending in petitions, 

they are mounting, Mr. Speaker. And they might be smug and 

sit there and think that this isn‟t, but that number is mounting, 

Mr. Speaker. And I don‟t want to warn them of the impending 

tide, but there is a tide building, Mr. Speaker, and they will be 

sorry for the day that they brought this forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again you can talk about things like the 

apprenticeship programs and, Mr. Speaker, and the dismantling 

— the dismantling — of the craft unions. I talked about how 

important that is and what it means to people in this province — 

people who worked in the crafts, people who are our carpenters 

or plumbers and all that, people who went to school and did that 

and who got their apprenticeship programs and who take pride 

in their work — to have this sort of Bill. And I guess what 

would be worse is that no letters, Mr. Speaker, no phone calls, 

no contacts for meetings — just simply, here is the Bill and 

we‟ll talk to you about it later; what do you think? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they wonder why they get that reaction, the 

reaction that they do. And perhaps, perhaps, you know, they 

might in a bubble and not even understand because, obviously, 

they don‟t understand what‟s going on in Canada with the 

Supreme Court, and they don‟t understand what‟s going in the 

United States. Mr. Speaker, they‟ve gone backwards and 

adopted George Bush policies. These are George Bush policies 

and now they‟ve adopted them. And somehow they think 

they‟ll get a different outcome. 

 

We all know, Mr. Speaker, about trying to do something the 

same way and getting a different outcome — what they say 

about that. And I think that that‟s what‟s going to happen. Read 

the history book. The history books will write about this. They 

will write about this just as they will write about the George 

Bush years in the States. And they will take it apart, and they 

will look at the labour laws at that time. And they will see that 

these are exactly what was put forward by that Minister of 

Labour. 

 

And perhaps he‟s trying to get into the history books next to 

George Bush. That‟s fine. I‟d rather not be there, Mr. Speaker, 

but perhaps that member is trying to do that. I think he‟s 

succeeding here. He‟s succeeding because his name will not go 

next to the President of the United States, Barak Obama. He 

won‟t be in the same books. He might be mentioned as, look 

what was happening at a time when Barack Obama was talking 

about equality and fairness and collective bargaining and 

signing union cards and all the rest of that. 

 

What was our minister doing in trying to get his name into the 

history books? Well he‟d be in Hansard, but I dare say that I 

don‟t think he‟s going to make it on that kind of playing field, 

Mr. Speaker, as somebody who was innovative in changes that 

helped working people. 

 

Because, you see, what‟s lost is that you have to understand that 

if you treat people with respect and you get the buy-in of 

people, they will work. And they‟ll provide the work and they‟ll 

do quality work. We‟ll have safer workplaces. But what is 

happening here is they‟re causing, they‟re causing strife, Mr. 

Speaker. They‟re causing strife. 

 

Mr. Westcott said — and if I may, just maybe read that again 

because in case they had missed that — in terms of the stability 

of what they‟re causing “It will be very destabilizing to labour 

relations and apprenticeships.” Now here‟s somebody who‟s 

worked in there. And obviously somebody before said, you 

would know little about that, and so we would simply ask 

somebody who works in this. “There will be wildcat strikes . . . 

[job] confrontations, neglect of the apprenticeship system and 

way lower wages for all construction workers, union or not . . .” 



May 13, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3093 

at the end of the day. 

 

Well if that‟s the goal, Mr. Speaker, I wish they would . . . 

instead of going to the communications department and coming 

up with these good-sounding phrases — freedom of choice — 

wow, we all get excited about freedom of choice, democracy. 

But when we take that apart, there‟s a great distance between 

what the Supreme Court thinks freedom of choice is, between 

what Barack Obama thinks what freedom of choice is, and that 

minister, what he thinks freedom of choice is. 

 

Now he‟s made to wear this. I guess at times, sometimes, Mr. 

Speaker, when I sit and I think about this, what could possibly 

be going on to do this, Mr. Speaker? I have to say perhaps that 

there‟s a lack of understanding or maybe perhaps he‟s being 

made to wear the can for this. I mean, I don‟t understand why 

somebody would want to attach themselves to this. Why would 

you, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Why would you, on one hand, have your Workers‟ 

Compensation Board having . . . Now there‟s something that we 

could be proud of — Mission: Zero. We could be proud of that, 

and we could all get behind Mission: Zero because we 

understand that. But when we all look at that, what the goals 

are, we get behind that and we say, good for the Workers‟ 

Compensation Board. 

 

But then we have somebody who comes up with freedom of 

choice, and they give us the kind of nonsense that‟s in Bill 80. 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s hard, it‟s hard to get behind something like 

that. And the people of this province are not going to get behind 

this — the workers, the craftspeople who spent their time in 

refining their craft. This is a complete disrespect for all those 

hours and all the time they have spent, what is going on here. 

 

[16:00] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it all comes back to collective bargaining. 

Many times I‟ve stood up and spoken about collective 

bargaining because, Mr. Speaker, in all the years that I spent 

there, one of the greatest, one of the best things that was in The 

Trade Union Act, Mr. Speaker, was the right to sit down across 

the table from your employer and discuss the problems at work. 

If you make that work, Mr. Speaker, I tell you that you have a 

healthy society, you have a healthy workplace, and you have 

committed workers. And it‟s not that difficult, Mr. Speaker. At 

the end of the day it is simple. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the other things that has been put in 

here is the ability in Bill 80 to have one union — one union 

instead of the craft system that we have, where we have many 

different unions on one site. We have one union come in and 

organize a project, and that‟s why we have to have 

project-by-project certifications, but one union could get all the 

crafts together. 

 

Now people have expressed to me that there‟s concerns when 

you do that, that the apprenticeship program suffers because, 

Mr. Speaker, because people will not spend or pay enough 

attention to the different trades. And when you add in to get the 

job done quicker, you can see why that would happen, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I was told, you know, I would suggest to the 

members opposite to listen and to maybe perhaps go out and 

talk, which I understand that they don‟t consult, that they just 

simply go ahead and do things, which would be something 

probably new for them. But perhaps they should go out and talk 

to people in the trades and ask them, and ask them clearly, Mr. 

Speaker, would it have an impact on the apprenticeship 

programs in this province? Would it have that? Now if they 

come back and they say, no it would not, Mr. Speaker, I‟m 

willing to accept that. But, Mr. Speaker, for my part, I‟ve gone 

out, and I‟ve asked people who work in these areas. And they 

tell me that that is what will happen with the apprenticeship 

program. Yet from across there we hear, we hear that, oh no, it 

won‟t happen. Oh no, it won‟t happen. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, you can — because it is democracy and we 

accept that — you can put through legislation. But our role 

here, Mr. Speaker, the role of the opposition is to point out and 

to talk to people and to point out the wrong-headedness of this 

approach. But, Mr. Speaker, they can march off and march off 

in the wrong direction, as I said, march off in the direction 

that‟s opposite to where the Supreme Court of Canada‟s going, 

march off in the wrong direction to where the United States of 

America‟s going. They can do that here in Saskatchewan but, 

Mr. Speaker, I don‟t see that this is going to be a great outcome, 

nor would I want to be putting my name to something like this, 

Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, and I guess with that, as is in 

democracies, is sometimes because the power is vested in the 

government, that they can, that they can inflict this kind of 

damage on a system that was working. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I talked about that system earlier because 

over a number of years The Construction Industry Labour 

Relations Act was put into place. And the Tories in the ‟80s 

decided that wasn‟t going to work. They wanted it done, Mr. 

Speaker. And what would I say, Mr. Speaker, the outcome is 

they wanted it done cheaper because there were negotiated 

collective agreements. They didn‟t respect the collective 

agreements, so they wanted spin-off companies. Why did they 

want spin-off companies? They wanted spin-off companies so 

that they could get lower rates of pay. And what is happening in 

Bill 80, Mr. Speaker? Lower rates of pay. Now how many 

people do you think you can fool with that? 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s quite clear that I think they‟ve embarked, with 

Bill 80, on something that will not succeed because, Mr. 

Speaker, people understand history. There‟s a history within the 

trades that is passed on, Mr. Speaker. And that history will 

point out to them what happened in the ‟80s, and they will see, 

Mr. Speaker, they will see. And they‟re telling me, Mr. 

Speaker, that this is the same as the ‟80s. And as I said earlier, 

this government is trying to finish off what Grant Devine 

started, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, collective bargaining is not an easy issue to tackle. 

Mr. Speaker, it is frustrating. It‟s confusing. And at times, it 

might seem impossible. But, Mr. Speaker, it has brought us to 

where we are today. Now the members opposite, they say that 

they‟ve created this economic reality, but they quietly know and 

— nudge, nudge — we know that this was built by the people 

of this province and the NDP administration. Now they know 

that, Mr. Speaker. 

 



3094 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2009 

And what they also are in denial about is that it was the labour 

laws that were in existence at that time, that allowed for this 

base, this economic reality that we are living in today, that it 

was those labour laws that got us to where we are. But, Mr. 

Speaker, it never seems enough when you get the Tories in, the 

Conservatives, Mr. Speaker, and now the Sask Party. Maybe 

they‟ll change their name next time around again, Mr. Speaker. 

But they just can‟t resist it, to try and push the buttons of, we 

can do it cheaper. We can do it quicker. Mr. Speaker, we can do 

all these things cheaper and quicker. And here is the money. 

Here is the money. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our Supreme Court, Mr. Speaker, has recognized, 

Mr. Speaker, that we might all want, Mr. Speaker . . . because 

there‟s always that in us that would like to do things quicker 

and cheaper, Mr. Speaker. But the Supreme Court has said that 

if you fix it this way, we all lose, Mr. Speaker. And so the wise 

judges, the wise judges which these people should probably 

listen to have carefully considered the topic of collective 

bargaining and made it a Charter right because they said yes, 

you have to struggle, Mr. Speaker. You have to struggle 

because these things do not come easy. The things of building a 

society do not come easy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they recognize that collective bargaining is 

something that is fundamental to democracy and that we all 

cherish, that we all cherish, Mr. Speaker. And I guess, Mr. 

Speaker, it is to the people, to the working people of this 

province, somewhat of an insult when the Minister of Labour 

trots out this kind of Bill and cloaks it in freedom of choice, 

cloaks it in democracy when it is nothing more, Mr. Speaker, 

it‟s nothing more than an attack on free collective bargaining 

and democracy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is what makes it so sad, so sad because this is 

a lack of appreciation, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] 

. . . for what is collective bargaining. Mr. Speaker, the members 

opposite said it‟s not sad. Maybe perhaps sad is the wrong word 

that I‟m using, Mr. Speaker, but disappointment, Mr. Speaker. 

But, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . It‟s tragic. The 

member here says tragic that the people of this province, the 

craftspeople of this province, the workers out there, that I would 

say to these members that they should go, they should go and 

talk to those workers because it has become quite clear, Mr. 

Speaker, through my speech here, Mr. Speaker, that they have 

no understanding. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would now reiterate what a member earlier said, 

is that they have no understanding of what is going on, no 

understanding. And yet they bravely talk from their seats as if 

they do. But, Mr. Speaker, there is no understanding because by 

their actions, by their actions any reasonable person can see that 

there is no understanding here. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this province has survived many trials and 

many challenges, and the people, Mr. Speaker, I would say to 

those members opposite, the people of the United States got it 

right. They got it right, and they dismissed this kind of nonsense 

in the last election. And I would think that that is what is going 

to happen in 2011 as I . . . [inaudible] . . . and look out and see 

what is going on, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is a government 

so soon, so soon that has grown out of touch with what is going 

on in this province. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to, I would like to end by 

saying that I am somewhat looking positively to the agreement 

that was reached between our House leaders. And, Mr. Speaker, 

thanks to our House Leader for working on this issue and 

getting us the ability to hold public consultations on this Bill. 

Mr. Speaker, many people were not very impressed with the 

consultations held around Bills 5 and 6 — the secrecy and 

backdoor dealings of those consultations, Mr. Speaker. But here 

at least, Mr. Speaker, we have been able to achieve some hours 

for public consultations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would just ask that there be some respect shown 

for the committee structure in this legislature and allow those 

stakeholders that want to be heard to be heard, Mr. Speaker, so 

that all the appropriate presentations could be made so that the 

people of this province could be heard. Perhaps we can still 

save the day on this one, Mr. Speaker, and change it so that it 

better reflects what the people of the province need to build a 

strong economy. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, by asking for further presentations, I‟m not 

asking for an endless line of people but, Mr. Speaker, what I‟m 

asking for is to allow the committees that were made, give the 

committees latitude to do their work. Mr. Speaker, the 

committees are a vehicle for us, and we have to show them the 

respect to perform their democratic role in this legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I look forward to the public consultations. I look 

forward to hearing from the people of this province. I would 

hope that the government listens. I would hope that they listen 

carefully and, Mr. Speaker, make the necessary changes and 

even if it means, Mr. Speaker, that they be big enough to 

withdraw this ill-conceived piece of legislation which has a lot 

of conflicting things in it which gives powers to people where 

they should not. 

 

And let‟s work for a level playing field, Mr. Speaker, and let‟s 

work for a collective bargaining system that works. And with 

that, Mr. Speaker, I thank you for allowing me to make these 

remarks. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion presented by the Minister Responsible for Advanced 

Education, Employment and Labour that Bill No. 80, The 

Construction Industry Labour Relations Amendment Act, 2009 

be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be referred? I 



May 13, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3095 

recognize the Government Deputy House Leader. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to the Human 

Services Committee. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Human Services 

Committee. I recognize the Deputy Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that this 

House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — Before I put the motion, I‟d just remind 

members, if you‟d give us a few minutes to just go over the annual 

meeting of the CPA [Commonwealth Parliamentary Association] 

immediately, that would be appreciated. 

 

The Deputy House Leader has moved that this House do now 

adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. The Assembly stands 

adjourned until tomorrow morning at 10 a.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:13.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3069 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3069 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3069 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3069 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3070 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3070 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3070 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3070 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3070 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3071 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3071 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3071 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3071 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3071 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3072 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3072 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Multiple Sclerosis Awareness Month 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3072 

 Multiple Sclerosis Society Working Towards a Cure 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3072 

 Elks Lodge Aids Hearing Impaired Youth 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3073 

 Montmartre Celebrates 100th Anniversary 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3073 

 In Anticipation of Mosaic 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3073 

 Leadership Campaign Controversy 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3073 

 Northern Athlete Earns College Scholarship 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3074 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Seniors’ Income Plan 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3074 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3074 

 Fees for Park Usage 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3075 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3075 

 Greenhouse Gas Emissions 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3076 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3076 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3078 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Income Support Program for People with Disabilities 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3079 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3080 

 Allocation of Child Care Spaces 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 3080 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3081 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3082 

MOTIONS 

 Sitting Days 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3082 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

  The Deputy Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................... 3082 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 



 

 Bill No. 80 — The Construction Industry Labour Relations Amendment Act, 2009 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3082 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3083 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3084 

  Harpauer (referral to committee) ................................................................................................................................................... 3095 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 


