




















































Hansard: April 21, 2009


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 50A  TUESDAY, APRIL 21, 2009, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2771 

 April 21, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, I would request leave for an 

extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The Provincial Secretary has asked for leave 

for an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As you know, 

Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan established the 

Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal on the occasion of our 

province’s 90th anniversary. This medal is bestowed on those 

who have been recognized in their communities for their 

outstanding contributions of volunteer service or exceptional 

community involvement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has one of the highest rates of 

volunteerism in Canada. Each volunteer reaches outside his or 

her personal sphere of activities to help others and to make 

daily life in our province better for everyone. 

 

Since its establishment in 1995, 120 exceptional individuals 

have been presented with this award, including the eight 

citizens who received the award earlier today. Mr. Speaker, I 

would ask all members to please join the Premier and myself in 

congratulating these eight recipients as they are introduced to 

their Legislative Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. I want to join with the Provincial Secretary and I know 

all members of the House — and the Leader of the Opposition 

will be saying a few words as well — in welcoming these very, 

very special guests here to their Legislative Assembly, as well 

as the members of their family and their networks or friends 

who have joined them in support of the medal presentation 

earlier this day, and also of course have supported them so that 

they can volunteer in the way they have in their respective 

communities right across the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this idea for a volunteer medal, I think, originated 

in 1995. And it is absolutely meet and right that we would take 

some time to honour those who give of themselves so selflessly 

because they represent so many others right across this province 

— the greatest amount of volunteerism in the country, right 

here in Saskatchewan. 

 

And so this is always a highlight I think for all members of the 

Legislative Assembly every year. There are always two 

constants at the medal presentations, Mr. Speaker. Members 

will know that the first is the pride that the rest of us feel in 

being blessed with fellow citizens such as these today, and the 

second constant is the modesty of the recipients who would 

rather defer to others as they are recognized by their province. 

 

So on behalf of a grateful province of Saskatchewan and the 

Government of Saskatchewan, we want to say to them, thank 

you very, very much for all of your service. And we want to 

encourage you in continued volunteering, as we know you will 

do in your respective communities. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to join with the 

Provincial Secretary and the Premier in offering congratulations 

from the official opposition to those who have been honoured 

today receiving Saskatchewan’s Volunteer Medal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during the ceremony this morning, I somehow got 

thinking about my grandmother who used to use the word 

volunteer in a context that I was not very familiar with, and it’s 

not very often used in this context. But she used to talk about 

these little flowers that would pop up in the garden that were 

sort of self-seeded from the years before. And she used to call 

them her volunteers because they just popped up, and they did 

some beautiful things to her garden. Volunteers in 

Saskatchewan just have a way of doing that. 

 

When the medal was created, it was to recognize 

Saskatchewan’s volunteer community which, as the Premier’s 

indicated, is larger than any other in the nation of Canada. But 

as with every community, it’s made up of individuals, and 

today we have honoured eight of Saskatchewan’s volunteer 

community — eight of our very best who join a very exclusive 

group of men and women who have been so honoured. 

 

I’ve had opportunity on other occasions to do this, and I want to 

do it again today, and that’s to share with our volunteer medal 

recipients this Eastern proverb which in translation reads: 

 

I fell asleep and I dreamed that life was happiness. 

I awoke and I found that life was service. 

I served and found that service was happiness. 

 

Much continued happiness in your service. By the way, this is 

not a retirement ceremony. This is a milestone and we celebrate 

it with you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to 

introduce Mr. Robin Bellamy from the constituency of 

Saskatoon Greystone, who today received the Saskatchewan 



2772 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2009 

Volunteer Medal. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to introduce 

Mrs. Beth Ell from the constituency of Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre, who today received the Saskatchewan 

Volunteer Medal. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Indian 

Head-Milestone. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s my privilege to introduce Mr. John Ford from the 

constituency of Indian Head-Milestone, who today received the 

Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to 

introduce Mr. Ajay Krishan from the constituency of Prince 

Albert Carlton, who today received the Saskatchewan 

Volunteer Medal. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood River. 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege today to 

introduce Mrs. Camille Ross-Bell from the constituency of 

Wood River, who today received the Saskatchewan Volunteer 

Medal. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to introduce 

Mr. Ken Sagal from the constituency of Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre, who today received the Saskatchewan 

Volunteer Medal. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to introduce 

Mr. Maurice Taylor from the constituency of Carrot River 

Valley, who today received the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I introduce the member from 

Melville-Saltcoats. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s my privilege to introduce Courtney Vaudner from 

the constituency of Melville-Saltcoats, who today received the 

Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — I request leave to make an extended 

introduction, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has asked for leave for an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thanks to my 

colleagues for the chance to make an extended and a very 

important introduction to all members of the Legislative 

Assembly. I am going to speak deliberately to hopefully 

achieve the correct pronunciations of our guests that have 

joined us in your gallery, but also perhaps to give the 

opportunity for the translator who’s with them to provide them 

a bit of a translation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is a great pleasure to introduce to you today and 

through you today to all members of the Legislative Assembly, 

His Excellency Nguyen Van Cuong. His Excellency is 

chairman of the Hung Yen province in Vietnam. This is not 

only the chairman’s first visit to our great province, but it is his 

first visit to our nation, to Canada. 

 

Later this day I am going to have the pleasure of meeting with 

His Excellency and other members of this excellent Vietnamese 

delegation to explore, Mr. Speaker, a memorandum of intent 

between the province of Saskatchewan and Hung Yen province 

in Vietnam. His Excellency is here in Saskatchewan exploring 

opportunities for co-operation and for mutual benefit and 

development. He is accompanied by His Excellency Nguyen 

Duc Hung, ambassador of Vietnam to Canada. This is his third 

visit to our province, and we welcome His Excellency back to 

the Legislative Assembly today. 

 

I also want to acknowledge Nguyen Xuan Thoi, head of the 

inspection department of Hung Yen province in Vietnam, as 

well as Doan The Cuong, head of the personnel department of 

Hung Yen province, and officials from the embassy of Vietnam 

and Canada have also joined us today. We welcome them and 

from the government of Hung Yen as well. 

 

We also have distinguished visitors from the An Thi district of 

Hung Yen and from Dung Thanh, trade company of Ho Chi 

Minh City. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the trade relationship between Saskatchewan and 

Vietnam is growing, and it’s important. In fact a large part of 

Canada’s relationship with Vietnam is a result of potash from 

our great province, although there are many other opportunities 



April 21, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2773 

we wish to explore. And I would ask all members to join with 

me and the government in welcoming them to this Legislative 

Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too want to 

welcome our very special guests in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, 

from Vietnam, on behalf of the official opposition, to welcome 

the chairman and the ambassador and your delegation. I hope, 

and we all hope, that the conversations between government in 

terms of a declaration of intent will prove to be very fruitful to 

both of our provinces and both of our nations. 

 

I would also want to say how much we appreciate in the 

province of Saskatchewan, the Vietnamese people who have 

chosen to make Saskatchewan their home. A growing and large 

now Vietnamese community in our province, we welcome 

them, and they contribute a great deal to the life of our province 

and our people. And so we welcome you as representatives of 

the province and of the nation, and ask that you enjoy your time 

here and have profitable discussions. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Indian 

Head-Milestone. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to the rest of the Assembly, I’d 

like to introduce two ladies that are seated in your gallery. 

 

The first is Carmen Currie, who is a grade 12 student at 

LeBoldus High School and plans on entering the nursing 

program here in Regina in the fall, which we’re certainly happy 

to see. Carmen also trains with the Regina Rowing Club and 

was recently training at UBC [University of British Columbia] 

in her efforts to make the Canada Games rowing team for the 

summer games, which is taking place in PEI [Prince Edward 

Island] this summer. 

 

Also with her is Sarah Millette. She’s a first-year U of R 

[University of Regina] student in Bachelor of Education, French 

program. As part of this French education program, Sarah will 

be studying at the University of Laval for the next year or so 

before returning back to the U of R to continue her studies. 

 

I’d like all members to welcome these two ladies to their 

Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour today to 

introduce petitions in support of changes to The Highway 

Traffic Act to be referred to as the Gallenger amendment. The 

petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to enact changes to The Highway Traffic Act, 

to be referred to as the Gallenger amendment, which 

would require all vehicle traffic to slow down to 60 

kilometres per hour when passing a snowplow with their 

warning lights activated on Saskatchewan roadways. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions today are from, of course, Regina, 

Balgonie, McLean, Qu’Appelle, Fort Qu’Appelle, Edgeley, and 

some other communities. Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to 

present these petitions today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I want to present a petition in 

support of indexing minimum wage. Mr. Speaker, we all 

understand that indexing the minimum wage would ensure the 

minimum wage earners would be able to maintain a standard of 

living as cost of living increases. And the petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to indexing Saskatchewan 

minimum wage to ensure that the standard of living of 

minimum wage earners is maintained in the face of cost of 

living increases. 

 

And as in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the petitions are signed from residents from Montmartre, 

Melfort, Pleasantdale, Star City, and North Battleford. I so 

present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for wage equity for CBO 

[community-based organization] workers. And we know that 

the low wages paid to those folks in the community-based 

organizations result in high staff turnover, and this lack of 

continuity has a negative impact on the quality of care some of 

the clients receive. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the development and 

implementation of a multi-year funding plan to ensure that 

CBO workers achieve wage equity with employees who 

perform work of equal value in government departments. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And it’s signed from folks in Odessa and Regina. Thank you 

very much. 

 



2774 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2009 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present a petition on behalf of rural residents of 

Saskatchewan who question why the Sask Party government is 

leaving them behind with respect to providing safe and 

affordable water. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to financially assist the town of Duck Lake 

residents for the good of their health and safety due to the 

exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency, and that this government fulfills its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are signed by the good 

residents of Rosthern and Duck Lake. I so present. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand to present a 

petition in support of fairness for students here in Saskatchewan 

through the necessary expansion of the graduate retention 

program. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately expand the graduate retention 

program to include master’s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are 

university students here in Saskatchewan at the University of 

Regina, as well as the University of Saskatchewan. I so present. 

 

[13:45] 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

in support of a new long-term care facility in La Ronge. The 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately invest in the planning and 

construction of long-term care beds in La Ronge. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by the good people of La 

Ronge and area. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Holocaust Memorial Day 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today 

marks Holocaust Memorial Day or Yom HaShoah here in 

Canada and a number of other countries. It is during this time 

that we remember approximately 6 million Jewish people who 

perished at the hands of the brutal Nazi regime. 

 

Motivated by a perverse hatred, the Nazis almost completely 

wiped out the European Jewish population in a matter of only a 

few years during the period leading up to and including World 

War II. 

 

Places like Auschwitz, Treblinka, and Dachau remain as eerie 

reminders of the nightmarish reality that the victims of the 

Nazis had to endure. The gas chambers and crematoriums still 

stand in many cases and allow visitors to have at least a glimpse 

of the level of the cruelty that humanity is capable of. They also 

give testament to the horrible consequences of allowing hatred 

to guide human action. 

 

When we take the opportunity to mark this important occasion, 

we are focused not only on remembering the plight of the 

victims, but also ensuring that we continue to educate ourselves 

and others about the Holocaust. 

 

I would like all the members of this Assembly to take the time 

today to mark the Holocaust Memorial Day and remember the 6 

million lives lost. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Long-Term Care Beds 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I stand today to remind the 

members opposite about a health care project I’ve been 

promoting at the request of my constituents — the need for 

additional long-term care and palliative care beds in La Ronge. 

 

This would benefit not just La Ronge, Mr. Speaker, but outlying 

communities as well — communities such as Southend, Hall 

Lake, Sucker River, Air Ronge, Stanley Mission, Pinehouse, 

Missinipe, Grandmother’s Bay and Stony Rapids. Residents of 

these communities support the effort. 

 

Hundreds have signed petitions to get this government to 

commit to building a long-term care facility in La Ronge for our 

seniors. But, Mr. Speaker, this government refuses to commit to 

long-term care beds in the North. They refuse to recognize the 

need. 

 

I fully expect that other communities in my constituency will 



April 21, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2775 

soon be petitioning for long-term care beds as well, Mr. 

Speaker, and I will work as hard for them as I have worked for 

the people who live in La Ronge. Mr. Speaker, the people who 

live in La Ronge area are working hard on this campaign, and I 

think it would be fair to them to recognize their hard work by 

meeting with them and starting the planning process. 

 

The shortage of long-term beds is a serious issue for the people 

of my constituency and for the people all across the North. It is 

time this Sask Party government begins to take this issue 

seriously. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Before I recognize the next speaker, I just 

want to remind members of a point that was raised yesterday by 

a group of civil servants about even the involvement of 

members not really paying attention when others were doing a 

statement. And if we could keep that in mind, I think it would 

be greatly appreciated. 

 

The member from Biggar. 

 

National Volunteer Week 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, volunteers come from all walks 

of life. What they have in common is their desire to make a 

difference in their neighbourhood, community, and 

Saskatchewan, and in their own life by giving of their time and 

expertise. 

 

Mr. Speaker, National Volunteer Week started in 1943 to draw 

attention to the vital contribution of women to the war effort on 

the home front. Later in the 1960s, the focus was changed to 

include all community volunteers. 

 

Volunteers are involved in virtually every aspect of society 

including health, education, sports, the arts, and the 

environment. Some volunteers give an hour of their time each 

week. Others devote many hours for causes they feel passionate 

about. According to SaskCulture’s website, Saskatchewan has 

one of the highest rates of volunteerism in the country. At 47 

per cent, that is higher than the national rate of 31 per cent. 

Statistics Canada reports that Saskatchewan has over 276,000 

volunteers involved in an estimated 475,000 volunteer positions 

across the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, volunteers play a vital role in Saskatchewan. 

Across our province they deliver services and programs and 

improve and enhance the quality of Saskatchewan people. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Saskatoon Trades and Skills Centre Culinary Arts Program 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, on Saturday, April 9 I had the 

great pleasure of attending a supper prepared by students 

enrolled in the culinary arts program of the Saskatoon Trades 

and Skills Centre at Mount Royal Collegiate. 

In the delivery of this program, STSC [Saskatoon Trades and 

Skills Centre] partners with the Saskatchewan Tourism and 

Education Council. The culinary arts training is a 12 week 

program that provides paid training to students in the area of 

food preparation and food service. About 15 people are 

currently enrolled in this course which provides hands-on 

experience for students as well as foundational knowledge like 

Foodsafe certification, CPR [cardiopulmonary resuscitation], 

first aid, and other employability skills. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the food and service provided by the students on 

April 9 was second to none. The servers were very speedy and 

polite, and the food quality presentation matched any of 

Saskatoon’s finest restaurants. Mr. Speaker, members don’t 

have to take my word for it. All are welcome to attend one of 

the meals offered by the students. 

 

The culinary arts program is just one of the training options 

provided by the STSC. In January of this year, I went to an 

information session at Mount Royal Collegiate that was 

provided to prospective students who are interested in the 

culinary arts program as well as the welding and electrical 

assembly courses. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join me in 

congratulating the staff and students of the culinary arts 

program, as well as the many other people pursuing training 

through the STSC. I wish all of them a bright future. Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Saskatchewan Regional Parks Association Convention 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, on April 3 in Saskatoon the 

Saskatchewan Regional Parks Association held their annual 

general meeting and convention. 

 

There are approximately 100 regional parks in our province 

which are proudly run and maintained by volunteers. The parks, 

which are a source of much regional pride, offer recreational 

opportunities to Saskatchewan residents and tourists alike. The 

2009-2010 budget is providing $415,000 in new funding for 

regional parks. This follows the 600,000 they received in 

funding last year, so that is a total of $1.015 million that they 

have received over two years. Compare that to the $75,000 per 

year that the regional parks received by the former 

administration. 

 

Regional parks that rural Saskatchewan so enjoys were 

underfunded for years. I should know — I sat on the Pasqua 

Park board and it was drastically underfunded. This government 

is committed to supporting their needs. 

 

I want to congratulate Memorial Lake Regional Park, located in 

Shell Lake, for being named the Park of the Year at the AGM 

[annual general meeting], and also Mr. Joe Tiefenbach, winner 

of the Volunteer of the Year Award and a tireless worker for 

Kipabiskau Regional Park. 

 



2776 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2009 

Mr. Speaker, I encourage all the members of this Assembly to 

visit one of the regional parks this upcoming season and enjoy 

Saskatchewan in all its splendour. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Moose Jaw Humane Society Fundraiser 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, the Moose Jaw Humane Society 

has brought back its successful spring fundraiser called 

Bone-anza. This year’s prizes are worth nearly double of last 

year’s and feature nine packages valued at over $23,000. A 

couple of the fan favourites are “I Got You Babe” offering an 

assortment of baby essentials, and “Happy Tails” which is a 

variety of dog and cat must-haves. There are prizes to suit 

everyone’s taste. The raffle tickets are only three for $5 and 

that’s the easy part. The tough part is when purchasers must 

decide which prizes they wish to enter for. 

 

The funds raised will be used to help with veterinary expenses 

and other things that contribute to the quality of care given to 

each animal at the shelter. Over 500 dogs and 1,200 cats come 

into the shelter in Moose Jaw each year. The Moose Jaw 

Humane Society operates on the premise that all animals have 

intrinsic value deserving humane and compassionate treatment. 

The shelter does fine work and raising funds for operation and 

supplies is a constant concern. 

 

Moose Jaw citizens have been very generous in the past and I’m 

sure their support will be again evident this year. Last year’s 

Bone-anza raised about $9,000, and they are hoping to top that 

this year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in thanking the 

donors of the prizes, the staff and volunteers of the Moose Jaw 

Humane Society, and all those for supporting the Bone-anza 

fund raiser. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Prince Albert Business Legacy Award 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On April 8, 2009, 

Prince Albert’s business community paid tribute to a constituent 

of mine. Barry Dutchak was honoured with the Legacy Award 

at the annual Samuel McLeod Business Awards. Barry is the 

co-owner of Parkland Ambulance and has spent most of his life 

working in the emergency services field. 

 

It all started back in 1974 when Barry began the family-run 

business with his brother, Wayne. Parkland Ambulance started 

with only two employees working 24 hours a day. It currently 

employs 65 full- and part-time staff and is one of Prince 

Albert’s leading businesses. 

 

This was not the first time Barry has been recognized for his 

contributions to Prince Albert and area. He has also been 

awarded the Governor General of Canada’s EMS [emergency 

medical services] Exemplary Service Medal, the Saskatchewan 

Excellence in Public Safety Award, and the provincial 

Protective Services Award, to name a few. 

 

So today, Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join with me in 

thanking Barry Dutchak for his contributions to the people of 

the Prince Albert and area and to congratulate him on being 

awarded the Samuel McLeod Legacy Award winner. Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Review of Hospital Policy 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Monday morning a 

patient was found lying on his back less than 10 feet from the 

entrance to the emergency room at Saskatoon City Hospital. 

The initial response of hospital staff was to phone 911 for an 

ambulance. We are told that their actions were in accordance 

with hospital policy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people are asking why hospital 

staff did not immediately attend to this individual instead of 

phoning 911. To the minister: is there a policy which requires 

hospital staff to phone 911 before attending to a patient in need 

on their property? And does he think that the policy is an 

appropriate one? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, 

and I thank that member for the question. I too am concerned 

about the policy that may have mis-intended consequences. You 

know, while we want to ensure the health and safety of 

employees within our health care facilities, we also want to 

ensure that the patients are paramount within our system. That’s 

why we’ve started a patient-first review to ensure that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that common sense has to be put in place 

here, and that’s why I’ve asked all health regions, 12 health 

regions, I’ve sent a letter to all 12 CEOs [chief executive 

officer] to review their policies through the lens of common 

sense, but also ensuring the safety of their employees. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Saskatchewan 

people are asking the obvious question: what if this man had 

died while waiting for medical attention in front of the entrance 

to a hospital emergency room? It’s a question to which 

Saskatchewan people, concerned about their own health and 

safety and that of their loved ones, deserve an answer to. 



April 21, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2777 

To the minister: who would have been held responsible if this 

man had died while waiting for medical attention? And does the 

minister not agree that he and his ministry are ultimately 

responsible for the care that people receive and for the decisions 

hospital staff make, particularly if they are following policy? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, you can be assured that 

our government, as well as the regional health authority, take 

this situation very seriously. The good news is that he was 

looked after and there was no serious consequences from this 

action. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, that is why I’ve asked the health regions to 

review their policies, which vary from health region to health 

region. But policies have been in place for a number of years 

under the previous government, Mr. Speaker. We’re asking the 

health regions to review these policies so that common sense 

prevails, so that if a person needs attendance from perhaps a 

person within the hospital, that can be done. 

 

But there are other extenuating circumstances. If it was a spinal 

cord injury, would the person that is attending from the hospital 

be the appropriate person? We need to look at all of those 

aspects through the lens of common sense to ensure the safety is 

paramount for our residents in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people 

do want reassurances that this kind of thing won’t happen again 

to them or any of their loved ones found in a similar situation. 

 

But the question to the minister is the review of these policies. 

What time frame will we be looking at? He mentioned that 

they’ll be in conjunction with the patient-first review which 

would take it to recommendations in the middle of July, which 

obviously would not be time sensitive to something like this. It 

could happen any time again. And what scope of review of the 

policies are we going to be looking at? 

 

[14:00] 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I think that is exactly 

why this government has taken action immediately once we 

heard the news. This morning we are sending a letter off to the 

regional health authorities, the CEOs, to review the policy. And 

I haven’t put a timeline on that, but I will be putting a timeline 

on it. I first asked them to start reviewing. And I will be putting 

a timeline on it, and I will be more than happy to report back to 

this House the findings of that review. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Controlling Greenhouse Gas Emissions 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

yesterday the Minister of Environment confirmed that the Sask 

Party will be breaking its campaign promise to stabilize 

greenhouse gas emissions by 2010 and reduce them by 32 per 

cent by 2020. She also confirmed that, at least on an interim 

basis, they will be adopting intensity-based targets instead of 

absolute targets for greenhouse gas emission reductions. And 

she provided no firm date about when Saskatchewan’s 

greenhouse gas emissions will stop rising. 

 

To the minister: when will Saskatchewan’s greenhouse gas 

emissions stop rising? And if she can’t answer that question, 

how can she credibly claim that she’s even keeping the spirit of 

the Sask Party’s election promise? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I would 

like to begin by wishing the member opposite a happy 

anniversary. Tomorrow will mark the one-year anniversary 

from the day that the NDP [New Democratic Party] formally 

endorsed the federal climate change targets. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is not immune to the economic 

circumstances that are currently facing our country. We are in a 

good position but we are not immune. And, Mr. Speaker, it is a 

position of our government that we are going to be balancing 

the economy with environmental protection. And I would like 

to quote from Dwain Lingenfelter: 

 

For too long, politicians and political parties have talked 

about balancing environmental sustainability and 

economic progress as if one could only be advanced at the 

expense of the other. This is a false trade-off. I am 

convinced now more than ever that environmental 

leadership equals economic leadership. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we couldn’t agree more, except the NDP 

apparently are not onside. The NDP Environment critic said 

that an economic discussion in the face of climate change 

policy is a red herring and it’s irresponsible. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, we have just witnessed the queen 

of spin. Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Environment says she will 

be introducing new climate change legislation that will be key 

to negotiating an equivalency agreement with the federal 

government. The minister has also said that such an agreement 

will allow Saskatchewan “. . . to retain compliance payments 

within the province for investments in low carbon 

technologies.” 



2778 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2009 

To the minister: will the minister guarantee that the plan 

accompanying any equivalency agreement will result in 

reduction in greenhouse gas emissions? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I am encouraged by the 

NDP’s interest in this file. We’ve had over 1,200 questions in 

this Chamber during this session, and this is question number 

13 on this file. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP are suddenly concerned about 

greenhouse gas emissions, except that they oversaw a 62 per 

cent increase in emissions in this province during the course of 

their government. So for them to stand up in the House today 

and demand to know an exact date when emissions are going to 

be reduced, I would challenge that perhaps they should have 

had a little bit more concern . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Interesting that emissions rise through economic 

activity, so apparently under the NDP we saw a lot of economic 

activity — contrary to what she’ll say. Mr. Speaker, the Sask 

Party’s main ideas to date for reducing greenhouse gas 

emissions appear to be clean coal and nuclear power. But the 

Minister of Enterprise and Innovation described clean coal as “a 

huge risk” in committee on April 7. And everyone knows the 

nuclear power plant will take more than a decade to build, even 

with the Sask Party’s attempts to rush the decision-making 

process. 

 

Investing in energy conservation and retrofits for homes, on the 

other hand, brings benefits today. Moreover a February 2009 

study by the C.D. Howe Institute praises energy retrofits as one 

of the cheapest ways to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. 

 

To the minister: will the minister guarantee that her plan will 

result in immediate reductions in greenhouse gas emissions? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I can pretty much 

guarantee the fact that doing something, that our party will be 

doing, is going to result in a larger benefit to our province than 

doing nothing, which is what the NDP did. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Minister of the 

Environment. 

 

Order. The Minister Responsible for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, we already know that the 

NDP abandoned their original targets and adopted the federal 

targets last year, but they are now in the midst of a leadership 

campaign. They have four declared candidates. And I’ve been 

looking for some information, and as far as I can tell, Mr. 

Speaker, not one of those four candidates has actually 

announced what kind of targets they have planned for our 

province. I think that’s very important going forward 

considering that the NDP think that the economy of our 

province has nothing to do with this discussion and are willing 

to completely abandon the economics of this discussion. I think 

that the . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may complete her answer. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, the current NDP leader 

said, and I quote: 

 

“I think it’s fair to say that when a party is working 

through a leadership, obviously there are going to be 

debates in the party and the single voice of that party . . . I 

think there will be some clarity when there’s a new leader 

and so on.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, we can only hope. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, apparently the Sask Party equals 

no plan; therefore it equals no answer. Mr. Speaker, media 

reports from the United States makes it increasingly clear that a 

cap-and-trade system is coming to North America. The US 

[United States] Environmental Protection Agency has 

announced that it will regulate carbon dioxide and five other 

greenhouse gases as pollutants even if Congress fails to act. The 

National Round Table on the Economy and Environment 

recommends that Canada adopt hard targets for greenhouse gas 

emissions and participate in the North American cap-and-trade 

system and warns that Canada’s economy will suffer if it 

doesn’t adopt the US approach. 

 

To the minister: will she provide Saskatchewan with the 

opportunity to participate in a green economy of the future, or 

will she cut us off from those opportunities by insisting on 

policies our biggest trading partner will never accept? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, if the NDP are concerned 

about the green economy moving forward, perhaps they could 

explain why they’ve completely slammed the door on nuclear 

energy, they’ve completely turned their back on clean coal, and 

apparently, according to the NDP Environment critic, carbon 

capture and storage is not for our province any more. 

 

So if they’re concerned about the green economy perhaps they 

could work on their own internal policies. And I would point 

out, if the member opposite wants to praise the American 

position, the American targets are a 20 per cent reduction by 



April 21, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2779 

2020 — sounds a little familiar to what we’re going to be doing, 

Mr. Speaker. And I would further point out that Carol Browner, 

President Obama’s chief energy and climate change adviser, 

said, and I quote, “You can get the clearest instruction by 

passing legislation.” Mr. Speaker, that is exactly what we will 

be doing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Consultation Regarding Energy Sources 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party is forcing 

Saskatchewan people to make decisions today about the 

province’s future energy needs that will have huge economic 

and environmental consequences for current and future 

generations. 

 

The UDP [Uranium Development Partnership] report that they 

commissioned left Saskatchewan people with more questions 

than answers. A clear 40 per cent of Saskatchewan people say 

they’re poorly informed when it comes to issues related to 

nuclear development. 

 

To the minister: why is he forging ahead with his flawed 

consultation process when so many Saskatchewan people say 

they don’t have enough information to make an informed 

decision, and will he agree that it’s his responsibility to provide 

the information? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much to the hon. 

member for the question. Certainly the process of examining 

the UDP report will be an opportunity for Saskatchewan 

residents to educate themselves. The poll that we saw last 

weekend in the newspaper said amongst those who had the 

opportunity to study it, many favoured the outcome, but there 

was very much a want for that education process to take place. 

 

I remind the hon. member and all members and all people of 

Saskatchewan that the website is up and running. The report can 

be downloaded, and the education process can begin. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Well sadly, Mr. Speaker, this government has 

forced Saskatchewan people to find information on their own. 

But a responsible government would ensure that people have all 

of the information that they need to make an informed decision, 

especially a decision with such huge economic and 

environmental impacts on the province. 

 

That’s why this afternoon we introduced the energy 

development partnership. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Furber: — It would do the appropriate groundwork and 

provide the information to the people of this province that they 

need to make decisions about long-term energy needs. 

 

To the minister: does he agree that a more diverse study 

examining all potential energy sources is needed? And if so, 

will they accept our proposal? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thanks very much. I’ve always 

said in this legislature that in Saskatchewan, regarding our 

energy needs, it’s not an either/or situation. We want to look at 

all types of production and make sure that no stone is unturned. 

 

Last week I had a chance to respond to what the Green Party 

did and encouraged them to bring their ideas forward. The NDP 

has come up with some ideas, and I think some of them have 

some merit, and we’d be quite willing to work together. I think 

the best way to do that would be through a motion in the 

legislature asking the all-party Crown Corporations Committee 

to examine this. And we’d be happy to do that. And we look 

forward to working with the members opposite on that very 

fact. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Well I think the people of Saskatchewan will 

look forward to such a proposal provided that it compared all 

the potential energy sources in this province because that’s all 

they’re asking for. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I asked the minister a simple question. They won’t 

adopt the proposal. This government paid $25,000 to write a 

UDP report that left 40 per cent of people in Saskatchewan 

feeling poorly informed. How does he square with 

Saskatchewan people that it’s responsible and appropriate to 

spend $25,000 a day to examine a report that had one option 

while the same time he did not accept the EDP [energy 

development partnership] proposal that will provide 

Saskatchewan people with a comparative analysis of all future 

energy options? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much. And, Mr. 

Speaker, again I look forward to more ideas coming from 

members opposite. But certainly the Uranium Development 

Partnership, the UDP, is about much more than just power 

generation in our province. It talks about refining. It talks about 

processing. It talks about research and development. It talks 

about innovation. 



2780 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2009 

And to be honest, Mr. Speaker, what I found very concerning 

through the UDP process is learning that Saskatchewan may 

lose its pre-eminence as the number one miner of uranium in 

the world today. We’re looking at Kazakhstan and Australia 

and others jumping ahead of us. That’s a concern to me and that 

should be a concern to members opposite as well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Well sadly, Mr. Speaker, this government used 

their UDP report, which focused exclusively on value-added 

uranium, in particular nuclear power, as the basis for their 

consultation process. We all know this report has generated 

more questions than answers. 

 

Our energy development proposal recommends that the UDP 

revisit its own report and provide information it lacks regarding 

costs, including decommissioning costs, per kilowatt hour costs, 

and whether there are actually export markets — not just 

hypothetical markets — and what is the waste storage plan. 

 

To the minister: will he accept that the recommendation of the 

UDP provide a more detailed report, providing answers to these 

very important questions? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Well we’re very much looking 

forward to the consultation process beginning. We feel that 

there will be many good ideas generated from Saskatchewan 

residents. We look forward to talking about things like medical 

isotopes in our province, and the value of uranium development 

and nuclear development in our province. That will be done 

within the context of a fair and open process led by Mr. Dan 

Perrins, who we think can do a good job in this area. 

 

Mr. Perrins will be reporting very shortly about the details of 

that consultation process and again it will be the most extensive 

consultation process ever undertaken by any political party, by 

any administration ever in the province of Saskatchewan. It’s 

about time, Mr. Speaker, and it’s being done by this 

government today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Well the problems with their consultation 

process are many. The main one is that it only studies one form 

of energy. People want choice and they want to be able to 

compare apples to apples when it comes to the different energy 

sources. 

 

Mr. Speaker, not only do we recommend that the UDP provide 

a more detailed and informative report, but also recommend 

that two additional panels be created, the first being the carbon 

development partnership and the second being the renewable 

energy development partnership. We then recommend that these 

three reports be compiled into one public report that is used as 

the basis for a comprehensive public consultation. 

 

[14:15] 

 

To the minister: does he agree that a report outlining all 

potential energy sources, comparing apples to apples and 

oranges to oranges, forms a better foundation for the public 

consultation process? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Well in comparing apples to 

apples and oranges to oranges, the member opposite has to 

separate the apples from the oranges and he has to separate the 

UDP from the power generation needs of the province going 

forward. And that’s exactly what we’re going to do. 

 

We’ve encouraged the UDP to do their work and Mr. Perrins to 

do their work, but we’ll take the offer from the members 

opposite to work with us through a legislative committee. And I 

would propose that we look at this particular question in this 

legislature through a committee: how can the province of 

Saskatchewan meet the growing demand for electricity in a 

manner that is safe, reliable, environmentally sustainable, and 

affordable for Saskatchewan residents? I ask the hon. member 

at this time, would he take that offer and join in that all-party 

committee? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — We would take a reasonable offer that includes 

all of the energy sources and the ability to compare them, one 

against the other, by the experts in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, 40 per cent of the people feel that they’re not 

properly informed and need more information. For the public 

consultation forums to be a success, there’ll need to be an 

exchange of ideas. 

 

Saskatchewan people have questions that need answers. This 

government has been unclear as to whether or not anybody will 

be available at their consultations with the expertise to answer 

the many questions that will be asked. We propose that experts 

from SaskPower, the UDP, the carbon development partnership, 

the renewable energy development partnership be available at 

public consultations to answer technical questions. 

 

To the minister: does he agree that experts need to be available 

to answer questions at the public consultation forums? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 



April 21, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2781 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I 

indicated earlier, the UDP process is progressing well. Mr. 

Perrins will be making an announcement. He’s operating as an 

independent officer. He’s examining the process and will be 

making his recommendations public and known. If members 

opposite have a concern with that, they can direct that directly 

to Mr. Perrins. I have confidence in him and I believe members 

opposite should have confidence as well. 

 

In regards to the other question about other types of generation, 

yes, the UDP is going on. At the same time, SaskPower is 

looking at a wind study. We’re also examining hydro 

development in northern Saskatchewan. I’ve had conversations 

on importing power with other jurisdictions. We’re at the 

leading edge of clean coal technology. We’re working at carbon 

capture and sequestration. 

 

We’re not sure today if members opposite are supportive of that 

or not, but we’re leading the way. We’re going to continue to 

do that in a responsible way because that’s what it takes to lead 

the fastest growing economy in the country. And that’s what we 

have today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, this government has said their 

public consultation process will include nine locations and be 

held over the course of six short weeks, Mr. Speaker — clearly 

inadequate. 

 

A longer consultation period with several more locations will 

ensure the Saskatchewan public will be able to engage more 

fully in the information and consultation process. The increased 

number of proposed EDP consultation sites mean that a 

majority of Saskatchewan residents will be no more than a 

half-hour driving distance from a consultation forum. 

 

To the minister: will he accept the proposal to increase the 

number of sites and lengthen the consultation period so that a 

greater number of Saskatchewan people can participate in the 

public consultation process? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. As 

I’ve mentioned in this legislature before, Mr. Perrins is 

currently examining the locations, the times, and the elements 

of the consultation process. He will be announcing that very, 

very shortly and I’m told that it will cover an extensive 

geographic coverage of the entire province of Saskatchewan 

and will also include various groups across the province. So 

we’ll leave it, we’ll leave it to him to make sure that that does 

take place. 

 

I know members opposite were concerned about dates and, you 

know, too many dates and too long, too short. So they’ve taken 

it upon themselves in their proposal to even come up with a 

new date — November 31, 2009. Well I look forward to 

receiving their information but I’m telling them today, I will not 

be at work on November 31, 2009. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP have put forward a 

reasonable proposal that will examine all potential future 

energy sources . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the . . . Order. I recognize the 

member from . . . Order. I recognize the member from Prince 

Albert Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The NDP have put 

forward a reasonable proposal that will examine all potential 

future energy sources, will provide Saskatchewan people with 

the information that they desperately want and need if they’re to 

make an informed decision. 

 

To the minister: is he going to accept the NDP’s proposal or 

will he continue to forge ahead again, ignoring Saskatchewan 

people’s call for more information? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — I’ve said in this House before that 

we welcome ideas. No one political party, no one government 

has a monopoly on all good ideas regarding electricity 

generation in our province. We welcome what the Green Party 

had to say last week. We welcome what the NDP has to say. 

We encourage the Liberals to come forward with their 

information. At the same time, SaskPower is doing the work 

that they need to do with the information that is available today. 

 

You know, I’ve extended the offer to the members opposite. 

I’ve said that we will work together through an all-party 

committee. We will go out and consult. It’s not an either/or 

situation. I extended that offer to the member opposite. I have 

not heard an answer. I suspect we’ll hear an answer very shortly 

and I look forward to those consultations going forward. You 

know, we have a situation here where we have to address the 

needs of the fastest growing economy in the country. We will 

do that and we will look at all types of generation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am instructed by the 



2782 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2009 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

to report Bill No. 86, The Saskatchewan Financial Services 

Commission Amendment Act, 2009 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration of Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that 

this Bill now be read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 

waive consideration of Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 86, 

The Saskatchewan Financial Services Commission Amendment 

Act, 2009 without amendment. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 86 — The Saskatchewan Financial Services 

Commission Amendment Act, 2009 
 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

that Bill No. 86, The Saskatchewan Financial Services 

Commission Amendment Act, 2009 without amendment be now 

read — order — be now read the third time and passed under its 

title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 

Bill No. 44, The Agreements of Sale Cancellation Amendment 

Act with amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that 

the Bill and its amendments be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 44, 

The Agreements of Sale Cancellation Amendment Act with 

amendment and that the Bill and its amendments be now read 

the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall be the amendments read the first 

time? 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 

Bill No. 44 — The Agreements of Sale Cancellation 

Amendment Act, 2008 
 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the 

amendments be now read a first and second time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

that the amendments be now read a first and second time. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 

reading of the amendments. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice may proceed to move 

third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 44 — The Agreements of Sale Cancellation 

Amendment Act, 2008 
 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that this Bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

that Bill No. 44, The Agreements of Sale Cancellation 

Amendment Act with amendment be now read the third time and 

passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

 



April 21, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2783 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — Order. It’s becoming somewhat difficult to try 

and keep a person’s mind around the proceedings with the 

interference. I recognize the Chair of the Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 

Bill No. 45, The Credit Union Amendment Act, 2008 without 

amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that 

the Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 45, 

The Credit Union Amendment Act, 2008 without amendment 

and that the Bill be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move to third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 45 — The Credit Union Amendment Act, 2008 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

that Bill No. 45, The Credit Union Amendment Act, 2008 

without amendment be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 

Bill No. 43, The Trespass to Property Act without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and the 

Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 43, 

The Trespass to Property Act without amendment and that the 

Bill be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 43 — The Trespass to Property Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

that Bill No. 43, The Trespass to Property Act without 

amendment be now read the third time and passed under its 

title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 

Bill No. 51, The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2008 

without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 



2784 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2009 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration of the Committee of the Whole on this Bill and 

that this Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 51, 

The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2008 without 

amendment and that the Bill be now read the third time. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to third reading. I 

recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 51 — The Provincial Court 

Amendment Act, 2008 
 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that this Bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

that Bill No. 51, The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2008 

without amendment be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Committee on 

Human Services. 

 

Standing Committee on Human Services 

 

Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 67, The 

Education Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) with amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that 

the Bill and its amendments be now read the third time. 

 

[14:30] 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Education has requested 

leave to waive consideration of Committee of the Whole on Bill 

No. 67, The Education Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) and that 

the Bill and its amendments be now read the third time. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. When shall the amendments be read 

a first time? I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 

Bill No. 67 — The Education Amendment Act, 2008 

(No. 2)/Loi n
o
 2 de 2008 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur 

l’éducation 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the 

amendments be now read a first and second time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Education that the amendments be now read a first and second 

time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 

reading of amendments. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister may proceed to move third 

reading. I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 67 — The Education Amendment Act, 2008 

(No. 2)/Loi n
o
 2 de 2008 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur 

l’éducation 
 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

move that this Bill be now read the third time and passed under 

its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Education that Bill No. 67, The Education Amendment Act, 

2008 (No. 2) be now read the third time and passed under its 

title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 



April 21, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2785 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 

Committee on Human Services. 

 

Standing Committee on Human Services 

 

Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 79, The 

Education Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2) without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that 

the Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Education has requested 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill 

No. 79, The Education Amendment Act, 2009 and that the Bill 

be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to third reading, 

the Minister of Education. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 79 — The Education Amendment Act, 2009 

(No. 2)/Loi n
o
 2 de 2009 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur 

l’éducation 
 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Education that Bill No. 79, The Education Amendment Act, 

2009 (No. 2) be now read the third time and passed under its 

title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, in order to allow the Standing Committees on Crown 

and Central Agencies, the Economy, and House Services to do 

their work, I move that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that, in order to facilitate the working of committees, this House 

do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. This House stands adjourned 

until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 14:34.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2771 

  Wall ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2771, 2772 

  Calvert ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2771, 2773 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2771 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2772 

  McMorris ....................................................................................................................................................................... 2772, 2773 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2772 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2772 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2772 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2772 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2773 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2773 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2773 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2774 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2774 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2774 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Holocaust Memorial Day 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2774 

 Long-Term Care Beds 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2774 

 National Volunteer Week 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2775 

 Saskatoon Trades and Skills Centre Culinary Arts Program 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2775 

 Saskatchewan Regional Parks Association Convention 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2775 

 Moose Jaw Humane Society Fundraiser 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2776 

 Prince Albert Business Legacy Award 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2776 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Review of Hospital Policy 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2776 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2776 

 Controlling Greenhouse Gas Emissions 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2777 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2777 

 Consultation Regarding Energy Sources 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2779 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2779 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2781 

 Standing Committee on Human Services 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2784 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 86 — The Saskatchewan Financial Services Commission Amendment Act, 2009 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2782 

 Bill No. 44 — The Agreements of Sale Cancellation Amendment Act, 2008 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2782 

 Bill No. 45 — The Credit Union Amendment Act, 2008 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2783 

 Bill No. 43 — The Trespass to Property Act 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2783 

 Bill No. 51 — The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2008 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2784 

 Bill No. 67 — The Education Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) 

 Loi n
o
 2 de 2008 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2784 



 

 Bill No. 79 — The Education Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2) 

 Loi n
o
 2 de 2009 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2785 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 Bill No. 44 — The Agreements of Sale Cancellation Amendment Act, 2008 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2782 

 Bill No. 67 — The Education Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) 

 Loi n
o
 2 de 2008 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2784 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 


