




















































Hansard: March 12, 2009


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 32A  THURSDAY, MARCH 12, 2009, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2243 

 March 12, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you I‟d like to introduce a constituent of mine, 

Viola Bell, who is sitting in your gallery today. Viola is the 

president of the Sturgis Métis Local. She was an LPN [licensed 

practical nurse]. She‟s a farmer. And I ask all of my colleagues 

to join with me in welcoming Viola to her legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On behalf 

of Her Majesty‟s Loyal Opposition, and as First Nations and 

Métis Relations critic, I too would like to join in welcoming 

Viola Bell to her legislature. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens 

that speaks to living costs which include housing and the major 

impact that they‟re having on Saskatchewan‟s senior citizens, 

and that more affordable housing options would be of 

significant help. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to act as quickly as possible to expand 

affordable housing options for Saskatchewan‟s senior 

citizens. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 

petition calling for wage equity for CBO [community-based 

organization] workers in Saskatchewan. We all know they get 

paid significantly less than those in the government sector — 

some 8 to $10 less — and this is an important issue because 

they‟re doing work of equal value. I‟ll read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the development and 

implementation of a multi-year funding plan to ensure that 

CBO workers achieve wage equity with employees who 

perform work of equal value in government departments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitioners come from Regina, Battleford, 

Pilot Butte, Fillmore, Coronach, Lanigan, and Lloydminster. 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 

present a petition on behalf of rural residents of Saskatchewan 

who again feel like they‟re being left behind by this government 

and are having to deal with the cost burden of providing quality 

drinking water all on their own. The prayer reads as such: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to financially assist the town of Duck Lake 

residents for the good of their health and safety due to the 

exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency, and that this government fulfills its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I submit these petitions on behalf of the good citizens of Duck 

Lake, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

a petition in support of a new Saskatchewan Hospital. The 

petitioners note that Prairie North Regional Health Authority 

has indicated the construction of a new Saskatchewan Hospital 

at North Battleford is a priority, and they have committed 

resources to develop preliminary facility and site plans. Mr. 

Speaker, the petitioners ask: 

 

. . . that the Assembly call upon the Government of 

Saskatchewan to immediately recommit funds and 

resources for the continued development and construction 

of a new Saskatchewan Hospital at North Battleford and 

provide the Prairie North Regional Health Authority with 

the authority necessary to complete this essential and 

much-needed project. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petitioners come from The Battlefords and the 

constituency of Cut Knife-Turtleford. Mr. Speaker, thank you 

very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



2244 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2009 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand to present a 

petition in support of expansion of the graduate retention 

program. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately expand the graduate retention 

program to include master‟s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are 

students from the University of Saskatchewan, the University of 

Regina, as well as a number of health care professionals 

working in the province who hold graduate degrees. I so 

present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Clerk. 

 

Clerk Assistant (Committees): — I wish to present a petition 

for a private Bill on behalf of petitioners from the Stephen and 

Michelene Worobetz Foundation. The prayer of the petition 

reads as follows: 

 

Amend An Act to incorporate the Stephen and Michelene 

Worobetz Foundation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish to present a petition for a private Bill on 

behalf of petitioners for The Ancient Order of Melchizedeq, 

Inc./Hidden Land Institute. The prayer of the petition reads as 

follows: 

 

Hidden Land Institute wishes to award certificates, 

diplomas, and confer degrees in religious-centred 

disciplines, subject to section 6(3) of The University of 

Saskatchewan Act, 1995. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu‟Appelle Valley. 

 

Ronald McDonald House Home Lottery 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I‟m 

pleased to report that a new and fully furnished home built in 

Lakeridge neighbourhood, which is located in my constituency 

of Regina-Qu‟Appelle Valley, this home will be the grand prize 

in the Ronald McDonald House home lottery. All proceeds of 

this home lottery will go towards the Ronald McDonald House 

located in Saskatoon. The lottery home is being sponsored by 

both the paint company, Benjamin Moore, as well as Tamco 

Homes. 

 

This home will be profiled in the Regina HOME Magazine that 

will be available this Friday. We applaud the efforts of these 

companies to help such a worthy and deserving cause. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Ronald McDonald home is an important support 

organization for families with seriously ill children who are 

being treated at nearby hospitals. The Ronald McDonald House 

offers those needy families comfort, warm, compassionate 

accommodations for a nominal charge while they remain in the 

same city as their ill children. Having family members nearby 

can mean so much to a child who is faced with ongoing critical 

medical treatment. 

 

Ronald McDonald home operates in 12 cities across Canada, 

and each location is owned and operated by a non-profit 

organization. While the bulk of the funding of these homes 

comes from Ronald McDonald House charities, and 

McDonald‟s itself, people can donate directly to these houses as 

well. Once again, Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate 

those involved in the Ronald McDonald House home lottery for 

their hard work, their dedication for a worthy cause. Thank you 

very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Regina Citizen Receives Award for 

Lifetime Commitment 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a great pleasure 

to stand today to recognize the 2008 CTV [Canadian Television 

Network Ltd.] Regina Citizen of the Year, a resident in the fine 

constituency of Regina Elphinstone-Centre, Beth Ell. The CTV 

Regina Citizen of the Year award recognizes a citizen‟s lifetime 

commitment to their province and its people. 

 

Beth Ell was raised in the farming community of Kelvington. 

For the past 14 years, she has worked at the Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance agency, where she has helped to build 

community by tirelessly volunteering her time with many 

community service initiatives provided for by SGI and the 

Canadian Office and Professional Employees Union. 

 

In particular, Beth has had a special relationship with Souls 

Harbour Rescue Mission. I know first-hand that Beth was one 

of the many people that Gerri Carroll relied on immensely as 

Souls Harbour went about performing its miracles. To this day, 

Beth Ell is affectionately known as mom by many of the adults 

and children at Souls Harbour. Indeed the last time I had a 

chance to visit with Beth, Mr. Speaker, she was helping to serve 

Christmas dinner for 1,500. Beth also holds the position of 

president for the Pasqua Hospital Auxiliary. Working with 

others, her big heart and helping hands have helped to raise 

over $1 million for the Hospitals of Regina Foundation. 

 

Beth Ell‟s work has touched the lives of thousands of people in 

Saskatchewan, and this award provides a fitting tribute to a 

wonderful person. I ask this Assembly to join me in expressing 

our admiration and appreciation of Beth “Mom” Ell, 2008 CTV 

Regina Citizen of the Year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 



March 12, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2245 

Students Against Drinking and Driving  

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as 

the weather improves, the number of people going out socially 

increases and many may end up drinking and driving home. Mr. 

Speaker, to help everyone remember the dangers of drinking 

and driving, March 8 to 14 has been declared Impaired Driving 

Awareness Week. Not only does drinking and driving have a 

devastating effect on families and friends of those injured or 

killed in alcohol-related crashes, but it also increases the cost to 

society in terms of insurance, health care, and other government 

services. 

 

According to Students Against Drinking and Driving, alcohol 

was a factor in 42 fatal accidents in 2005. It represents a 16 per 

cent decrease from the previous three year of average collisions. 

That‟s a good thing — fewer people were injured as a result of 

alcohol-related crashes. Also in 2005, 670 injuries were 

recorded; a 70 per cent drop from the previous three-year 

average of 810. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the number of incidents involving drinking and 

driving is decreasing, and that‟s good. However there is still 

work that needs to be done to ensure the number continues to 

decrease to the ultimate goal of zero. Mr. Speaker, the slogan, 

Don‟t Drink and Drive, can‟t be said enough, and the Students 

Against Drinking and Driving is working hard to enforce that 

slogan into the minds of young people and adults across 

Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Dr. Louis Poulin Recognized on Retirement 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, for over 30 years, Dr. Louis 

Poulin has been a physician, medical manager, and senior 

medical officer with the Prince Albert Parkland Health Region. 

He‟s exceedingly well respected in our community and is 

known as a compassionate and dedicated doctor. 

 

In February Dr. Poulin retired. The Health Region‟s physicians, 

staff, and patients, while very happy for him in his retirement, 

are also sad to see him leave. He was a valued physician and a 

strong leader in our community.  

 

Over his years in Prince Albert, Dr. Poulin has helped many 

people and saved many lives, but one in particular stands out 

for Dr. Poulin. It is a child he called his miracle baby. Dr. 

Poulin was a young doctor when he examined a mother in the 

early stages of labour. Although on the surface she seemed to 

be doing just fine, on what he calls a gut feeling, Dr. Poulin 

decided to test how the baby was doing. And as it turns out, the 

baby was in distress. And after emergency surgery was 

performed, the baby was born seconds before she would have 

stopped breathing, as the umbilical cord was wrapped around 

her neck. 

 

Dr. Poulin had the opportunity to watch his miracle baby grow 

up and eventually delivered one of her babies. Dr. Poulin said 

his career was filled with similar cases where he felt guided by 

a higher power. Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join with 

me in thanking Dr. Poulin for his years of dedicated service to 

Prince Albert and area, and in congratulating him on his 

retirement. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Batoche. 

 

Funding for Rural Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At this year‟s SARM 

[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] 

convention, our government made a major announcement that 

will benefit rural Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, our government 

is taking steps to enhance safety on the farm through the 

reinstatement of SaskPower‟s farmyard line relocation program. 

This important program was cancelled in 2004 by the previous 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will continue to provide a rebate for gopher 

control. In addition we are introducing the Saskatchewan 

livestock predation program which hires hunters and trappers to 

control the wild boar and coyote population. This government 

will significantly enhance the 20 million municipal road 

program. And, Mr. Speaker, in our upcoming balanced budget, 

our government will keep another promise to achieve a fair 

balance for education funding. 

 

Under the NDP [New Democratic Party], Mr. Speaker, rural 

residents saw their hospitals close, crop insurance premiums go 

up while benefits went down, roads crumble, and the needs of 

farmers and ranchers ignored. In contrast, these programs will 

keep rural residents in their daily lives. They will keep 

Saskatchewan strong and make our province a better place to 

live for everyone. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Tamara’s House 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, in 1991, Tamara‟s House was 

formed as a non-profit organization to provide services to 

women who have survived childhood sexual abuse. The idea for 

Tamara‟s House grew out of a meeting in the home of the 

Saskatoon founder, Dr. Kathy Storrie. A small group of 

concerned people decided that women who had survived child 

sexual abuse needed a safe alternative to the psychiatric system 

to help them deal with the lifelong repercussions of their 

experiences. 

 

Six years ago, thanks to Frank and Ellen Remai, a home for 

survivors was opened in Saskatoon Nutana. The home offers 

survivors short-term shelter, counselling, therapeutic 

treatments, and educational opportunities, including an annual 

bursary. Outreach workshops and seminars also provide public 

education about sexual abuse and the healing process. 

 



2246 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2009 

Tamara‟s House is currently funded for four beds by the Social 

Services ministry. Growing demand, however, in Saskatchewan 

has resulted in eight residents presently living at Tamara‟s 

House. Staff stretches time and resources to assist the 

increasing numbers of residents because these women simply 

cannot be turned away in a crisis. 

 

At present, Tamara‟s House management is communicating 

with the ministry and preparing a funding proposal to expand 

beds to accommodate the growing numbers of women turning 

to Tamara‟s House for help. 

 

I endorse, Mr. Speaker, the valuable services provided by 

Tamara‟s House, and I would urge the government to grant a 

forthcoming request for expanded funding for Tamara‟s House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Liver Health Month 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, March is Liver Health Month 

throughout Canada. Being diagnosed with any form of liver 

disease can be a traumatic and fearful experience for many 

people. Despite the fact that liver disease is often 

stereotypically linked to drug and alcohol abuse, in actuality 

there are over 100 known causes that affect everyone from 

newborns to mature adults. In some cases factors can range 

from genetics, obesity, autoimmune disorders, to cancer. 

 

As our population ages, we are facing more chronic illnesses 

like liver disease than previous generations. But we also are 

seeing amazing breakthroughs in treatment options. It is critical 

that we work to shorten our wait-lists so that those who truly 

need the medical care can promptly receive it. 

 

Our government is working hard to strengthen our health care 

system and reduce wait times. In November our government 

launched a much-anticipated patient-first review. In fact, no 

other province in Canada has undertaken such a system-wide 

review. Mr. Speaker, it is truly inspirational how communities 

across Saskatchewan can come together to build awareness and 

fight this condition — through fundraisers, marathons, and 

other efforts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members join in the fight 

against liver disease by raising awareness in their own 

communities so that we can work together to combat liver 

disease. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Graduate Retention Program 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s clear that the people of 

Saskatchewan want the Sask Party government to fix its flawed 

graduate retention program. Over this past week I‟ve been 

emailed and phoned by many students and professionals who all 

agree that the Minister of Advanced Education needs to admit 

he made a mistake and expand the graduate retention program 

to include those who earn masters‟ and Ph.D.s [Doctor of 

Philosophy]. The Sask Party claims that they are willing to 

learn from their mistakes. To the minister: when will he admit 

he made a mistake and that his graduate retention program is 

flawed and unfair? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, thanks very much for the 

opportunity to talk about the graduate retention program, the 

most aggressive youth retention program that there is in Canada 

— recognized across the country. It makes sure that we‟re 

covering people from journeypersons all the way through to the 

undergraduate completion of their degrees, Mr. Speaker. What 

we‟re seeing with the phase-in, Mr. Speaker, is in fact some 

graduate students are already covered because they were 

already phased in, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I‟ve had the opportunity to sit down with both deans of graduate 

studies, and there‟s no clear consensus, Mr. Speaker, regarding 

the instrument. So let‟s look at some objectives. Rather than 

playing politics, let‟s look at public policy instruments and that 

is, how can we best make sure on areas of recruitment, 

retention, completion, and then succession planning into 

employment streams and career streaming? 

 

So as we‟re going through this, Mr. Speaker, certainly not 

opposed to any additional instruments, but we‟re making sure 

that we‟re going through a very rational, thorough process 

regarding the appropriate instruments. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — I‟m sure that‟s very comforting to the students 

left out in the cold, Mr. Speaker. At a time of global economic 

uncertainty, many Saskatchewan people are concerned that this 

Sask Party government is squandering our province‟s future 

prosperity, and you can‟t blame them for fearing that, Mr. 

Speaker. After all, the Sask Party fails to see the value of 

encouraging those with masters‟ and Ph.D.s to remain here in 

Saskatchewan and contribute to our future economic growth. 

 

To the minister: when will he stop squandering our future 

prosperity and expand the graduate retention program to include 

all university students in Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 



March 12, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2247 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, just I guess in a way of 

framing this, I‟m happy to report that population growth is up 

over 16,000 people July to July, Mr. Speaker. But to the point, 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s one of the reasons that we put in place the tax 

reductions that we have. And so for a family of four making 

$35,000, there‟s a savings of over $2,600. The relevance, Mr. 

Speaker, is these were designed for the intentions of people 

with low and medium incomes, Mr. Speaker. They‟re benefiting 

more from the tax cuts that have been put in place than any 

previous program that was in place by the previous government. 

 

So as we‟re helping to address population growth instead of 

decline, as we‟re helping to address affordable living, Mr. 

Speaker, we‟re also having a rational conversation about what 

are the best instruments to ensure that we‟re maximizing public 

dollars. Mr. Speaker, we‟ve seen additional dollars invested 

from Ottawa. We‟re waiting to see what that looks like. Mr. 

Speaker, there‟s more work to be done here to be sure, but it‟s 

going to be through thorough public policy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people understand 

that the Sask Party government is failing them. Unfortunately 

the minister is oblivious to the effects of his program, so let‟s 

try again. 

 

Tax season is fast approaching. Some graduates are certainly 

going to benefit from the retention program, but many others 

are starting to see how, with the Sask Party government, they 

are paying more and getting a whole lot less. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party is shortchanging professors, 

business grads, speech language pathologists, nurse 

practitioners, physiotherapists, social workers, and clinical 

psychologists, to name just a few. Many of these professions 

are in high demand right now in Saskatchewan. 

 

To the minister: can he explain to these desperately needed 

professionals why they are paying more and getting less under 

this Sask Party government? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, one of the first questions I 

began by speaking with both deans is to say, what does the 

cohort of graduate students actually look like? Who are those 

that are entering graduate programs within Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker? We see some of those that are coming through 

traditional streams — that is, directly out of their undergraduate 

degrees. There are others that are coming in mid-professions, as 

far as making sure they‟re doing some upgrades and 

professional development. And then, Mr. Speaker, we see that 

there are a number of international students. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I‟ve said, some students are already benefiting 

from the graduate retention program. Is there more work to do? 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, there is. But we need to better understand 

what are the instruments that can be maximized. 

 

The federal government‟s moving forward, Mr. Speaker. We 

want to make sure that we‟re positioned to get more money 

from Ottawa, Mr. Speaker. But in a sense, what we need to do 

is make sure that we‟re maximizing those resources that are 

already on the table. Not opposed to moving forward, Mr. 

Speaker. Doing so in a very thorough way that allows for the 

best public policy instruments to be implemented. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

SaskWater Services 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the Minister 

of SaskWater claimed he wants SaskWater to focus on 

providing safe, affordable water to families and communities. 

But he avoided the question of who was going to pay for it. 

 

The Sask Party‟s got two choices. They can allow SaskWater to 

pursue industrial customers and find the revenue it needs to 

keep water rates for families and communities affordable. Or 

they can make families and communities pay rates that they 

can‟t afford and drive the corporation into the ground. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the member: which is it? Will he allow 

SaskWater to find the new revenues it needs to keep water rates 

affordable, or is his real plan to drive SaskWater into the 

ground? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member is 

right in the sense that there are two choices. There‟s a choice 

going forward to be responsible, to provide service to 

Saskatchewan people — something that was articulated very 

well at the SARM convention as recently as yesterday — 

communities across the province. 

 

The second choice is to do nothing, as has been done over the 

last 16 years, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is a serious concern 

going forward. It‟s a serious, it‟s a serious and growing 

concern, something that this government takes very seriously 

and something that this government will use the Crown 

corporations to ensure that that service is provided as 

Saskatchewan people want it, as they deserve it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, everyone agrees that the role 

of SaskWater is to provide safe and affordable waters to 



2248 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2009 

Saskatchewan families and communities. The question is 

affordability. 

 

Industrial customers represent two-thirds of the SaskWater 

annual water sales. Without the revenue those customers bring 

in, SaskWater is simply not viable. Now the Sask Party‟s 

refused to let SaskWater develop new industrial clients. So it‟s 

clear where they‟re going, Mr. Speaker. Over time SaskWater 

simply won‟t be able to generate the revenue it needs to remain 

viable. It won‟t be able to continue to provide safe, affordable 

water to Saskatchewan‟s families and communities. 

 

My question to the minister: what doesn‟t he understand? Why 

is he so determined to dry up SaskWater? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, SaskWater has 

provided both industrial and residential services. On the 

industrial side they‟ve done it and tried to be on a commercial 

basis. They‟ve had a small loss over the last number of years. 

 

If the concentration was made on the residential side, and more 

capital was put in, they might break even; they might make a 

small profit if that decision was made. But that does not address 

the real issue here, Mr. Speaker. And members opposite, those 

that were at SARM, would have heard this in spades — that we 

have to provide safe and reliable residential water in the 

municipalities. That‟s where the real need is. That‟s where the 

responsibility for SaskWater lies. That‟s where we will be 

concentrating our efforts and making those decisions, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the minister admitted that 

change is coming to SaskWater. Change, the minister said, will 

be “difficult and disconcerting.” Yesterday he said also, 

“Different skill sets might be needed at SaskWater.” He 

wouldn‟t say how many people with different skill sets might 

be needed. 

 

To the minister: what is he hiding? How many jobs are going to 

be lost at SaskWater now that he‟s changed his plan and won‟t 

allow commercial development? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, this speaks to the 

very fact why the NDP got in trouble over the last 16 years. 

They did not look at change; they did not face change in the eye 

and say that we‟re going to change things to make things better 

in the province. 

 

Our province has changed, Mr. Speaker. It‟s changed from 

when that NDP opposition was in government. We now have 

the fastest growing economy in the country. We have people 

moving back to Saskatchewan from Alberta. We have people 

moving back to Saskatchewan from Manitoba, Mr. Speaker. 

There‟s more residences coming. There‟s more developments 

around Saskatoon, around Regina. We know from SaskEnergy 

and SaskPower that there‟s more hookups in every town and 

city in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Yes, that enhances the 

responsibility for Crowns like SaskPower. That necessitates 

change, and that‟s what will be done, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, you know the government 

opposite is proud to talk about infrastructure programs, but we 

know what their infrastructure programs got Duck Lake — 

$66,000 on a $2.3 million water project. He talks about private 

service providers, and we know where that got Duck Lake — 

water bills of over $160 a month and 11 customers without 

water service. 

 

The Speaker: — The member may place his question. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The best way to 

provide safe and affordable water to communities and families 

is to make SaskWater more viable, but they don‟t want to do 

that either. To the minister: what is he hiding? Why won‟t he be 

straight with the people of Saskatchewan about the Sask Party 

government‟s plans for SaskWater‟s future? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, we‟re seeing a 

reoccurring theme here that members opposite are complaining 

about the costs that . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Minister responsible could respond. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, they‟re complaining 

about the costs, but they offer absolutely no solutions. 

SaskWater, in their agreement with Duck Lake, it was entered 

into by that administration, Mr. Speaker. 

 

SaskWater‟s responsibility is to provide safe and reliable water 

to Saskatchewan residents. That‟s indeed what they will be 

doing. SaskWater has an enhanced responsibility. And that‟s 

what it will be directing its resources towards. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[10:30] 



March 12, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2249 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

EZ Finder Phonebooks 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, according to today‟s newspapers, 

it appears the people from across the continent are phoning in to 

complain about this Sask Party government‟s creative 

financing. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, earlier this week when I asked the Minister 

of CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan] 

about the process involving the sale of EZ Finder Phonebooks, 

he said, and I quote, “All prospective purchasers were 

canvassed.” 

 

Well now according to today‟s paper, Mr. Speaker, that is in 

fact not the case. Mr. Bruce Howard, CEO [chief executive 

officer] of User-Friendly Phone Book, says in our papers today 

„“They [being his company] had a very high level of knowledge 

. . .‟”  

 

“They [this government] had a . . . high level of 

knowledge of our interest and our interest was never 

pursued, never called, nothing.” 

 

And get this, Mr. Speaker, what he says: 

 

“When I saw the purchase price, I said . . . Without even 

knowing the numbers I can guarantee you we would be 

five (times) . . . [higher].” 

 

Mr. Speaker, five times higher. So my question to the Minister 

of CIC: why did he report to this House, why did he . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I ask . . . Order. The member has the 

right to place his question. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — I note a little sensitivity across the way, Mr. 

Speaker. The question to the Minister of CIC is this: why did he 

report to this House that all prospective purchasers had been 

contacted when in fact that they hadn‟t? And why did they not 

pursue an opportunity to receive five times more for the EZ 

Finder Phonebook? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s the oldest story 

in the book — two days after the sale was made, somebody 

comes along and says they would have paid you more. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you one thing, I can tell 

you one thing, Mr. Speaker. Any deal . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Fairview will 

come to order. The Minister Responsible for Crown Corp. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — I can tell you one thing. Any deal 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The minister may respond. 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I can tell you one 

thing. Any deal to get us out of this mess is better than any deal 

to get us into this mess that those members opposite undertook. 

$13.4 million loss, taxpayers‟ money. 2006, what are the 

numbers? $1.9 million loss. 2007, 3.3. 2008, we don‟t know the 

exact number for sure, but when the annual report comes out 

we‟ll know it; it‟s in the neighbourhood of $2 million loss. 

 

Facing SaskTel was the possibility of another $1 million loss 

with the Calgary phone book. They came up with the strategic 

plan, strategic partners, a list of partners, those operating in the 

very markets that these books are. They were canvassed, they 

were chosen. An independent evaluation . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The minister‟s time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, let‟s review. In today‟s 

newspapers, it‟s indicated that conversations between this firm 

and this government have been going on for a long time. But 

when it came to the sale, the CEO of this group says, we were 

never contacted. He knows, he knows the business and he 

knows what was for sale and he says, I would have gladly paid 

five times more. 

 

Now what about the deal we did get? Well we apparently got a 

significant 20 per cent of what we might have got, and we‟ve 

got what this government said they wouldn‟t do. And that‟s an 

investment in an out-of-province firm. That‟s against the very 

policy they promote, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s clear the question needs to be, to the Minister 

of CIC: why is it you can‟t even do the wrong thing right? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

has demonstrated that he can do the wrong thing and he can do 

it very well, because they did it time and time and time again. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

is fast and loose with the facts. He talks about five times the 

value, Mr. Speaker. $950,000 was the cash deal. He says he 

would have paid five times that amount. Well, Mr. Speaker, that 

would be $4.75 million. The value of this deal to SaskTel is 

$6.593 million: $950,000 in cash, $3.7 million in preferred 

shares which are almost like a debt instrument, and, Mr. 

Speaker, $1.91 million in receivables. $6.6 million has been 

rescued from a $13.4 million loss. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister‟s time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 



2250 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2009 

Crown and Government Outsourcing 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the minister is demonstrating his 

grasp of creative financing. Mr. Speaker, we now know that this 

government has been less than upfront when it comes to 

outsourcing in sales. When it came to the question of 

outsourcing of the email services, even Saskatchewan firms are 

not invited to participate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question now to the Minister of CIC: is he, 

SaskTel, any other Crown, or his government in total now 

contemplating any other outsourcing of services? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, we‟ve had this 

outsourcing debate before and I‟d be more than happy to get 

into it again. Outsourcing is what innovative companies do. 

And SaskTel is an innovative company. When you‟re involved 

in innovation, things become routine and when they become 

routine, you take that money, you outsource it. You save that 

money. You take it, and you put it into innovation. You create 

more jobs and you ensure that you have an innovative, 

competitive company. That‟s what SaskTel will do and will 

continue to do. 

 

Those decisions will be made by the management team, by the 

board of directors. I will have a chance to review it. But unlike 

members opposite, politicians won‟t claim to know more about 

this than those professionals that are hired to do a job. They do 

a good job. And if members opposite have any information that 

says otherwise, I would challenge them to put that on the floor 

right now. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, for the third time this morning, 

the minister refuses to answer a very direct question put to him. 

My direct question is: is he, is the government considering the 

outsourcing of other services, key components, for instance of 

SaskTel? Let me even be more direct. Is this government now 

considering the outsourcing of directory assistance or message 

relay service? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as it was in 

2004, or as it was in 2005 under that government, the option of 

outsourcing is one option that is looked at and should be looked 

at in a responsible manner whether it‟s SaskPower, SaskTel, 

SaskEnergy, SGI, or any of the Crowns or any business in 

government or in the private sector, Mr. Speaker. If it makes 

sense from a business perspective to do it, and that capital can 

be redeployed to create more jobs and to keep those companies 

more innovative, of course they‟ll look at it. 

Does the member opposite not want them to do that at all? If he 

does, I invite him to put that on the public record today, now. 

And why has it changed between 2004-05 and today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Government’s Performance 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Deputy 

Premier seems to be quite agitated in his seat over there. Mr. 

Speaker, what we have observed in today‟s question period is 

what we have observed throughout the course of this session — 

a government that is refusing to be upfront with the people of 

Saskatchewan through this legislature or in other means. Let me 

just review, Mr. Speaker, for a moment, what we have learned 

in the course of this session. 

 

The public was not informed about the outsourcing going on at 

SaskTel. In that process, Saskatchewan firms have been left out 

of the process. They will not tell us who received the 

outsourcing for conference calling. They‟re selling assets 

without due process. We learned today that we could have got 

five times more. They can‟t even do the wrong thing right. 

 

They botched, Mr. Speaker, they botched the enhanced driver‟s 

licence. They‟ve had a damning report from the Privacy 

Commissioner. They‟ve introduced labour legislation again 

without consulting workers. They refuse to listen to the 

concerns of the people of Duck Lake. And they do nothing . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I ask the member to 

place his question. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — The question, Mr. Speaker, and given that 

they‟re not even listening to people who are having their water 

turned off, their power turned off, and their gas turned off, my 

question is to the Premier. Does he call this good government? 

Because, Mr. Speaker, I‟ll tell you, the people of Saskatchewan 

do not. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, let me just thank the hon. 

member for his question. And in the preamble he made some 

comments with respect to a discontinuance of service in the 

Crowns. We need to state it very clearly for the public record, 

Mr. Speaker, that under his government, when he sat over here 

and he was the government, cut-offs were almost a third higher 

than they are this year, Mr. Speaker, under his government. So 

there‟s a little duplicity there as the hon. member wants to raise 

his question. 

 

But the specific question was, are the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan happy with and well served by the government? 

Well I think we should ask the people of Saskatchewan how 

they feel about the largest single-year tax cut in the history of 

this province. I think we should ask them how they feel about 

the strongest economy in the Dominion of Canada right here in 

Saskatchewan. I think we should ask them how they feel about 



March 12, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2251 

a government that‟s reduced the debt by 40 per cent in its first 

budget year, Mr. Speaker. I think we ought to ask them how 

they feel about record investments in infrastructure as a 

stimulus and to deal with a deficit of infrastructure left behind 

by that government. I think their answer would be, we can 

always, we can always see improvement but right now we are 

pleased with the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, it is clear this early in the life of 

this government, this early in this session, it is clear that this 

government has now been gripped with an attitude of 

invincibility — an attitude, Mr. Speaker, that says, we can do 

anything we want. We do not need to consult with the people of 

Saskatchewan. We do not need to accept due process. We do 

not need to listen to the independent officers of this legislature. 

An air of invincibility that says they can turn their backs . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s an air of invincibility that 

makes them believe they can turn their backs on the very people 

who voted for them — for instance the people of Duck Lake. 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s an air of invincibility that thinks they can just 

turn their backs with disdain on people who are losing their 

utilities and an air of invincibility that says that we ought to just 

accept their creative financing. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier: between his 

trips to the airport, will he do something about this? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you to the hon. member for the 

question. Mr. Speaker, again to the preamble from the member 

for Riversdale, if he was listening carefully to my first answer, I 

said very clearly that governments can always do better. That is 

the attitude of this particular government 15 months into office. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan have been able to achieve some 

pretty amazing things over 15 months. The economy of the 

province has provided for that, but we have said consistently 

that we can always strive to do better. And that will continue to 

be the attitude on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we have some momentum to be able to build on, Mr. 

Speaker, it‟s true. I can run down the list again in terms of that 

record of debt reduction, in terms of making life affordable in 

the province through record increases in things like the senior 

income assistance program, through low-income tax credit 

nearly doubling, Mr. Speaker, through low-income housing 

supplements on the rise, Mr. Speaker. People in the province 

are sharing in what is unprecedented prosperity for the 

province. This government‟s going to work to ensure that that 

prosperity continues and is shared by all and that this province 

leads the country as it is today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[10:45] 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Affordable Housing Investment 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I‟m pleased to rise today to inform the House about this 

government‟s investment of nearly $30 million in affordable 

housing. 

 

Expanding the supply of quality affordable housing throughout 

the province will help ensure a strong economy and a better life 

for all Saskatchewan people. 

 

Students, seniors, low-income households, and people with 

intellectual disabilities across Saskatchewan are counting on 

this government to help address their housing needs. For 

example, we know that affordable student housing is a priority 

at the University of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. This nearly 

$30 million investment includes $15 million for the 

construction of new on-campus residence at the U of S 

[University of Saskatchewan] to provide students there with 

better access to affordable housing. It will result in the creation 

of 400 living spaces for students as part of the first new 

residences to be built on the U of S campus in more than 30 

years. Long, long overdue, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The University of Saskatchewan president, Peter MacKinnon, 

says the new residence will enable the U of S to remain 

competitive at attracting and retaining students from 

Saskatchewan and around the world. My colleague, the Hon. 

Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour, tells 

me that the construction of additional affordable on-campus 

housing will help students at the U of S succeed in their studies 

and ultimately stay in Saskatchewan after they graduate. The 

residence will be built on university-owned land across from the 

main campus. Construction is expected to begin later this year, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

But we‟re not stopping there. We will also be providing $12 

million for the renovation of 140-unit Milton Heights apartment 

building in south central Regina. This important initiative will 

ensure that those units will remain available to low-income 

seniors and other low-income households in Regina for many 

years to come. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government recognizes that affordable 

housing is an important issue across Saskatchewan as well as in 

our two largest cities. That is why nearly $30 million 

investment also includes $2.3 million for 12 affordable housing 

units for seniors in Prince Albert and 600,000 for improvements 

to activity centres and group living homes that will benefit 

people with intellectual disabilities in Maidstone, Yorkton, and 

Langenburg. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this nearly $30 million investment amply 

demonstrates this government‟s commitment to expand the 



2252 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2009 

supply of quality affordable housing across Saskatchewan. And 

it‟s just the beginning. We will continue to work to help address 

the housing needs of the province‟s students, seniors, 

low-income households, and people with intellectual 

disabilities. It is my privilege in the months ahead to keep the 

House apprised of this government‟s ongoing efforts in the area 

of affordable housing. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 

want to thank the minister for an advance copy of her remarks. I 

want to start by saying I have some questions about the nature 

of the statement. It‟s not new information or information . . . 

We‟ve heard this announced in February. 

 

But I do want to say a couple of things. One is, these are very 

good, worthwhile projects and we are, and the people of 

Saskatchewan, very happy to hear about these. I do want to say 

I do agree with the minister, particularly the student project. 

The student housing project is long overdue. 

 

And their 15 months . . . And we heard the Premier just talk a 

few minutes ago about the 15-months work they‟ve done. 

They‟ve rejected this project already once, and it‟s now come 

back and they‟ve accepted it. And of course it was called for in 

the Merriman report some 10 months ago, and it took them 10 

months to get up to speed. And in fact here in this House, as 

opposition, we‟ve raised numerous questions, petitions. And in 

fact it was a key part of our recommendation to the Merriman 

report. So we‟re very happy to see this. 

 

But I would say this, Mr. Speaker, that the real heroes in this, 

the real heroes in this — and the opposition . . . or the 

government may want to shout this down — but I would say the 

real heroes are the students at the U of S who‟ve worked very 

hard for many years, the past couple of years, and particularly 

released this report they called living well, learning well. The 

student union did so much good work in really articulating the 

concerns of students and housing. In fact what they‟ve said 

often, and I have to agree, if it‟s not affordable, it‟s not 

available. And so this government needed to act. They had no 

choice, but they had to act. 

 

We‟re very happy about the other projects as well. The senior 

project in Prince Albert is very worthwhile, and the one about 

the intellectual disabilities in Langenburg — very worthwhile 

too. We know, Mr. Speaker, that there‟s a huge connect, a huge 

connect between mental health and homelessness. So we hope 

the minister expands her understanding or view of what the 

work will be for Sask Housing when it comes to people 

suffering with mental health issues. We agree totally that those 

living with intellectual disabilities have huge needs, and we 

think that‟s important. But let‟s expand that to those with 

mental health as well. 

 

We are, we are very concerned though, Mr. Speaker, that we 

see more and more of an ad hoc approach to housing in this 

province. We need to see a real strategy. And we need to see the 

minister step up to the plate and call for a national housing 

strategy, and there needs to be one here in Saskatchewan. We 

need one that speaks to all the people‟s needs here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

We saw last summer the cut to the NHOP [neighbourhood 

home ownership program] program, and we call for an 

immediate reinstatement of the NHOP funding. We also know 

that Métis and First Nations need support in housing, both on- 

and off-reserve. And we know that people who are coming to 

Saskatchewan, recent immigrants, need assistance as well. And, 

Mr. Speaker, we know, we know this is very true in all our 

cities in this province. We need support, immediate support, for 

those who are absolutely homeless. We need that to be a reality 

right away, and we look forward to it next week. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I‟ll take my seat, and we appreciate 

the work that‟s being done. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Division of Bill No. 72 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Speaker, I would ask leave of the 

Assembly before orders of the day to move a motion that will 

provide instruction to the Standing Committee on Crown and 

Central Agencies to divide Bill No. 72. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has asked for 

leave. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move: 

 

That the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 

Agencies be instructed to divide Bill No. 72, The Traffic 

Safety Amendment Act, 2008 into two Bills so as to 

incorporate into separate Bills the provisions of the said 

Bill relating to: 

 

a) Enhanced driver licences, being clauses 2 through 9; 

11(a) - 11(d) and 12 of the original Bill; 

 

b) Volunteer firefighting, being clauses 10, 11(e) and 12 

of the original Bill; and further; 

 

That the following conditions shall apply to the 

consideration of the two Bills: 

 

a) The two Bills shall be numbered and printed 

separately prior to clause-by-clause consideration, in 

accordance with rule 157 of the Rules and Procedures 

of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan; 

 

b) The said committee shall report the Bill separately; 

 

c) The “specified Bill” status and time spent in 



March 12, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2253 

consideration of the original Bill shall be applied to the 

two Bills in accordance with rules 33 through 35 of the 

Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — Will members of the Assembly take the 

motion put forward by the Government House Leader as read? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Weyburn. 

 

Affordability of Life in Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I am pleased to be able to take part in the debate, to 

move the motion that we‟re going to be discussing. And I‟ll 

read it right off the top before I get into my comments. The 

motion reads: 

 

That this Assembly recognize the efforts made by the 

Government of Saskatchewan to keep life affordable for 

all residents in our province, including taking steps to 

ensure that our economy continues to grow in this time of 

global uncertainty [Mr. Speaker]. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I‟ve already indicated, I‟m certainly very 

supportive of the motion and very pleased to be able to move 

this motion. And it‟s a motion that speaks to many of the 

initiatives that we‟ve seen put in place by this government, not 

only since the beginning of the term of this government, but 

certainly since the last budget was introduced, announcements 

that were made by the Premier of the province in October of 

last year. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, in the course of my remarks over the next 

15 minutes or so, I‟ll be looking at both some of the initiatives 

that I think have helped to make life affordable for the people of 

Saskatchewan, for the good constituents of Weyburn-Big 

Muddy who continue to honour me with being in this Assembly 

as a representative, and also initiatives that will ensure, Mr. 

Speaker, that the economy continues to lead the nation. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when we‟re looking at the issue of 

affordability, and there‟s really numerous examples, and I know 

members after me on this side of the House are going to speak 

to some of those initiatives in detail and various different 

initiatives. A few that I want to look at in a little more depth, 

Mr. Speaker, are those initiatives, those examples that have 

helped seniors and low-income people, but also, Mr. Speaker, 

really everybody in this province that is going to benefit — all 

taxpayers of this province, the families, the children of those 

people that file income taxes in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to begin with really what is being 

touted by not only this government, Mr. Speaker, but by 

commentators across the province, columnists, people that 

follow business, Conference Board of Canada as a example, of 

what is really being touted as the largest single-year income tax 

reduction in the province‟s history. And this was made by the, 

this was made by the Premier of the province, I believe it was 

back in late October of last year, Mr. Speaker. And this is very 

significant, not just for the obvious reasons that everybody 

wants to see more of their hard-earned money remain in their 

own pockets for them to decide with. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we‟ve seen over the last number of years that, 

particularly under the tenure of the former government that, you 

know, simply we were just . . . we were not competitive with 

our neighbouring provinces, particular in Alberta. I know that 

was a huge concern in my constituency when I was first 

becoming involved in politics and running for an election. 

 

And my own family has been, you know, that was a major 

contributor for my decision to run, was my family situation 

where I had siblings that left the province. So, Mr. Speaker — 

and one of the reasons, I think we know, we don‟t really have to 

go into this — but was the fact that not only were there jobs 

available in other provinces, those jobs tended to pay higher. 

But also the income tax rates were more competitive in other 

provinces. 

 

And so when you add up all those factors, the good thing is, Mr. 

Speaker, in the last 15 months, 16 months of this government, 

we know where the jobs are being created. They are being 

created in Saskatchewan, and now we have a better situation on 

the taxes. For an example, Mr. Speaker, a family of four in the 

province of Saskatchewan can now earn up to $41,300 before 

they pay any provincial taxes, Mr. Speaker. And it‟s significant 

because it‟s the highest, the highest level of any province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I have, you know, a whole list that I can go down of how a 

family of four with an income of $35,000 are now more 

equitably treated for their taxes. With seniors, single-parent 

families, and . . . The tax savings this year will be very 

favourable for them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other thing about, the other initiative on this 

that the government has done is, the people of Saskatchewan 

will save an additional $22 million because income tax brackets 

and personal tax credits will be indexed going forward, Mr. 

Speaker. So this will benefit every single person in the province 

who files income taxes. 

 

And in fact, Mr. Speaker, the one thing that I am really pleased 

about that the government has done is, for many years now — 

and it‟s always been a bit of a myth that the party opposite has 

been the party to look after those that are perhaps disadvantaged 

in the province, of the lower means and lower income in the 

province, Mr. Speaker — but for years in this province, people 

on the lowest income levels paid the highest rate of taxes out of 

any province in Canada, Mr. Speaker. So with the changes that 

we have put in place, I‟m very pleased to know that 80,000 

low-income taxpayers will be completely dropped from the tax 



2254 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2009 

rolls in the province of Saskatchewan, and they‟ll also benefit 

from a new low-income tax credit, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So that‟s all very good news for the people of Saskatchewan 

and makes us clearly competitive with other jurisdictions. And 

it‟s, quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, the right thing to do to put 

money back in the pockets of those who earn it. 

 

[11:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‟ve also looked at things that we‟ve done to 

help seniors. There‟s a high percentage of seniors that live in 

the Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency. And I know that 

working very diligently in our constituency office, my 

consistency assistant Marcie and I deal with a number of calls 

from seniors in our constituency. So I was very pleased to see 

that we have put in place a number of initiatives that will help 

the seniors of this province, and help them not only retain more 

of their pension earnings, their retirement earnings that they 

worked their entire lives to obtain, but helping to keep that in 

their pockets. 

 

But also some of the supplements that we have announced that 

will help low-income seniors, particularly increasing — in fact, 

doubling — the benefits that low-income seniors are able to 

obtain from the Government of Saskatchewan and, in fact, 

increasing the number of seniors that will be eligible going 

forward, Mr. Speaker. So, you know, certainly those on the tax 

side are very important. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, just from my perspective as a 

member of this government, and I think members of this 

government can, you know, share this sentiment that we never 

know how long we‟ll be members of this legislature. We‟ll 

never know really what kind of impact we‟ll have on the people 

that we serve. And surely we don‟t know how long we‟ll be 

government, but I think it‟ll be for, you know, a number of 

terms going forward, Mr. Speaker. Certainly my good friend 

from Regina Rosemont agrees with that sentiment. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it‟s important for a number of reasons, why 

we‟re putting money back into people‟s pockets. First, in a time 

when all governments are talking about stimulus, this will help 

to ensure that our economy remains in a good position going 

forward. I know so far it looks like we‟re going to be leading all 

other provinces in 2009-2010 in terms of economic growth. But 

this is just another way. You know, the Obama administration 

and governments, jurisdictions across North America are trying 

to find ways to stimulate their economy. And this is one way we 

can help to achieve that to make sure that people have more 

money in their pockets to spend in the economy. 

 

But the other one, Mr. Speaker, I think is more important — 

certainly from my point of view — is that it‟s just the right 

thing to do, Mr. Speaker. You know, I think there‟s a 

philosophy on the other side that they believe that, you know, 

government knows best and the government knows how to 

spend dollars more effectively than the individual.  

 

And that‟s something that I just completely disagree with, Mr. 

Speaker. I think my constituents and my neighbours know. 

They know whether or not they need to see more money in their 

pockets to help pay for the kids‟ hockey registration or, you 

know, the fact that utility prices have gone up. So they can 

make those choices for themselves. They don‟t need 

government to say, you know, here‟s X amount of dollars for 

you, but we‟re going to decide how we‟re going to spend it. 

And we‟re going to put it towards, you know, this project. 

We‟re going to put it towards this bill that you may have. I 

think families should make that decision for themselves, Mr. 

Speaker, and so that‟s certainly why I support that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to move on. You know 15 minutes sure 

goes by pretty quickly in these debates, so I want to move on 

and talk a little bit about some of the things that we‟re doing on 

the second part of the motion to ensure that the economy 

continues to grow. 

 

One thing, I think the most important thing, that we‟ve done 

recently — and we‟ve done a lot of things so we have to kind of 

put it in perspective; this is most recent — is the $500 million 

booster shot announced, I believe it was in February, by the 

Premier. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is going to include money for municipalities 

— over $100 million going to all municipalities — which I 

think was very well received at the SARM convention this 

week. You know, I think there‟s been a fairly well-known track 

record over the last number of years that government hasn‟t 

really been that well received at SARM convention, up until 

about 16 months ago, Mr. Speaker. And I think the reception 

was pretty warm. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in my constituency I know that, because it‟s on 

per capita, I think it‟s about $1.8 million that‟ll be eligible in 

Weyburn-Big Muddy. And I know the city of Weyburn has 

indicated they‟ll use their approximate million dollars to 

upgrade Crescent Point coliseum, the hockey rink in Weyburn, 

Mr. Speaker. And other communities have already talked to me 

about some of the projects that they want to do. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, you know, I could go through, I do want to go 

through how has this been received. Because it‟s one thing, Mr. 

Speaker, and I‟ll admit this is one thing for government to think 

that these are good projects. Obviously we agree with them as 

the government side of the House. And we agree with the 

booster shot and the income tax cuts and the record debt 

reduction — 40 per cent debt reduction. And we certainly will 

agree with that and are supportive of those things. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I think it‟s always interesting to see what 

others are saying. And certainly when the booster shot came 

out, Mr. Speaker, you know, I could go through all the 

headlines of the . . . what communities were saying, what 

municipalities were saying about that. But I certainly don‟t have 

enough time. I certainly, every time it comes to the office — 

and all members have the chance to — I look through the 

newsmagazines that come through from different organizations: 

the chamber, SARM, SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association]. They put out different 

publications.  

 

And certainly the Saskatchewan Chamber was very supportive 

of the government‟s moves saying that the Saskatchewan 

economy is going to hold up well in the midst of economic 

turmoil in the rest of the world. There‟s no signs of weakness in 



March 12, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2255 

employment or earnings. These are just some of the quotes from 

. . . that‟s from the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just some other headlines. This is from Reuters, 

“Canadian prairie province dodges recession bullet.” And just 

to quote from the first line, Mr. Speaker: “The world recession 

has so far stopped short of Saskatchewan, the cold Canadian 

province that has historically repelled prosperity and young 

people,” Mr. Speaker. 

 

And obviously certainly I know the record of the NDP. That‟s 

for sure. Mr. Speaker, Conference Board of Canada, “Provincial 

Economies Battered by Global Recession.” However, it says, 

“No province is immune to the effects of the global recession, 

but the momentum in the domestic economies of Saskatchewan 

. . . will [continue to] cushion the blow . . .” 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the short time I have left, I want to refer to one 

other thing that I noticed just yesterday. This is from a 

gentlemen that was brought into the province to speak to 

different business leaders and CEOs, talking about future 

trends, that sort of thing, and this is what he put on his blog. 

And this is an American writer, Mr. Speaker. He says and I 

want to quote this, “In the past two months I have been 

travelling across the U.S. and Canada delivering speeches . . .” 

 

He goes on later to say: 

 

Last week I was in Saskatchewan to speak to three 

different groups of company owners or CEOs and the 

story was different. As I went around the room asking 

what business they were in and what their thoughts were 

concerning the future, I thought I had been dropped into 

another reality. Comments like “We are in expansion 

mode”. “I am very optimistic about our prospects”. “We 

are up over last year” . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, he goes on to say: 

 

Wow! I felt that I had be dropped into an entirely different 

place. As it turns out Saskatchewan‟s economy was up . . . 

[while the rest of North America is down]. 

 

He goes to say and I quote: 

 

So, with all the doom and gloom we are bombarded with 

every day we must remember that this is not universal. 

Saskatchewan clearly is not participating in the global 

economic meltdown. 

 

And this is from an American analyst, somebody that follows 

different, you know, trends — economic trends, business 

trends. So, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t know when he was in 

Saskatchewan. He must have been watching question period 

because he certainly saw probably a lot of gloom and doom 

from the other side. But, Mr. Speaker, at this point I‟m going to 

move the motion. It reads: 

 

That this Assembly recognize the efforts made by the 

Government of Saskatchewan to keep life affordable for 

all residents in our province, including taking steps to 

ensure our economy continues to grow in this time of 

global uncertainty. 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m looking forward to hearing all sides in the 

debate and taking part in the question-answer period, and I so 

move the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, to ask leave to introduce a 

guest. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has asked leave 

to introduce a guest. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Very 

quickly, I‟d like to take the opportunity to welcome a very 

special guest to the Assembly. In the east gallery, Mr. Speaker, 

is a young man by the name of Sean Corrigal. 

 

Sean is from Ile-a-la-Crosse and Sean will be travelling back 

home with me today. So lucky for Sean, he gets to spend eight 

hours in a vehicle with me. And I just want to show that Sean‟s 

parents are Joey Daigneault who is from Ile-a-la-Crosse, a 

gifted hockey player; Anna Corrigal, a hard-working woman. 

But the most important person of all that Sean knows is his 

grandma or his kohkom whose nickname is noot sigwē gweey. 

And noot sigwē gweey in Cree means, Mr. Speaker, the great 

bingo player and great bingo winner. 

 

So I want to take the opportunity to welcome Sean to the 

Assembly and I look forward to spending the entire day with 

him as we travel home to the great community of 

Ile-a-la-Crosse. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

Affordability of Life in Saskatchewan 

(continued) 

 

The Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly is the 

motion presented by the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy. 

Will the members take it as read? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s always a 

pleasure to follow the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy. I 

often seem to get a chance to do that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The resolution can really be divided into two parts to a certain 

extent, Mr. Speaker. One, sort of the government slapping itself 



2256 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2009 

on the back for Saskatchewan being an affordable place to live. 

And secondly, the government taking some credit for whatever 

might happen over the next few months. And I think the 

government hopes that whatever that is is good, based on the 

so-called booster shot that the government has repackaged — 

$500 million of money previously announced, Mr. Speaker. 

 

For a number of years, and certainly through I think almost the 

entire term, if not the entire term of the previous NDP 

government and leading up to now, Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatchewan‟s been a have province. The last time that 

Saskatchewan was both a have province and the most 

affordable place to live in Canada was the last year of the 

former NDP government. 

 

Saskatchewan continues to be a have province, Mr. Speaker, 

but no longer continues to be the most affordable place to live 

in Canada. And if the government wants to take credit for the 

change in affordability, I think they should, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The current Premier, before the last election, raised the concern 

that the NDP would say that if he was elected Premier, if the 

members opposite were elected government as they were, 

winters would be longer in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. In fact I 

never said that, although I did suspect they would seem longer, 

Mr. Speaker. And this winter‟s proved me correct. This winter 

of Sask Party government has been a long winter. And it‟s been 

a cold winter, Mr. Speaker. The coldest in a number of years. 

 

And while the government is slapping themselves on the back 

for this being an affordable place to live, Mr. Speaker, it has not 

been the most affordable place to live in Canada any longer, 

Mr. Speaker, during that long, cold winter. 

 

And when gas was dropping, gas was dropping under $4 a 

gigajoule, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan were 

paying twice that — twice that — and are still paying that until 

this winter ends. And finally relief, Mr. Speaker, finally relief in 

April. April showers will also bring finally a gas cut. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, this province has the highest inflation rate in 

the country. And a large reason for that, a large reason for that 

are matters within this government‟s control — particularly 

utility rates, Mr. Speaker. And the member from Weyburn-Big 

Muddy, as members opposite like to do, talk about a tax cut that 

we haven‟t got yet, Mr. Speaker. It won‟t be delivered till this 

spring, again with April showers, again finally with a decent 

adjustment to gas rates, Mr. Speaker. But by the time that tax 

cut is received, it will have been eaten up. In most households, 

it will have been eaten up entirely by utility rates, entirely by 

utility rates, Mr. Speaker. People will have paid in natural gas 

to heat their homes what they will be getting in the tax cut, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And the government opposite, when we called for rebates like 

they have in Alberta, like the Saskatchewan Party called for in 

opposition, the government opposite said nothing. And their 

silence meant no, Mr. Speaker. And there was no rebates. There 

were no relief. 

 

That party in opposition promised that if oil went up, gas prices 

would go down. The Premier, when he gets to government, says 

that‟s a gimmick. Well it was a gimmick then in opposition. 

And it is typical of the party opposite that they would, as one of 

their ministers say, say anything in opposition, and do 

something quite different in government. 

 

The member from Weyburn-Big Muddy spoke about his 

constituents and what they were looking forward to. I know my 

constituents were looking forward to — many of them — real 

property tax relief. That‟s the message they heard from the 

Saskatchewan Party. 

 

I have risen in this Chamber a number of times since the 

election and said, I believe that many people in my constituency 

who voted for the party opposite feel that they were misled. 

 

[11:15] 

 

There has been no substantial property tax relief. There has 

been a rebate added of 2 per cent to the NDP rebate of 10 per 

cent, Mr. Speaker. That‟s not what the people of Saskatoon 

Meewasin think that they were promised by the party opposite, 

by the current government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I actually have said at one point, many months ago, that we 

don‟t, we don‟t, we won‟t hear from the Reiter report till June. 

And members opposite yelled across the way: no, no, no, he‟s 

going to report in January, he‟s going to report in January. Well 

maybe he did, Mr. Speaker, to somebody, but we still haven‟t 

heard what‟s in that report. It is now March; I expect it‟s being 

rewritten. And we‟ll see if we even make June, Mr. Speaker. 

But in any case there won‟t be any property tax relief of the 

substance that my constituents were led to believe, and we‟re 

well into the second year of this government. 

 

And again on the affordability, Mr. Speaker, this is a 

government that is now moving on housing but has delayed and 

dithered in that respect. And so what goes into people‟s cost of 

living and to making this an affordable province — which it no 

longer is, Mr. Speaker — utility rates, gas prices, housing, 

property taxes, all things that this government has neglected, 

Mr. Speaker. And of course they‟re not responsible for the 

weather, but it‟s the people of Saskatchewan‟s bad luck that 

they would so mismanage natural gas prices when the winter 

was going to be as cold and long as it has been. 

 

The second part of the resolution has to do with the stimulus 

program. And it was interesting that the member from 

Weyburn-Big Muddy first of all attacked government spending 

saying, well we think people should decide how to spend this 

money, that government projects aren‟t the way to do this, to 

stimulate the economy. Yes, Mr. Speaker, that‟s what he said. I 

made a note of it when he said that. And then he goes on to talk 

about the $500 million in direct contradiction of what he said. 

 

He did say in those first remarks that the NDP believes that 

government can spend money better. But the NDP certainly 

doesn‟t believe this government can spend money better, Mr. 

Speaker; we don‟t believe that. There‟s been no record that this 

government knows how to manage its finances or manage the 

economy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This $500 million booster shot, Mr. Speaker, is money that had 

already been announced, money going to municipalities. It may 

change the cost share within municipalities, Mr. Speaker. 



March 12, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2257 

Municipalities may be paying less; the government will be 

paying more. That‟s certainly welcome. We welcome that. The 

municipalities welcome that. No doubt they do, Mr. Speaker, 

but are any of these projects new, Mr. Speaker? Were they 

going to proceed anyways? The funding formula may have 

changed, but if they‟re not new projects and if they‟re not new 

jobs and they‟re not new spending, Mr. Speaker, then there is 

no new stimulus. And for there to be a stimulus, there has to be 

something new being injected into the economy here other than 

money that ministers announce again and again and again and 

again. 

 

What it is essentially in this year, Mr. Speaker, as far as 

anybody can tell, is merely photo op money. It‟s photo op 

money. And you can put stimulus underneath the photograph if 

you want to, Mr. Speaker, but in fact it‟ll have no effect on the 

Saskatchewan economy if it doesn‟t create more jobs, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And recent developments on the labour front, and legislation 

from this government suggests that they may not be all that 

committed to Saskatchewan jobs in any case, Mr. Speaker. 

Some of this infrastructure money may end up employing 

people outside the province of Saskatchewan who pay taxes 

outside the province of Saskatchewan. I don‟t think the 

government has thought that out very well, but you can hardly 

call it a stimulus. It might be a stimulus in Alberta but, Mr. 

Speaker, that‟s not our responsibility here. Our responsibility is 

to work with the people of Saskatchewan, and to make sure that 

the people of Saskatchewan work, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, the stimulus might work as a placebo. But for a 

placebo to work, Mr. Speaker, people have to believe. People 

have to believe that the placebo is going to work. And if people 

are seeing the same $500 million repackaged now — it‟s not 

just infrastructure spending — but now as a stimulus, as a 

booster shot, Mr. Speaker, they‟re not going to believe that that 

stimulus works. And for money in people‟s pockets to actually 

work, Mr. Speaker, the money has to be there. And if the tax cut 

that comes to us in the spring has already gone out the other 

door, paying the heating bill over the winter, Mr. Speaker, 

that‟s not going to work. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member‟s time has elapsed. I 

recognize the member from Lloydminster. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today we‟re 

talking about affordability and affordability in Saskatchewan. 

When we look at affordability, it is defined as that which is 

affordable, believed to be within one‟s financial means. With 

that in consideration, affordability has two components. One, 

the cost of something, and two, the ability to pay for it by 

financial means. Therefore we can look at the improving 

affordability in two ways. One, you can either change price 

while keeping means constant — the ability to pay — or you 

can keep price constant while raising everyone‟s means. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m going to start with the second first, and then 

move on to the first one later on in my discussion. 

 

In Saskatchewan we have seen an increase of 16,000 new 

people working in Saskatchewan this January over last January. 

Sixteen thousand people are going to work and earning a 

paycheque now that weren‟t that year ago. We have the lowest 

unemployment rate in the country. We have record job 

numbers. More people are working today in Saskatchewan than 

had ever worked at any other time. And that is across the 

spectrum. When you look at the numbers — that is at the high 

level, the low level, full-time, part-time, First Nations involved 

in the workforce — on every level, we have succeeded in 

bringing people into the workforce. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, not only are more people working, but they 

are earning more across the board — 4 per cent increase in 

wages in this past year. Now we‟ve seen, as was mentioned by 

the previous speaker, inflation has gone up by 2.6 per cent, but 

wages have gone up by 4.2 per cent — a real gain. People are 

getting ahead in this province. They are getting more 

affordability because they can afford. Mr. Speaker, not only are 

we seeing more people working, not only are they making more 

money, but the government is taking less of it back out of their 

pockets. 

 

In October we saw the largest ever income tax cut in this 

province‟s history — not only lowered, but it was retroactive 

back to the start of the tax year. When we start getting our tax 

returns back, people are going to get a substantial return — 

unexpected — and that increases affordability in their lives. 

They can afford to buy something that in the past they may not 

have been able to. 

 

Now this contrasts to what the NDP did when they were in 

power. They were known as tax raisers. They raised the PST 

[provincial sales tax]. They were as chintzy as putting PST on 

used cars where the PST had already been paid. They would 

collect PST multiple times. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I read stuff like this, I feel like that 

commercial you see where the accountant‟s walking around 

with his hand in the pocket of the people in their everyday lives. 

That‟s how I feel the NDP was, following the people of 

Saskatchewan around plucking dollars and cents out of every 

transaction, lowering, lowering the affordability in this 

province. Now, Mr. Speaker, we have created a little more 

money in the pockets of people of Saskatchewan for the last 18 

months. 

 

Another way is property tax. We spelled out in our campaign a 

very aggressive property tax plan. And we promised that we 

were going to come out with a long-term solution, and we will, 

Mr. Speaker, and the people of this province will be the better 

for it. 

 

Now the NDP in contrast, they talked for a long time about . . . 

in doing something meaningful about property tax, and that‟s 

where it ended. No affordability was gained, just a whole lot of 

talk. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there are people that are no longer engaged 

in the workforce. There are people who have worked their 

careers, have retired, are now enjoying retirement. Now 

affordability for them may not be captured in increased wages. 

Our government recognized that. We increased the low-income 

supplement to seniors. Not only did we increase it, we doubled 

it, and we doubled the number of people that are eligible for it. 



2258 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2009 

So if you‟ve worked your life, you‟re on retirement, you now 

have that much more affordability. Double the amount of the 

subsidy from the government and double the number of people 

who are on it. What did the NDP do on this? Nothing. For 16 

years they never once readjusted this rate. We doubled the 

amount, and we doubled the amount of people eligible for it, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

We also put more money in the pockets of the people of 

Saskatchewan through the active family tax credit. We also 

recognized that some people work hard in our province and still 

don‟t pay income tax, especially now that we have raised the 

threshold to a point where a lot of people who are hard-working 

and don‟t reach the lowest threshold don‟t pay income tax, so 

they weren‟t affected by our tax cuts. We doubled the 

low-income tax credit. Mr. Speaker, that is money in the pocket 

that is increasing affordability on the bottom line for people of 

this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

All of these government initiatives have contributed to the 

increased means for the people of Saskatchewan, making 

Saskatchewan one of the most affordable places in Canada. I 

like to call this affordability through prosperity, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now let‟s look at the second part of affordability. We‟ve looked 

at increasing the means. Now let‟s look at moderating price 

increases. This is not easily achieved in a province with such 

growth as ours is experiencing. Our government has worked 

hard to mitigate the escalating prices normal with this type of 

growth. An example of where we would often see extreme 

increases would be housing. So as an example, look at the 

housing in Saskatchewan as a step to find the burdens of 

increased cost on people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Again there are two strategies which can be used to avert these 

cost increases. An economist will tell you the prices of any 

good is determined by the upward sloping supply curve and 

where that‟s intersected by the downward sloping demand 

curve. Simply put in terms, if the number of housing units stay 

the same relative to a large number of people moving to 

Saskatchewan, prices will rise and they will rise dramatically. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the NDP, in 16 years they had a plan to 

battle this. They were such shrewd managers that they figured 

out a system. Their system was that if our population stagnated, 

if our young people moved away, there would be no pressure on 

the demand side of the equation. Therefore, there was never an 

affordability issue with housing. As long as you keep exporting 

our youth, as long as our population doesn‟t grow, there isn‟t a 

need, a pressure on housing. 

 

After watching a generation of our young people leave, Mr. 

Speaker, our government decided to have a different plan. Our 

plan was one of hope and optimism, where growth was 

welcomed, where housing shortages were met by — of all 

things — housing increases, Mr. Speaker. And the proof is 

startling. 

 

The proof, Mr. Speaker, is that for 16 years the average housing 

increases, the average housing starts in Saskatchewan for 16 

years was 2,600 houses a year. With the optimism of the 2007 

election, a new direction for our province housing . . . our new 

province started and housing starts exploded. In 2007, 6,000 

housing starts; 2008, almost 7,000 housing starts. The Sask 

Party government has set the table to allow capacity increases 

to offset the shifting demand curve with a real supply of 

housing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to point out this is not a countrywide 

phenomenon. Our four Western provinces, arguably the most 

prosperous, all are seeing housing start declines. Saskatchewan, 

dramatic increases in supply. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out something. When I came 

to the office this morning, I found an article on the CBC 

[Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] website called, “New 

housing prices drop . . . in Western Canada.” Mr. Speaker, I 

scanned through this because, when you see such growth, it is 

amazing that you would in fact see housing prices decline. On 

CBC‟s website, their article states, Saskatoon, year over year, is 

going to see “a 2.7 per cent decrease” in housing costs. That is 

remarkable. And I think that this government should be 

commended for increasing supply . . . allowing the private 

sector to increase supply to this benefit. 

 

Now we do recognize that housing prices have escalated. We 

are proactive. Our government has had several announcements 

as far as putting public money, putting our money where our 

mouth is. We have donated 2.9 million to the Juniper Manor 

project in Saskatoon, 43 units. We have put 3.4 million to the 

SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 

Technology] Woodland Campus housing project; 1.7 to 

Columbia Manor. Mr. Speaker, U of S has got more housing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is remarkable that we‟re attacking the supply 

side. We‟re investing where we think it needs to be on the 

public side. And moving forward, we are seeing actual 

decreases in the price of houses in Saskatchewan, and I 

commend this government for that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government has seen decreases in tax, 

increases in wages, increases in the number of people working. 

They‟re paying less for their housing. Affordability is going the 

right direction — it is going up. The people of Saskatchewan 

have more money in their pockets and they will continue, 

because this government is moving forward. 

 

I am proud of this government. I am proud of our record. We 

recognize the need for supply. We recognize the need for public 

assistance. We recognize that in 16 long years our province 

wasn‟t done by properly, and we want to change that. People 

are moving back to Saskatchewan and they will continue. That 

government is stuck in the past, looking backwards at a time 

where they thought, if they leave there‟s more for the rest of us. 

Our government is looking forward. Our government is saying, 

come back and make this province better for everyone. Mr. 

Speaker, thank you for the time . . . 

 

[11:30] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Time has elapsed, member. I 

recognize the member from Regina Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I can hardly 

believe the words I‟m hearing from such an uncaring 

government — a government that‟s so indifferent to the needs 



March 12, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2259 

of Saskatchewan people. I hear the member for Lloydminster 

saying that housing starts are up and yet, and yet the 

government can‟t point to one single social housing, low-cost 

housing initiative sod-turning that has been one of their 

initiatives. And this is after 17 months of Sask Party 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The 75-minute debate today is around affordability, and I‟ve 

got nine and a half minutes, roughly, left to talk on this. But I‟m 

astounded that the government is trying to pat its back on 

affordability. We‟re in the middle of what I hope and pray is the 

last cold, cold snap of this long, cold winter. This winter, where 

the government caused SaskEnergy to raise its natural gas rates 

October 1, just coming into this cold winter season, a big jump 

in our natural gas rates, Mr. Speaker. The result of that is that 

Saskatchewan people paid the most, the highest price for 

natural gas of any province in all of Canada, full stop, period. 

All through the coldest winter months. They say, oh no, we 

were on average, we were pretty good. Yes, that‟s right. 

 

In the last summer, in the heating . . . in the air conditioning 

season, the price of natural gas was low enough that on average, 

we were right in the middle of the pack. But through the cold 

winter season, the heating season when we use natural gas in 

quantity, we had the highest rate of natural gas in all of Canada, 

full stop, period. And I say, shame on them for their 

mismanagement of that. 

 

Then we have a government patting itself on the back for its gas 

prices because they announced just the other day, oh we‟re 

going to ask for another decrease — they call it — in natural 

gas prices. And then they had the audacity . . . The minister 

said, this will bring the natural gas rate to the same level or the 

lowest level since 2003, when New Democrats were in power— 

since 2003. Really proud, bringing it down to the level similar 

to 2003. But there‟s one big difference between today and 2003, 

Mr. Speaker. The price that you can buy natural gas from, from 

a gas producer today is 50 per cent lower than it was in 2003, 

when they were simply matching the prices that they are now. 

It‟s just bizarre. The price should be significantly lower if they 

hadn‟t so mismanaged it, but what we expect from an uncaring 

and indifferent to the needs of Saskatchewan people 

government. What would we expect from a government that, by 

its own words, uses creative financing. And they need creative 

financing. Mr. Speaker, what a shame. 

 

In the past year the most single . . . I‟m going to switch a bit to 

rent. In the past year, the most calls I‟ve got at my constituency 

office have been dealing with rent increases — rent increases 

that by all counts have been exorbitant. And you know, Mr. 

Speaker, we don‟t have rent control; the government didn‟t 

introduce rent control. The government not only didn‟t 

introduce rent control, but they can‟t point to a single 

sod-turning of social housing that started because of their 

initiative. 

 

There‟s been some sod-turning as a result of our several 

hundred million dollars that we put into social housing in our 

last year in government. We put the money in — and we knew 

it takes a little while to turn the sod — but they can‟t . It‟s 17 

months since they‟ve been elected, and they can‟t point to a 

single social housing initiative started under theirs. 

 

So they‟ve done nothing in terms of rent, nothing in terms of 

social housing. They‟ve driven up the natural gas prices. Then 

they‟ve applied and had SaskPower apply for a double-digit 

increase in our power bills at a time, Mr. Speaker, when we‟re 

just heading out of the cold winter heating season, and into the 

summer air conditioning season. So now we‟ll have a 

double-digit increase in the SaskPower rates, and what‟s the 

justification? Well part of it is, well natural gas prices are high. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that‟s just pure nonsense. It‟s 

gobbledygook. It‟s absolutely not accurate. 

 

The price of natural gas has not been this low for many, many 

years. The price of coal — worldwide coal — which is the 

major fuel used by SaskPower to generate its electricity, the 

price of coal worldwide is also lower now than it has been for 

several years. All of the inputs, none of them point to up. None 

of them point to up, other than their need for creative financing 

and their callous disregard to the needs of Saskatchewan 

people. Their indifference to people of Saskatchewan, their 

uncaring with respect to utility prices, Mr. Speaker. And what a 

shame. We had in place in Saskatchewan — and Saskatchewan 

people enjoyed it for a number of years — the lowest cost 

utility bundle in all of Canada. And that was a promise, a 

solemn promise that the government of the day made, made to 

the people of Saskatchewan. And we kept it. 

 

And we went in fact even beyond that, because there was a 

spike in natural gas prices just a few years ago where we 

actually capped that and made the difference out of the treasury, 

but all to keep the natural gas prices low for Saskatchewan 

consumers. We did that. And we paid out on the lowest cost 

utility bundle a couple of times. And it was an audited lowest 

cost number. It wasn‟t just something that we asked people to 

believe what we in government said was accurate. We had it 

audited by a national auditing firm to make sure that in fact we 

were living up not only to the spirit but the intent, and we were 

in fact delivering on that promise. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the parts of this motion talks about taking 

steps to ensure our economy continues to grow in a time of 

global uncertainty. Now I want to address that just briefly. 

Because the government can do some things to help an 

economy grow, but one of the things that a government can do 

is to provide some certainty. But this government is doing 

exactly the opposite, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You ask the people at SaskTel who are fearing about the 

chunking off of chunks of SaskTel. You ask the people in email 

services whether they‟re feeling good about the income tax 

cuts. You ask the people in conference calling that‟s been 

farmed out, out of province. You ask those people that were the 

telephone conference call delivering the service; you ask them 

whether they feel real good about the income tax cuts. I don‟t 

think the answer would be positive for the government. You ask 

the people that worked in EZ Finder, the division of 

DirectWest, the telephone directory, whether they feel real good 

about their jobs going out of province. And I don‟t think they‟d 

give much of a darn about an income tax cut. 

 

Affordability and income tax cuts depend on having a decent 

job. That‟s what it depends on. But this callous and indifferent 

Sask Party government don‟t seem to get it. They just don‟t 

seem to care about working women and working men in 



2260 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2009 

Saskatchewan. And that‟s to their everlasting shame and 

discredit. 

 

Ask the 90-plus people at SaskWater where the minister says, 

well change is going to be difficult and hard to take. Ask them 

what — those 90-plus people headquartered in Moose Jaw and 

spread around the province, delivering water services to 

families and communities all across Saskatchewan — you ask 

them what they think of the income tax cuts, Mr. Speaker. You 

ask them about affordability. Every one of them is going to say, 

my affordability depends on me having a paycheque so I can 

provide for my family, so I can do things good in this 

community. I can continue to coach minor hockey or minor 

baseball or I can in some way be a part of my community. 

 

These people are proud, as we all are, of our communities. But 

to have affordability, you got to have a job. You got to have a 

decent job. And the job numbers coming out tomorrow, I think 

are going to start something. I hope I‟m wrong, but I think 

they‟re going to start something that we don‟t want to see. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟ve never seen a government that got so callous, 

so uncaring, and so creative with the finance as they say are, as 

this government now. I have never seen that happen before. Mr. 

Speaker, this government shouldn‟t be patting itself on the back 

for making Saskatchewan the most affordable province in 

Canada. We were before they were elected. We‟re not any 

more. 

 

They should be apologizing to the people of Saskatchewan for 

their callous, uncaring way. They‟re driving up utility rates. 

They‟re creating uncertainty in the job front. They‟re doing all 

of the things that are just dead wrong and are hurtful to the 

Saskatchewan economy. I sure wish I was wrong. But, Mr. 

Speaker, they should be apologizing. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Northwest. 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It‟s my 

privilege to rise on the floor today to speak in this debate. And, 

you know, Mr. Speaker, it‟s really interesting as the pretend 

socialist party across the way, under their social agenda and 

affordable reality for the folk of this province, they raised the 

government by 30 per cent. They raised the child poverty rate to 

be the first in the nation. They raised the child prostitution rate 

to be the first in the nation. They raised addiction rates for our 

youth to be the first in the nation, with the least amount of 

resources to it. They raised the incarceration rate to be the first 

— number one — in all of North America. They raised the 

incarceration rate of adults to number one in Canada. And so 

they have the nerve to stand on this floor and begin to talk about 

their record as a pretend socialist party with pretend socialist 

programming and policy. 

 

Under our government we have, through the social agenda, $12 

million to fund renovations to housing at Milton Heights, a 

non-profit apartment building operated by regional Lutheran 

Care Society. We provided over $29 million in funding for 

affordable housing projects across this province. They did none 

of it. $2.3 million for funding for a 12-unit seniors housing 

development put forward by the Prince Albert housing society 

for the Métis community. They didn‟t do it. Four hundred 

thousand for renovations and expansion of the Saskatchewan 

Abilities Council activity centre in Maidstone . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — There‟s been some exchanges going 

across the floor, I hate to cut into debate, but I would ask that 

I‟m having a hard time hearing the speaker. Order. I recognize 

the member from Saskatoon Northwest. 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I guess I‟ve 

touched a nerve with them. One hundred thousand for 

renovations to the Saskatchewan Abilities Council activity 

centre in Yorkton. They didn‟t do it. One hundred thousand for 

the purchase of property which operate a group home for 

individuals with intellectual disabilities and learning impaired. 

They didn‟t do it. 

 

This builds on our previous initiatives by our government. In 

October 2008 our government announced the largest ever 

investment in the history of the province in support of citizens 

with intellectual disabilities. The 6.9 million investment over 

the next four years will address the . . . [inaudible] . . . of 440 

individuals in need of special residential and day programs, that 

grew under their watch. 

 

We expanded the seniors‟ income plan to include over double 

the amount of seniors who were previously eligible to receive 

assistance, and the seniors are now over 18,000. For one senior 

we gave a supplement of $1,320; for a couple, $2,112. They 

didn‟t do it. We doubled the amount of seniors who can now 

receive financial benefits from the plan to a maximum of $190 a 

month for a senior single, and $150 a month per person for 

couples. 

 

In the senior income plan, we began to add things to the plan: 

one free eye examination, chiropractor services, reduce 

deductibles on prescription drugs, home care subsidies, 

supplement health benefits for those in special care homes, 

loans and some low-cost devices to the Saskatchewan Abilities 

Council. For 16 years the NDP ignored the needs of 

low-income seniors by not increasing benefits under the senior 

income plan at all in 16 years. In our first year of government, 

we doubled both those benefits for eligible seniors and the 

number of eligible seniors. We are glad to assist those who have 

done so much to help build our province, instead of neglect 

them like the previous government did. 

 

[11:45] 

 

Our government has provided funding to a number of 

affordable housing complexes across the province including: 

2.9 million through the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation to 

help fund Juniper Manor in Saskatoon, a three-storey senior 

residential building featuring 43 new rental units; $3.4 million 

last year through the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation to 

help fund safe and affordable rental accommodations for 36 

low-income families, many of them First Nations who have a 

family member attending SIAST Woodland Campus in Prince 

Albert — they didn‟t do it; supported a new group home in 

Wynyard for people with intellectual disabilities with an annual 

commitment by our government for 300,000 in funding — they 

didn‟t do it; 1.7 million through the Saskatchewan Housing 

Corporation to help fund Columbian Manor in Saskatoon, a 

51-unit residence for low-income seniors. Our government is 



March 12, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2261 

committed to ensuring that life in Saskatchewan remains 

affordable for everyone. 

 

The NDP, on the other hand, has a history of neglect when it 

comes to our housing issues in our province. They conducted a 

housing task force in the year 2007, but they kept the 

recommendations secret — a lack of transparency, ingenuous at 

worst, no transparency, hypocrisy at its highest by the NDP. 

They only pretend to have a social conscience. Their record 

speaks on their action. 

 

In support for our low-income people, we raised shelter rates 

for 6,500 households and social assistance plan and the 

transitional employment assistance between 32 and $119 extra a 

month. As well the shelter rates for the provincial training 

allowance, increase the TEA [transitional employment 

allowance] utility benefits by 20 per cent last October to 

support families on TEA who pay higher utility costs, and the 

SAP [Saskatchewan assistance plan ] recipients continue to 

actually have all of their utility costs fully paid. 

 

We increased Saskatchewan rental housing supplement to 

low-income families between 36 to $136 a month. We 

increased the income thresholds by 19 per cent for seniors who 

rely on social housing programs. We increased the 

Saskatchewan employment supplement to help lower-to 

moderate-income working families with the cost of raising 

children — they didn‟t do it. 

 

Our government passed The Residential Tenancies Amendment 

Act, which gives Saskatchewan one of the longest notice period 

for rent increase in the country at six months. Rent increases are 

now limited to twice per calendar year — they didn‟t do it.  

 

Our government is committed to ensuring that Saskatchewan 

remains affordable for our low-income earners. The Residential 

Tenancies Act will help ensure everyone to have an affordable 

place to live and ensure their rent doesn‟t grow to get out of 

control. Shelter rates will increase across Saskatchewan as the 

province continues to help those most affected by the escalating 

housing costs. The increase will take effect February 1. 

 

To keep shelter allowances current, the province now indexes 

rates twice a year, based on a rental market data compiled . . . 

available through the Canadian mortgage and housing 

corporation on Saskatchewan communities. They never did this 

indexing of shelter allowances, which is essential in a growing 

economy to help low-income people meet the rising costs of 

affordable housing. 

 

Our government remains committed to ensuring that all 

Saskatchewan residents benefit from the opportunities and 

prosperities that we‟re all experiencing. It is important that our 

government increases shelter allowances to provide relief to 

students receiving the provincial training allowance. This 

increase to help low-income students with rising house costs 

enables them to focus their attention on their studies and 

achieving educational goals. 

 

Under the NDP, shelter rates were not increased from 1992 to 

2005. Hypocrisy — hypocrisy by a pretend socialist party who 

did nothing more than grow their government instead of putting 

into place sound social policy. Shelter rate indexing was one of 

the recommendations of the provincial task force on housing 

affordability. 

 

Beginning July 1 last year, children up to the age of 14 will 

have their prescription drug costs capped at $15 per 

prescription, helping the most needy. This savings will help 

families save money and ensure their children remain healthy. 

Another campaign promise made and another campaign 

promise kept. 

 

Our government has a drug plan that takes care of the most 

vulnerable by being affordable to the taxpayers. We‟re 

committed to providing access to prescription drugs needed by 

the people of Saskatchewan and is actively expanding the 

provincial formulary, which was never done under that 

government. Even when there was drugs that could save 

people‟s lives or extend their lives by cancer, they wouldn‟t do 

it. 

 

An Hon. Member: — It wasn‟t done. 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — It wasn‟t done. You know, I got to tell you, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, for a pretend socialist party who ran on 

the policy that we will take care of the poor folk, we will take 

care of child poverty, we will take care of our folk in our 

society, those who most need it — they failed at their job. Our 

government is doing it. I am proud of our track record. We are 

moving forward to take care of the folk of this province the 

proper way. I support this amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Member‟s time has expired. I 

recognize the member from Regina Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise today to enter 

into this debate as a community volunteer, a mother of a young 

child, and as the only female member of this legislature in this 

debate. Mr. Speaker, any observer of this debate knows that a 

motion such as this one before us implying that the Sask Party 

government is actually making any tangible efforts at keeping 

life affordable for all people is incredibly disingenuous. The 

Sask Party‟s claim that they made efforts to make life 

affordable glosses over the callous cuts already made to social 

programs, and with those cuts, the people that they have left 

behind. 

 

Concurrently the impression that this Sask Party government 

has made meaningful progress in abating the surging cost of 

living misrepresents the Sask Party government‟s clear 

ideological commitment to the expect less, you‟re on your own, 

conservative mindset — a mindset that abdicates the role of 

government and increasingly turns over the capacity and 

functions of government to unaccountable private interest 

groups. And it is a mindset that is being put on trial today as the 

world‟s nations come to terms with a market system that has 

left greed and irresponsibility unchecked. 

 

The steps taken by this Sask Party government towards 

encouraging economic growth is tainted with an ideological 

commitment, not to share the prosperity with everyday people 

and build a more fair and caring Saskatchewan, but rather to 

squander all we have built and could build together as a 



2262 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2009 

province. 

 

Instead the type and tenor of the growth advocated by the Sask 

Party government comes at the expense of public process, at the 

expense of public consultation, and at the expense of any notion 

of transparency. Whether it is the bias and inscrutable nuclear 

development process that seeks to restrict public debate and 

facilitate backroom deals, the private esoteric group known as 

Enterprise Saskatchewan that takes the decision-making of 

economic development out of the hands of democratically 

elected legislature and into the hands of an unaccountable group 

of large corporate friends and managers, or whether it is the 

insidious privatization agenda already underway in our Crown 

corporations like SaskTel, the Sask Party government has 

shown a blatant unwillingness to openly engage the public and 

fully reveal their ideological agenda with the people of this 

province. 

 

Moreover, Mr. Speaker, the motion the Sask Party government 

puts forward today mocks the struggles of working people. Mr. 

Speaker, many citizens of our province are facing tough and 

uncertain times. The Saskatchewan economy has nearly lost 

2,000 jobs as a result of layoffs. Companies like Shore Gold, 

Potash Corporation, Agrium, Cameco, Doepker Industries, 

StarTek, Babcock in Wilcox, Mosaic and Evraz have laid off 

workers, who have laid off . . . or have a plan laid out to lay off 

more workers. 

 

The forestry sector is ailing and shedding jobs on a continual 

basis. And Saskatchewan‟s cost of living is surging, recording 

the highest jump in the price of goods and services in the 

country. This is not just inevitable or nature taking its course. 

Yes, Saskatchewan, along with other jurisdictions, is facing the 

contagion of global economic crisis on an unfolding, historic 

proportion. Yet at the same time here at home, the Sask Party 

government imposes utility increases, dithers on the renting 

crisis in our cities and towns, and refuses to freeze rising tuition 

costs for post-secondary students. With government-led 

inflation, it‟s no wonder why life under a Sask Party 

government is so expensive. 

 

All these actions describe a government that harbours an 

ideology that prevents Saskatchewan people from feeling a 

qualitative sense of a better or affordable life. Instead these 

actions underscore an ideological commitment to leave people 

behind during tough times and good times. 

 

When the Sask Party arrived in government, they were 

unwilling to share with the people of this province, describing 

the $2 billion bank account left behind by the NDP as “stark” 

and shortly thereafter sought to cut programs to help the most 

vulnerable, including Station 20 West in Saskatoon and the 

nutritional products program which provided medically 

necessary, low-cost supplies. Now when the Saskatchewan 

people face economic insecurity resulting from the same 

conservative ideology that blatantly jeopardized jobs, caused 

many to lose their pensions and savings, and rewarded greed 

and irresponsibility, the Sask Party government is making 

concerted effort to gouge the people of this province through 

government imposed hikes. 

 

People are being left behind by a government preoccupied with 

selling the province, preoccupied with wearing the mantra of 

growth, and preoccupied most disturbingly, Mr. Speaker, with 

an agenda that ultimately seeks to undermine the well-being of 

this province and its citizens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is with sincerity that I speak of the 

heartbreaking personal challenge of people struggling to get by 

as a result of the Sask Party ideology. People like Lindsay, a 

university student in Regina who faces nearly $600 increase in 

undergraduate tuition since the Sask Party government lifted the 

NDP‟s tuition freeze. Compounding her rising student debt, 

Lindsay also lives away from home, renting an apartment. As 

anyone renting in Regina knows, access to affordable, decent 

rental units is increasingly limited. Lindsay admits to me that 

she now makes it a habit to avoid checking her mail for fear 

another notice of a rent increase will appear, Mr. Speaker. 

Unfortunately, with a Sask Party government‟s utility increases, 

and an ideological commitment to leave renting to the blind 

market forces, it is almost a foregone conclusion that her rent 

will continue to rise. 

 

All Lindsay has to do is read the Leader-Post article on January 

24 of this year to know what the Sask Party government 

Finance minister has to say about her struggle to pay the bills 

and obtain a university education. In the article, the Sask Party 

Finance minister responds to reports that Saskatchewan leads 

the nation in inflation by saying, “There certainly is more than 

enough money in peoples‟ pockets to cover inflation.” Or 

perhaps the Sask Party Finance minister forgot that Lindsay 

doesn‟t make enough to benefit from the tax cut provided by the 

government and, if she did, it has effectively been taken out of 

her pocket by the surging cost of living. 

 

She is not alone, Mr. Speaker. Kelly, that worked at Melville‟s 

recycling facility operated by Rail City Industries, is worried 

about losing his job. Rail City Industries provides intellectually 

challenged adults like Kelly a job with the recycling centre. 

With their recycling program, including an extended recycling 

program that accepts materials in addition to those accepted by 

SARCAN, monies left over help to assist the quality-of-life 

programming for the approximately 53 clients at Rail City. Due 

to the Sask Party government inaction so far, however, Kelly 

and his fellow workers are in danger of losing this fulfilling 

employment at Rail City Industries and elsewhere. Just another 

story of Sask Party government leaving people behind. 

 

Lindsay and Kelly are also joined by the 11 residents who had 

their water cut off in Duck Lake, Saskatchewan. Some of these 

residents were families with young children, Mr. Speaker. Due 

to the soaring water bills at over $160 per month, they are 

unable to make the necessary payments and have been cut off 

from water service. There is also another 20 families at risk of 

not being able to pay the exorbitant water bills. 

 

And on that subject, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Municipal 

Affairs said that homework hadn‟t been done on the issue. Well 

the Minister for Municipal Affairs unfortunately didn‟t do his 

homework either. And let me clarify, Mr. Speaker. He says, 

“[And] here are [the] irrefutable facts,” and talks about the 

November 14, 2003, emergency boil-water order. Well the 

information for that, Mr. Minister, to know, is the emergency 

boil-water order was due to a contamination through testing. 

 

The minister also talks about the November 25, ‟05 



March 12, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2263 

precautionary drinking water advisory which was due to a line 

break, not water quality. I‟ll give him that information. June 30, 

‟06 was referred to by the minister as an emergency boil-water 

order which was again due to a line break. So the minister 

might want that information. August 14, 2007, there was 

another precautionary drinking water order. And as stated 

before, it was due to another line break, not due to water 

quality. 

 

So the only time the water quality issue was raised was at the 

time frame when they had the power and the ability to do 

something about the SaskWater pricing situation, instead of 

making the residents pay over $160 a month for their water, 

which is absolutely unacceptable, Mr. Speaker. I will end my 

remarks by saying that this government needs to do a lot more 

with the resources they have on behalf of all Saskatchewan 

residents. 

 

[12:00] 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Sixty-five minutes of debate has 

ended. Now we are in the 10-minute question-and-answer 

period. The government has first question. I recognize the 

member from Lloydminster. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 

the member for Regina Coronation Park. With 16,000 more 

people working in Saskatchewan now than last year, more than 

ever before, the lowest unemployment rate in the country, and 

wages have gone up 4.2 per cent — you know, taking into 

account all the income tax cuts, the low-income supplement, 

when you take into all of the extra dollars that are in the pockets 

of the people of Saskatchewan today that weren‟t 5 years ago, 8 

years ago, 12 years ago, my question to that member is: in light 

of the prosperity, in light of the people doing far better as 

individuals and collectively, does he really think that another 

16-year-period, as we saw in the past, of stagnation would make 

our province more affordable? I would argue it would be less. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The problem with the 

Sask Party government is they were born on third and thought 

they hit a triple. They inherited a red-hot economy where job 

growth was just phenomenal, and we‟re very proud of having 

set the table for that job growth. What we are questioning is 

what‟s happened in the last 17 months since they took office. 

And they have driven the affordability . . . We used to be the 

most affordable province in all of Canada. We are clearly not 

that today. Mr. Speaker, I say shame on them. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In today‟s 

StarPhoenix, there‟s a viewpoint expressed by a journalist, and 

the title of his article is “Extend welcome to post-grads, too.” 

The closing sentence of his article is, I quote, “Well, Mr. Wall, 

you could start by extending a hand to the thousands of 

post-grads this new program has left behind.” 

Clearly for economic growth, we need talented people, people 

like business grads, physiotherapists, speech language 

pathologists, nurse practitioners, social workers, and 

psychologists. My question to the member from Northwest: 

why is the Sask Party squandering our future prosperity by 

excluding these many needed professionals? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Member from Saskatoon Northwest. 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — To answer that question, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

we have the most aggressive student retention program in all of 

Canada. We provide an opportunity over seven years to pay 

back $20,000, not only within this province but the other 

provinces. 

 

We also have the third lowest tuition rate for our postgraduate 

students. We are working away at looking at what more we can 

. . . [inaudible] . . . We‟ve lowered the taxes. We‟ve increased 

student housing. My goodness we are doing so much more in 

16 months than they did in 16 years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Batoche. 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — For the member from Coronation Park, when 

the statistics from Saskatchewan show that we are number one 

in Canada, in fact probably leading in all of North America, we 

are no longer a have-not province, CNN [Cable News Network] 

is even looking at us, how do you come up with the solution 

that we‟re losing? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it just gets more and more 

bizarre from the members opposite talking about Saskatchewan 

being a have province. We‟ve been a have province for more 

than a half a dozen years now. That happened under the NDP 

when we were in government and, mark my words, it‟s going to 

be tough to maintain. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the debate was about affordability and we have 

clearly outlined where they have driven affordability in a 

wrong-headed way. We‟ve used water. We‟ve used natural gas 

where they‟ve charged us the highest rates in all of Canada this 

winter. Power, where they‟re going to be raising the rates 

double digit just in time for the air conditioning season. It‟s a 

real shame that they can even think they can brag about 

affordability at this time. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

Minister for Municipal Affairs said: 

 

. . . we will [help] continue to work with the town [in the 



2264 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2009 

building for . . . the building, help Duck Lake] in applying 

for the Building Canada fund‟s second intake, which we 

expect to begin very shortly. 

 

And he says also: 

 

We are working with them towards making sure that in 

fact that does take place. There‟s a second intake of the 

fund coming up in just a few weeks. 

 

So my question is to the member for Weyburn-Big Muddy and 

the question is simply this: given that the Building Canada fund 

doesn‟t accept projects that have already taken . . . have started 

under way, and given that the Building Canada fund is a federal 

program and not a provincial program, I would like to know 

what the Sask Party government is going to do for the residents 

of Duck Lake besides filling out a form for a federal program. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Weyburn-Big Muddy. 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to thank the 

member for her question and certainly, you know, I appreciate 

the question. I certainly, you know, recommend that she 

approach the minister about this topic. I know she doesn‟t get a 

whole lot of time in question period so I appreciate she wants to 

take all the time she can. And you know what‟s interesting, Mr. 

Speaker, she mentioned a number of times since, you know, 

2003-2004 where it wasn‟t the water quality issues, it was 

infrastructure issues. Why, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Because municipalities had been devastated by the previous 

NDP government when it came to infrastructure. And we‟re 

making strides to address that issue, Mr. Speaker. I only wish 

for those people in Duck Lake and other communities that have 

these issues, Mr. Speaker, that that member would have talked 

with this much passion when they were in government, when 

she actually had a chance to do something for these people, Mr. 

Speaker. It‟s sad for those people that she finally finds the 

passion and the time on this issue when she has no power. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Northwest. 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I have a 

simple question for the member from Regina Coronation Park. 

The NDP allowed under their watch the shelter rates fall below 

acceptable targets for affordability. They didn‟t increase the 

shelter rates for 12 years while our party increased it twice since 

we‟ve taken government. The question is, is why are the total 

caseloads and the numbers of people receiving assistance higher 

under the NDP government than under our government at this 

time, although our population has grown, if we are neglecting 

the well-being of the people of this Saskatchewan province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — I thank the member for Saskatoon Northwest for 

that question, Mr. Speaker. And it‟s interesting that at the time 

New Democrats formed government in 1991 the social service 

recipient total was over 30,000 people. And for every month 

after about six or eight months in government, for every single 

month for the rest of the 16 years we were in power, the total 

number of people receiving social service benefits diminished. 

Some months it was by six or eight, sometimes it was by 20. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we did that. We have a proud history of helping 

give people a hand up; helping with job training; helping move 

people into independence wherever it was possible. And in 

areas where it isn‟t possible, then you provide the assistance 

that‟s needed. We have a very, very proud record. Thanks, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 

question is for the member from Lloydminster. Mr. Speaker, I 

have a very simple question for the member from Lloydminster, 

a very simple question. Does he believe that his constituents 

and the people of Saskatchewan should pay more for their 

natural gas — more for their natural gas, Mr. Speaker — than 

what the government buys it for? And should he allow his own 

government to gouge the taxpayers of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear!  

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Lloydminster. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, the members of my riding and 

the people of Saskatchewan as a whole have been well served 

by SaskEnergy over the long term. They buy gas. They use the 

tools to spread prices over the long term, Mr. Speaker. And that 

member knows very well that, when you look at the efforts 

made, that the Saskatchewan users of natural gas have had the 

advantage of SaskEnergy. And they will continue under this 

government to have that advantage moving forward. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Weyburn-Big Muddy. 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the time 

remaining, I have a question for the member from Walsh Acres, 

Regina Walsh Acres. Mr. Speaker, the members of the NDP 

seem to feel that they know better than the experts, those that 

buy commodities — natural gas in this case. And they knew 

which way things were going, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would ask that member, surely if they would know, you know, 

last fall which way the market was going, she would have made 

a killing on the commodity market trading. So in the foresight 

that they have, what‟s the stock market going to do in the next 

six months? 

 



March 12, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2265 

The Deputy Speaker: — The time has elapsed for 75-minute 

debate. We‟re under main motion. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 603 — The Reporting of Federal Transfers Act 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Douglas Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, at the conclusion of my remarks I will be moving a 

motion that, in fact, to move second reading of The Reporting of 

Federal Transfers Act. But before doing so, I‟d like to make a 

number of explanatory comments about the Bill that we are 

currently considering. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the full title of the Bill that we are considering is 

An Act respecting the determining, reporting and reviewing of 

all Federal Government payments made to each provincial 

government in Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I might say as a general principle the more 

informed we, members of the Legislative Assembly, we, the 

people of Saskatchewan, more informed we are about what is 

actually taking place in government, what actually happens in 

government, the better able we — the public, the members of 

the Legislative Assembly — are in a position to judge the 

performance of the government. That might seem like a 

statement that need not be said, but it bears repeating that the 

more informed we are about what the government‟s actually 

doing, the better able we are then to judge the performance of 

the government. 

 

Reporting of government activities, finances, results, is a 

long-held tradition. It‟s a characteristic of governments that 

operate in a democracy. It‟s given that if you operate in a 

democratic system, if the public is to be informed and to make 

an informed choice about the government, the opposition is to 

hold that government accountable in a democratic system. Then 

it follows that people need to be aware about what is taking 

place in government. And so over the years, over the, I guess, 

centuries, our system has evolved so that there are always 

improvements in the information that is provided to members of 

the Legislative Assembly, members of parliament, and of 

course to the public. So it‟s a long-held tradition that 

government activities shall be reported on. 

 

You know, how can governments be judged fairly if there‟s no 

reporting on what governments actually do? And then how can 

governments be held accountable if there‟s no information on 

what it is that governments have been up to? That‟s why in our 

system, governments are mandated — not just expected but 

mandated — required to provide reports on many topics. 

 

In fact there is in our Assembly, and I judge probably in other 

legislative assemblies and parliaments, there‟s an Act called 

The Tabling of Documents Act. It‟s an Act which sets forth how 

government documents must be tabled and when. Because there 

are many reporting entities within government that are required 

to provide annual reports, required to provide financial reports, 

required to provide reports on special activities, required to 

report on virtually everything that government is doing. 

 

And therefore we have an Act called The Tabling of Documents 

Act to provide some framework as to when and how these Acts 

will be, in fact, tabled with the Legislative Assembly — in fact 

many of them I think are, in fact, tabled with your officer. So 

there is then some framework for this. 

 

[12:15] 

 

But it just goes to show for the people of Saskatchewan that 

there‟s a great deal of information that comes from the 

government, is expected to be provided — not just expected, 

but mandated to be required to be made public so that the public 

is then in a position to look at that — and then to come to some 

conclusion as to whether the government is doing things they 

want the government to do, and therefore hold them 

accountable. And also to inform them in terms of their choices 

in future elections. 

 

That‟s the theory and that‟s how it‟s supposed to work. And in 

the main, it is working that way. We have seen improvements 

over the years in reporting to the Legislative Assembly and to 

the public. We certainly had great challenges back in the 1980s 

with respect to tabling of documents, and I‟ll get into that in a 

minute. I might say that, when it comes to reporting, that 

financial reports are especially significant. 

 

A primary function of all of us, members of the Legislative 

Assembly, is to consider the government‟s annual request for 

funds in its budget and its detailed estimates, so that the 

government can then be provided these funds to, in fact, run the 

government. It‟s not a matter of government spending money 

without having the approval of the Legislative Assembly. In our 

system, that‟s a fundamental principle and the public will know 

that, if a government is defeated on a vote having to do with the 

budget, it‟s generally held that that government then lacks the 

confidence of the Assembly of parliament and therefore triggers 

an election, because there is no confidence. 

 

We saw of course a lot of discussion about that last fall in 

Ottawa when the federal Finance minister put forward a fiscal 

update to talk about the government‟s finances and challenges 

and going forward. And that fiscal update was not accepted by 

the opposition parties, and of course we all know there was a 

great deal of talk about that it might trigger an election, an 

alternative to an election, might be a coalition of opposition 

parties who then might be called upon to govern. That‟s all 

been sorted out. But again, the point I wanted to make is that 

it‟s a fundamental principle in our system that it‟s the 

parliament or the legislature that is called upon to approve the 

request from the government for funds to run the government 

for the coming year. And that‟s a given in our system, a primary 

function of the Legislative Assembly. 

 

We have other functions of course such as passing legislation, 

whether it‟s Bills being proposed — in the main I would say 

Bills that are proposed — by the government to expedite the 

delivery of programs for people in the province, to update 

legislation with respect to regulations that affect people. Any 

number of things, reasons that legislation is put forward, and 

the opposition from time to time will also put forward 



2266 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2009 

legislation. But no change can be made to legislation again 

without that change being approved by the Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

It goes further than that, as you know, Mr. Speaker, that it‟s not 

just legislation. But there is also regulations that come out of 

legislation, and then there‟s a further review mechanism of the 

Legislative Assembly to ensure that those regulations are in 

keeping with the principles of the legislation as first put 

forward. So the question here is, how can MLAs [Member of 

the Legislative Assembly] judge whether the government‟s 

request is reasonable if they are not informed about what has 

taken place in the past? 

 

And again this is no small issue for MLAs. There have been 

major legislative battles on this principle of reporting and 

accountability in Saskatchewan‟s legislative history. All of us 

will recall in the 1980s where there seemed to be a breakdown 

in the principle of reporting and accounting, and a government 

hiding behind lack of clear, specific direction in terms of what 

needed to be done. And then contrary to what had been the 

practice, decided to start a new practice of not reporting, not 

providing information or doing so at a very late date. 

 

It‟s also held that if you‟re called upon to judge the government 

and you want to do so based on results from the past, then the 

information that you get should be relevant information. It 

shouldn‟t be information that‟s many years out of date and 

therefore is of little use in terms of holding the government 

accountable for what it‟s asking from you today. 

 

So that was one of the issues in the 1980s where government 

said, well you know, there‟s a loophole in legislation that really 

doesn‟t address the question about when it is that information 

should be provided, never mind what the practice had been and 

how reasonable people would interpret that. We take a different 

interpretation and therefore we‟re going to drag our feet. We‟re 

not going to provide information in a timely fashion. And we all 

know that that was a major battle in the 1980s in Saskatchewan. 

It went so far as court cases being . . . or it being initiated 

against the government in terms of ensuring that they would be 

providing information in a timely matter. 

 

I think in that particular case it had to do with the public 

accounts. The public accounts is in fact the books of the 

province for a completed fiscal year. The Devine government at 

that time said with respect to certain public accounts, oh yes, we 

have the public accounts, but the legislation doesn‟t say we 

have to provide it to the public and to the Legislative Assembly 

by any given date. It says as soon as practicable. So that‟s a 

subjective interpretation as to when we can provide it and 

therefore decided to sit on it for months and months and 

months, so that by the time you do get the information, it‟s out 

of date and is not really that relevant in helping you to judge the 

government on a go-forward basis. 

 

Now that has changed, Mr. Speaker. There was a change in 

government in 1991. One of the first things the government did 

was to make amendments to The Tabling of Documents Act to 

ensure that legislation would be provided in a timely manner; 

specified that documents needed to be tabled with you as the 

Speaker of the Legislative Assembly, so that you could then in 

turn provide these to the members; and also was very specific 

about which areas that these reports should be coming from. 

 

The quality of information is also an issue of course for the 

members of the Legislative Assembly. You know, there are 

reports and there are reports. And a government agency can 

take very complex information, present it in a way that makes it 

impossible for anyone, let alone members of the Legislative 

Assembly, to understand what exactly it is that government 

agency was doing. So the accuracy of the information, what it 

covers, is — or the quality of information — is also a major 

issue. That particular issue is probably best illustrated by the 

debate in Saskatchewan, and a debate that was also on the floor 

of the Legislative Assembly with respect to summary financial 

information. 

 

In the 1980s the government took the position that it did not 

want to provide a broad overview of all of the financial 

activities of government, more than simply the monies that the 

government received from the Legislative Assembly to run the 

highway system, social services, education, and health. But also 

the question of the activities in the Crown corporations and 

other government entities not covered by the so-called General 

Revenue Fund that funds straight-line government ministries, 

but these other agencies and Crowns. 

 

Government didn‟t provide an overview of all of this 

information so that you could look at it and then come to some 

conclusion about the overall health of government. Because in 

those days the government was undertaking activities in the 

Crowns that rightfully should have been reported in 

straight-line government departments, but they chose to hide 

them in the Crowns so that there was no overarching report of 

all of government‟s activities that would then lead to some 

understanding by members of the Legislative Assembly and the 

public as to the financial health of the government — 

information that would have been well received in those days, 

given the record of the government of the day. 

 

Now of course the summary financial statements are included in 

the public accounts so that the information can be reviewed by 

the public, by members of the Legislative Assembly. And I 

might let people know that are watching this that, if they care to 

see the public accounts of Saskatchewan, that these can be 

accessed through the government‟s website which is 

www.gov.sk.ca, and you follow the links to Department of 

Finance. You‟ll ultimately get to links that get you in the 

direction of the public accounts of Saskatchewan, which again 

are the books of the provincial government for the preceding 

fiscal year. 

 

One of the other areas of accountability that has been improved 

tremendously over time is the review of the financial 

information from the provincial government and also reports of 

the Provincial Auditor by the Public Accounts Committee of 

Saskatchewan. This is a review mechanism whereby a 

committee of the Legislative Assembly reviews the financial 

documents, then provides a report to the Legislative Assembly, 

along with any recommendations that they might have, to 

enable the Legislative Assembly to have greater confidence in 

the financial reports and issues that have been raised. 

 

This is a committee that has also seen major changes over time, 

all heading in the direction of greater accountability, better 



March 12, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2267 

reporting, more timely information. I remember in the 1980s 

where there was a time where government members were 

actually filibustering their own Public Accounts Committee to 

delay the Public Accounts Committee getting to a more current 

year in its consideration. So that is a committee that was well 

behind the times. But today of course the Public Accounts 

Committee, the attitude has changed. The members work more 

co-operatively. And in fact the Public Accounts Committee, I 

think, of today is totally current in its consideration of 

government departments. That‟s a tremendous change from 

what has taken place in the past. 

 

There‟s other changes, of course. In addition to the Public 

Accounts Committee having a member of the opposition as the 

Chair of the committee, the committee is now also fully 

engaged when it comes to the issue of selecting a Provincial 

Auditor. Years ago, in the 1980s, the legislation did not really 

provide for any involvement on the part of the Public Accounts 

Committee when it came to appointing a Provincial Auditor. 

That is something that the government drove. That‟s 

government‟s agenda that came into play, and the committee 

had little or no say in that process. 

 

Now, of course, the Public Accounts Committee plays a major 

role in the appointment of the Provincial Auditor — and I might 

say too, a major role in the budget for the Provincial Auditor. 

Because the Provincial Auditor, as an independent member of 

the Legislative Assembly, ought not to get its funds from the 

government, per se, ought to be a separate process for 

determining what budget the Provincial Auditor needs. And of 

course we now have that process in place in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Bill before us, in short, seeks to inform the public. And 

what exactly is it proposing to inform the public about? It‟s to 

inform the public about transfers from the federal government 

as compared to transfers to other provincial governments for 

each category of transfer. What are these categories, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

[12:30] 

 

First of all, I might do an overview that in Canada we are a 

federation. That is to say, not only is there a national 

government, but there are also provinces with provincial 

governments. Each area of government has its own jurisdiction 

and areas of responsibility that set out initially in the BNA 

[British North America] Act, I suppose, that formed the basis 

for the creation of Canada. And it stipulated that Ottawa had 

certain responsibilities; the provinces have certain 

responsibilities. For example we all know that the post office, 

as an example, is a federal responsibility, federal institution, 

federal organization. But health care, on the other hand, is a 

provincial responsibility. Education is a provincial 

responsibility. Highways is a provincial responsibility. Social 

services is a provincial responsibility. 

 

But there are other federal responsibilities. And so in this 

country we‟ve arrived at a point where it would be helpful to 

the provinces to have transfers to the provinces from the federal 

government to assist the provinces in meeting their 

jurisdictional obligations, their constitutional obligations to 

provide those services that I talked about — health, social 

services, education, highways, and the like — because the 

provinces, or at least some of the provinces lack the fiscal 

capacity. They simply don‟t have the money to provide those 

programs in a reasonable way unless there is some federal 

transfer to assist them to do so. 

 

These programs, well there are many of these programs. All of 

them are subject to Acts of federal parliament. Federal 

parliament and the government can‟t just say one day, well 

we‟re going to give arbitrarily a bunch of money to 

Saskatchewan or arbitrarily a bunch of money to Newfoundland 

Labrador. We don‟t have to worry about where it comes from. 

We just give them the money. But they can‟t do that. Federal 

parliament, the federal government is not unlike our own 

government. Government can‟t spend money unless that‟s been 

approved, in their case by the parliament. And all the monies 

that are expended by the federal government have to 

subsequently be reported in their public accounts. 

 

But some of the areas in which funds are transferred to the 

provinces are areas such as the Canada Health Transfer, 

obviously as it implies, funds to the provinces to assist the 

provinces with health care; the Canada Social Transfer to assist 

provinces with social programming, and I think to some extent 

post-secondary; health reform transfers, a special health 

transfer; a wait times reduction transfer, and again a special, 

federal initiative to provide funds to the provinces to assist the 

provinces to reduce waiting times in their health care system; 

early learning and child care transfers where the federal 

government transfers funds to the provinces to assist them — as 

the Act would indicate — to assist them in areas of early 

learning and child care; and there are many . . . Well I think 

that‟s in the main, the areas in which the federal government 

transfers funds to the provinces for programs that are being 

provided by the provinces. 

 

There are of course some other catch-all transfers that the 

federal government is in a position to make ex gratia payments 

for something that isn‟t covered by an Act and so on, but would 

be provided for in the Federal-Provincial Fiscal Arrangements 

Act. And again, all of these transfers have to be reported by the 

federal government to the Parliament of Canada and to the 

people of Canada. So again, what we‟re talking about is how to 

account for the transfers received by the Government of 

Saskatchewan, the people of Saskatchewan, as compared to 

other governments in Canada, or people, Canadians in other 

provincial jurisdictions. So there is a long list of these. 

 

I might by way of explanation just point out that in addition to 

providing provinces with funds to help them to — as I indicated 

— to assist them in areas such as health care, education, social 

programs, these are transfers that are done in the main on a per 

capita basis. So depending on your population, this is how 

much money you get and therefore Saskatchewan would receive 

the same as — on a per capita basis — as Ontario which 

receives the same as Newfoundland-Labrador, the same on a 

per capita basis. But there are other transfers that the federal 

government does and the main transfer here is one called 

equalization. 

 

The theory underlying equalization is that even though you 

assist the provinces to help them to deliver certain programs, 

say in health care, it may well be that that province really 

doesn‟t have the fiscal capacity to generate the revenues to hold 



2268 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2009 

up their share of those health care expenditures. And in order to 

do so, if they were to provide those funds to their health care 

system, their issue would be is that they would have to tax 

themselves at such a high level that their jurisdiction then 

would become, in the main, uncompetitive with other 

jurisdictions in Canada and would cause a massive migration 

from those areas to other provinces where the tax rates are 

much lower. 

 

So the idea is that, not only should provinces be in a position to 

provide relatively comparable services in each province, but 

they also ought to be able to do that at reasonably comparable 

tax rates. The idea here again is that, in addition to being 

provinces each with our own challenges in areas of provincial 

jurisdiction, we‟re also Canadians. And there should be some 

expectations of Canadians that when we move from one part of 

Canada to another part of Canada, that we are in a position to 

see relatively comparable programs in the jurisdiction we‟re 

moving to as compared to the jurisdiction we came from. 

 

So that if a family moves to Regina from Corner Brook, 

Newfoundland, they then have some expectation that the school 

system is not going to be hugely dissimilar in Regina than what 

it is in Corner Brook. That their child won‟t be put back in the 

school system because Corner Brook‟s school system didn‟t 

provide what the school system here is providing or that the 

child is advanced because our school system is inferior. 

 

You can‟t make a direct comparison, because again it‟s 

provincial jurisdiction, but the idea is that a Canadian should be 

able to expect to receive comparable services no matter where 

they go in Canada. And this is in the area of health or education. 

Comparable services, and to have those provided without being 

charged extraordinary taxes to pay for that because again, what 

would happen is then people would move from one part of the 

country to another seeking the lower tax jurisdictions. 

 

The Bill that I‟m putting forward would provide the breakdown 

of what dollars Saskatchewan receives under each category that 

I talked about — the early learning and early childhood 

intervention, the health care transfers and so on, as compared to 

other provinces. It‟s not just the global amounts. 

 

The global amounts is in fact being reported now by the 

Provincial Auditor in the volume 2 of his report every year. The 

Provincial Auditor has a chapter on vulnerability and I‟ll 

explain that in a sec. But for those members of the public that 

want to see the auditor‟s report, they can go to 

www.auditor.sk.ca and follow the links there to see volume 2 of 

the auditor‟s 2008 report. 

 

And there, on page 15, there‟s a chapter on vulnerability, which 

“is the degree to which a government is dependent upon, and 

thus, vulnerable to sources of revenue outside of its control or 

influence.” And “Looking for trends in federal transfers 

provides insight into a government‟s dependency on outside 

revenue.” 

 

This is no small issue for some jurisdictions — less of an issue 

for Saskatchewan these days, but no small issue for Canadians 

in some provinces. 

 

This is information, as I said, that compares the total amounts, 

the global amounts received by Saskatchewan on a historical 

basis. Also does an analysis of the amount received from the 

federal government as a percentage of our own-source revenues 

— such as income tax that we receive in Saskatchewan from 

people that live here, sales taxes, corporation taxes, and so on 

— to again give some insight as to the extent to which we 

depend on other jurisdictions. 

 

And finally the auditor also does a reporting of the transfers that 

are received by each of the provinces. And that shows that 

Saskatchewan was the third lowest of the 10 provinces for 

reliance on federal transfers. The lowest was Alberta and 

Ontario and given what‟s taken place in the economy, that may 

well change, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Very high in terms of receiving federal transfers were PEI 

[Prince Edward Island], some 62 per cent. Or the federal 

government transfers represented 62 per cent of their 

own-source revenues whereas in Saskatchewan it was about 19 

per cent. So relatively speaking, their budgets have three times 

as much money from the federal government as is the case for 

Saskatchewan. And most of that, of course, is for equalization 

as opposed to straight-line per capita transfer, because on a per 

capita basis it‟s pretty much similar. 

 

Again this information is publicly accessible. The Provincial 

Auditor does provide this information. But again it‟s on a global 

basis and not on a basis of this federal government program and 

what is received by each province; that federal government 

program, what is received by each province; but the total 

amount that is received by the province. And that‟s helpful in 

terms of the issue the Provincial Auditor raises when it comes 

to vulnerability, total amount that we are dependent on the 

federal government for, our revenues, but it doesn‟t deal with 

the issue that I think we need to get at and which I will explain 

further. 

 

I might say that the provincial government provides 

information, of course, on the funding that‟s received from the 

federal government. They do a breakdown in volume 2 of the 

Public Accounts and shows the actual amount received for each 

ministry from the federal government. And so that is public 

information. But the provincial government does not do a 

comparison, does not do a comparison with what is received by 

other provincial governments for these areas. And that is what 

this Bill is trying to get at, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This is information that is available in the public accounts of 

Canada, the books of the federal government. Just like in 

Saskatchewan, it‟s expected the federal government will, at the 

end of a fiscal year, publish its books in great detail about all of 

the funds that they expended. Every cent and where it‟s gone to 

must be outlined in those public accounts. And those 

expenditures by the federal government, revenues in this case 

by provincial government. is reported in their public accounts 

— every nickel that‟s spent by the federal government. 

 

And it‟s no major undertaking, in my view, for provincial 

Finance officials who probably know this information anyway, 

it‟s no major undertaking for provincial Department of Finance 

personnel to review the federal public accounts, get the 

information, and to present it in a way that‟s understandable for 

members of the Legislative Assembly and for the public, so that 



March 12, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2269 

we can then understand what it is that Saskatchewan receives 

from the federal government as compared to other provincial 

jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker. In fact I don‟t they even have to read 

books. I think they do all this stuff electronically now, and so 

therefore I don‟t think that it‟s any major challenge. And given 

what I know about the competence and the abilities of people in 

the Department of Finance, I feel very safe in saying that this is 

no major undertaking or any major challenge for our provincial 

Finance officials. 

 

[12:45] 

 

Why this Bill at this time, Mr. Speaker? In a word, equalization. 

And you know, the time is always right, I think, to put forward 

legislation that improves reporting and the information that 

flows to the public and members of the Legislative Assembly 

and thereby improves accountability. But it‟s no secret that, in 

this particular case, this Bill at this time is prompted by the 

issue of equalization. 

 

Equalization, if I could, not only do provincial governments 

receive per capita transfers from the federal government to 

assist them with programs in certain areas such as health and 

the like — and therefore all provinces receive about the same 

amount of money on a per capita basis, as might be expected — 

but again the federal government and the provinces have taken a 

position over time, as do many other federations in the world, 

take the position that you can have areas of the country that are 

less able to generate revenues than other areas of the country. 

 

And we‟ve seen we have a great deal of manufacturing might in 

Ontario, as an example, as compared to Saskatchewan. Some 

jurisdictions — Prince Edward Island — had very little in the 

way of capacity to generate their own revenues. And so this 

country has landed at a point where, in addition to providing 

provincial governments with per capita transfers to help them 

with specific areas that are provincial responsibilities, such as 

health and education, federal government should also provide 

some equalizing component to enable some provinces to deal 

with the challenge of not having the fiscal capacity to provide 

for programs on a roughly comparable basis when it comes to 

taxing themselves. And again, as I said, this is the case in other 

jurisdictions. 

 

It‟s similar to what we do in Saskatchewan with respect to 

school boards. We have a number of school boards. Not only do 

we give the school boards money on a per capita basis, but we 

also look at the ability of those school boards to generate 

revenue, in this case on the basis of assessed property values in 

those school board areas. And if there is a school board that had 

very low ability to generate revenues from properties in that 

area, then we give them additional funds to get them up to some 

level of equality with other school boards. 

 

And so this is a principle and a concept that‟s been accepted in 

Canada, is accepted internally in Saskatchewan, is accepted by 

other jurisdictions around the world — although there may be 

variations in terms of how they play it out. But again it‟s the 

issue of equalization, and specifically the issue of the treatment 

of resource revenues in equalization. 

 

As I explained, equalization depends on the strength of your 

economy in a particular jurisdiction and your ability to generate 

revenues to pay for your own programs — in addition to 

funding that you get on a per capita basis from the federal 

government — and that some provinces have a very weak 

ability to generate those revenues. Other provinces have a 

stronger ability to generate those revenues. The question is one 

of definition: what constitutes revenues? And in this particular 

case the battle is all about the revenues that come from 

non-renewable resource revenues. 

 

Initially when equalization was set up in this country, the 

provinces, the federal government took the position that you 

ought not to count non-renewable resource revenues because it 

might be a revenue you get today but it won‟t be there 

tomorrow, and therefore should not be included in equalization. 

And therefore we had the scenario of, years ago in the ‟50s and 

‟60s, at a time that resource revenues for Alberta were ramping 

up mightily with all the play that they saw in oil in those years, 

but continued to receive equalization from the federal 

government. So Alberta, for a period of time, not only were 

they getting lots of money from the oil industry that was 

ramping up in their area, but they were also receiving 

equalization from Canada. 

 

There‟s changes that have been made, and then resource 

revenues were dropped from equalization. And that‟s been a 

bone of contention for Saskatchewan over many years, because 

there‟s a sense here that at some point the resources run out — 

and if you haven‟t been able to take the revenue from that to 

reinvest it in your province to broaden and strengthen your 

economy, you might be in a position in some future time where 

your non-renewable resources are no longer renewable and have 

run out, that you don‟t have the dollars to do that. And then 

you‟re back in equalization in a major way. 

 

So the issue for us is one of the treatment of non-renewable 

resource revenues in equalization. We had a slight — not a 

slight but a major — divergence from this principle that these 

resource revenues should not be included, in the 1980s, when 

the prime minister of the day, Brian Mulroney, struck a deal 

with Nova Scotia. And Newfoundland and Labrador that said to 

them, you know, if you generate revenues from non-renewable 

resource revenue sources such as oil and natural gas, we‟re not 

going to include that in our equalization payments to a certain 

extent. 

 

In the early, I guess probably about 2004, with the publication 

of a report by a Saskatchewan expatriate by the name of 

Thomas Courchene who is a professor at Queen‟s University, 

he published a report called “Confiscatory Equalization.” This 

led to questions about resource revenues and the extent to 

which these are being considered by the federal government in 

determining equalization. 

 

We found out the federal government was giving us less than 

we were entitled to, but what it did was to make this a public 

issue as opposed to an issue that was simply dealt with by 

Finance ministers at their tables. What we had then was a public 

issue. We asked the federal government of the day, the Liberal 

government of Paul Martin, to address that and to provide for 

Saskatchewan what they did for those Atlantic provinces. We 

know the answer. Paul Martin and the Liberal government said, 

no way; we‟re not going to do that. We‟re not going to treat you 

the same as Newfoundland-Labrador and Nova Scotia. In fact 



2270 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2009 

we‟re going to give them an even more generous treatment 

under the equalization program and you, Saskatchewan, are left 

out in the cold. 

 

Then of course we know that Mr. Martin lost an election, but 

not before this program was put into place for those Atlantic 

provinces. And then we had another federal election, and the 

Conservatives led by Stephen Harper campaigned in 

Saskatchewan to say, we are going to exclude non-renewable 

resource revenues from calculating your equalization 

entitlement — full stop, period. And we all know how that story 

ended by Stephen Harper walking away from the people of 

Saskatchewan essentially saying, you know, that‟s just stuff I 

say to get your votes. It‟s not something I want to deliver on, 

and let‟s move on to another issue. 

 

Of course we had in those days, a great deal of public debate 

about that, but the unmistakable conclusion here for the people 

of Saskatchewan is that they‟ve been had — had by Stephen 

Harper, had by the Conservatives federally, had by a group that 

said one thing during the election, and no small thing that they 

were saying. What it was being calculated as was, this change 

in equalization as promised by Stephen Harper, would mean 

$800 million additionally for the people of Saskatchewan. What 

does that mean exactly? 

 

Well our budget in those days were probably in the area of 

about $8 billion, so $800 million would roughly be a 10 per 

cent boost in revenue on an ongoing basis from the federal 

government. And any person that‟s in this Legislative 

Assembly, and especially the Minister of Finance, would tell 

you that $800 million a year on an ongoing basis is no small 

amount of change. It‟s a major figure. It would be immensely 

helpful. It would help Saskatchewan to do exactly what we need 

to do, and that is to strengthen, to broaden our economy so that 

at some point Saskatchewan will be a contributing province 

when it comes to equalization in this country without having to 

rely on non-renewable resource revenues. 

 

But again we know what happened. It was a broken promise by 

Stephen Harper and the Conservatives, you know. And it wasn‟t 

as if they were promising something that had all kinds of fine 

print and italics and what have you. There was no qualification. 

It was a bold statement about, we are going to remove 

non-renewable resource revenues when it comes to calculating 

your equalization entitlement in Saskatchewan, as for all other 

provinces that are currently being treated in that way — full 

stop, period, no equivocation, none whatsoever. People of 

Saskatchewan expected to receive for their provincial 

government $800 million a year, $800 million a year which 

could do all kinds of things in terms of our competitive with 

other jurisdictions. But Stephen Harper and his Conservatives 

broke that province. 

 

So now the question is, how did this relate to the Bill and how 

does that relate to the government opposite? Well when Stephen 

Harper was in opposition and dreaming up these things to say, 

we still had the Paul Martin government. And the leader of the 

Saskatchewan Party, the now Premier, took the position that the 

Saskatchewan government was right, that we should be fighting 

to improve the equalization program, in fact pushing us to 

improve the way in which we were attacking Ottawa to get the 

funds that we felt we deserved, especially given the deal that 

had been provided to Newfoundland Labrador and Nova Scotia. 

This was a party that was very hard on this particular question 

to move the provincial government to get more from the federal 

government. 

 

When the Harper government decided that it was going to break 

its promise, it was not going to live up to the commitment that 

they made to the people of Saskatchewan, then the provincial 

government took the point of view that we would launch a court 

challenge to be on this issue in this matter with the federal 

government. We took steps to begin to define the details of that 

court challenge and to then take it to the courts, which would‟ve 

been the next step, to challenge the federal government. We felt 

there was reasonable grounds, based on initial analysis by legal 

and constitutional experts, as to our ability to win that court 

case. 

 

And I might say that if you win a court case like that, of course 

you can‟t take the sheriff and get the money from the federal 

government, but experience shows in Confederation that if the 

federal government loses a case like that, they eventually do 

make good on what the courts say that they should be doing. 

 

So what happened is that, of course, following that, although 

the Sask Party opposite campaigned that, you know, we should 

be getting these dollars from Ottawa, that as soon as they were 

elected, they made the decision to drop the court challenge. 

They were no longer going to proceed with this court challenge 

to get fairness for the people of Saskatchewan, fairness that had 

been calculated in the area, in the amount of about $800 million 

a year, and perhaps more than that. They said, we‟re not going 

to do that. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the message at that time when the provincial 

government said, we‟re not going to proceed with this court 

challenge because we can do better, we can do better, the 

message from the Premier — our Premier now — was that, you 

know, we don‟t need this court challenge with the federal 

government to get $800 million a year. We can do better. 

 

The Minister of Justice, the person who made the 

announcement — not the Premier himself — but made the 

announcement, we‟re not going to proceed with this court 

challenge, he said, well we can do better. We can do better than 

that. And, Mr. Speaker, so I guess the short of it is, if the 

Government of Saskatchewan can do better, can do better than 

$800 million a year, then we ought to know that, and we ought 

to know that in great detail. And, Mr. Speaker, that is what this 

Bill is all about. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Being near the time of adjournment and 

pursuant to Rule 15(5), I ask the member to place the question, 

to move the motion. I recognize the member from Regina 

Douglas Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

Bill No. 603, The Reporting of Federal Transfers Act be now 

read a second time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



March 12, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2271 

The Speaker: — Being past the time of adjournment, this 

Assembly will stand adjourned until Monday afternoon at 1:30 

p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 13:01.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2243 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2243 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2255 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2243 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2243 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2243 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2243 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2244 

  Clerk Assistant (Committees) ................................................................................................................................................ 2244 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Ronald McDonald House Home Lottery 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2244 

 Regina Citizen Receives Award for Lifetime Commitment 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2244 

 Students Against Drinking and Driving  

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2245 

 Dr. Louis Poulin Recognized on Retirement 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2245 

 Funding for Rural Saskatchewan 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2245 

 Tamara’s House 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2245 

 Liver Health Month 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2246 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Graduate Retention Program 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2246 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2246 

 SaskWater Services 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2247 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2247 

 EZ Finder Phonebooks 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2249 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2249 

 Crown and Government Outsourcing 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2250 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2250 

 Government’s Performance 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2250 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2250 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Affordable Housing Investment 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2251 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2252 

MOTIONS 

 Division of Bill No. 72 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2252 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Affordability of Life in Saskatchewan 

  Duncan ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2253, 2264 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2255 

  McMillan ....................................................................................................................................................................... 2257, 2263 

  Trew ............................................................................................................................................................................... 2258, 2263 

  LeClerc .......................................................................................................................................................................... 2260, 2263 

  Morin ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2261, 2263 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2263 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2263 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2264 

 



 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 603 — The Reporting of Federal Transfers Act 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2265 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 


