




















































Hansard: March 03, 2009


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 26A  TUESDAY, MARCH 3, 2009, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2065 

 March 3, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the galleries 

today, mostly seated, Mr. Speaker, in the government gallery 

opposite, are some very special guests that I have the privilege 

of introducing to you and through you to all members of this 

Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last September I had the pleasure of joining the 

Minister of Advanced Education and 50 different employers, 50 

companies in the province of Saskatchewan, to a job fair in 

Toronto to promote Saskatchewan, to promote the opportunities 

that are here and hopefully to attract some new residents to this 

great province. This was in addition to some advertising we had 

done — I think with some significant effect when you look at 

the numbers in Alberta in terms of attracting people, as well as 

Manitoba — and then the on-the-ground effort at the job fair. 

 

And just very quickly, Mr. Speaker, if I may, I want to 

introduce them to you, not individually, there are too many 

here. But we were celebrating the fact that just from that one 

mission alone, 86 — 86 — families from the Toronto area have 

moved to our province in the last number of months. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — We had a chance to host them for a bit of a 

lunch today. Represented in the group this afternoon were 

information technology professionals, engineers, tradespeople. 

They’ve moved to places like Regina obviously, our capital, 

and Frontier, Saskatchewan in the Southwest, Saskatoon, and 

Langbank, just to name a few. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wonder if all members will join with me in 

welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I simply 

want to join with the Premier in welcoming the guests that are 

in the gallery today, many of them relative newcomers to our 

province. With the Premier and with the government, we are 

very, very happy that you have chosen to make Saskatchewan 

your home. We wish for you long and prosperous lives in our 

province for you and your children and your grandchildren. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I expect that some of the folks who have joined us 

today, and some who have come to our province, have come 

under the immigrant nominee program and the family category 

there. They have received invitation from the current 

government. They received invitation from the former 

government, and we are all, as Saskatchewan people, so happy 

to have them here. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Humboldt. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am truly 

honoured today to introduce individuals in your gallery, and 

you’ll recognize them with Hockeyville jerseys. We have some 

of the individuals who are working extremely hard to promote 

that Humboldt is Hockeyville. We are in the last finalists of 

five, and so we all need to support Humboldt for Hockeyville 

for Canada. 

 

With us today, we have Malcolm Eaton, the mayor of 

Humboldt. We have Gord Lees, the chairperson of the 

Humboldt is Hockeyville committee; and Kerri Martin, another 

diligent worker on the committee. Could everyone please join 

me in welcoming them to their Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, in your gallery is my intern Nicole 

Leach. Nicole and I are working together until April, and I’m 

very pleased to have her and she’s very busy. Nicole is 

completing her B.A. [Bachelor of Arts] with honours in 

political science and economics at the U of R [University of 

Regina]. And I’m happy to have her, and we’re doing a lot of 

good work together. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 

and through you to all members of this Assembly, I’d like to 

introduce four ladies seated in the west gallery: Jacqueline 

Tisher, Melanie Kohlruss, Norma Knuth, and Karol Schram. 

And these ladies are from Hope’s Home. 

 

This home has been in operation for almost four years, and 

provides a daycare for medically fragile children, staffed by 

nurses so that the parents can be allowed to go back to work. It 

is an integrated care along with typical children so that kids can 

be kids, which aids in the development of these medically 

fragile children. And I ask all members to please join me in 

welcoming these guests today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. I also want to 

join with the member from Humboldt in welcoming the 

Humboldt delegation who are here wearing the appropriate 

jerseys. 

 



2066 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2009 

And, Mr. Speaker, I have this very fond memory of Hockeyville 

in Shaunavon, Saskatchewan these many years ago. It’s a great 

tribute to a community. It’s a great tribute to a province to host 

Hockeyville. We can make it happen. 

 

I know the Premier has encouraged us all to vote early, vote 

often. In getting Hockeyville to Saskatchewan, I want to join 

with the Premier encouraging all of the colleagues here in the 

House. We’ve all got computers. The Minister of the Attorney 

General is doing it right now, he tells us. So 100 votes each 

from this room will help Hockeyville. We wish you all the best, 

Humboldt. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to introduce in your gallery a gentleman who’s no 

stranger to these Chambers. I’m talking of course about Mr. 

Michael Radmacher. 

 

Michael is one of these guys that’s had such a great time 

working as a page in this legislature, he thought he’d come back 

for another helping as a legislative intern. He’s completed his 

Bachelor of Arts Honours at the University of Regina; has just 

received word that he is granted a full scholarship at the 

University of Victoria which he will commence in the fall. 

 

It’s a great pleasure working with Michael. He’s an individual 

that combines passion and intellect and does a great service to 

the legislative internship program. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I beg of the members, leave to just extend the 

invitations, welcomes. I noticed one of the guests in the 

galleries that the Premier introduced a moment ago, a 

gentleman who’s kept me up to speed on health issues and 

doctor issues in the Broadview area, working with Seed Hawk, 

Mr. Gordon Wyatt. And I’m sorry Gordon, that . . . The 

gentleman beside you is from Ontario too, working with Seed 

Hawk. I want to welcome you both to the Assembly, and 

especially Mr. Wyatt for your interest in our province and the 

voice you represent to our province. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition that deals with the housing market 

here in the province of Saskatchewan and that the squeeze in 

the housing market has really translated into some challenges 

for renters and that includes senior citizens right across the 

province. And, Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to act as quickly as possible to expand 

affordable housing options for Saskatchewan senior 

citizens. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition. It’s entitled wage equity for CBO 

[community-based organization] workers, and of course many 

people throughout this province are concerned about the wages 

paid to the people who work in this very important sector. I’ll 

read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the development and 

implementation of a multi-year funding plan to ensure that 

CBO workers achieve wage equity with employees who 

perform work of equal value in government departments. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And these folks are signing this petition come from Saskatoon, 

Regina, Aberdeen, Torquay, Birch Hills, Estevan, throughout 

the province. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of a new Saskatchewan 

hospital. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners note that in 2006, the 

Government of Saskatchewan committed funds and resources to 

the development and construction of a new Saskatchewan 

hospital in North Battleford. The petitioners therefore pray: 

 

. . . that the Hon. Legislative Assembly may be pleased to 

call upon the Government of Saskatchewan to 

immediately recommit funds and resources for the 

continued development and construction of a new 

Saskatchewan Hospital at North Battleford and provide 

Prairie North Regional Health Authority with the 

authority necessary to complete this essential and 

much-needed project. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by residents of The 

Battlefords. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Before I recognize the next individual, I 

would ask members to respect the right of individuals to present 

their petitions without interference. 

 

I recognize the member from Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 



March 3, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2067 

present petitions in support of a reduction in the education 

portion of property tax. This is needed by Saskatchewan 

families and Saskatchewan business who are increasingly 

challenged by the implications of reassessment here in 2009. 

The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to stop withholding and to provide 

significant, sustainable long-term property tax relief to 

property owners by 2009 through significantly increasing 

the provincial portion of education funding. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by concerned citizens and residents 

of Regina. Mr. Speaker. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hockeyville 2009 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. There has 

been much talk already today about Hockeyville. But not 

enough, not just yet, Mr. Speaker. I want to take this 

opportunity to again encourage Saskatchewan people to support 

the efforts of Humboldt to become Hockeyville 2009. 

 

Just a few minutes ago, I was able to join with the mayor and 

the members of the committee outside of the rotunda and had a 

Humboldt Broncos jersey on. I don’t mind wearing a Broncos 

jersey, Mr. Speaker, but generally it’s from another community 

than Humboldt. But I was grateful for the opportunity to put it 

on and do a little bit of promotion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just so people know what’s at stake here, it isn’t 

just bragging rights for the province and for the great 

community of Humboldt, it’s also $100,000 worth of upgrades 

to the local arena. The runners-up will each receive $25,000 to 

be used for arena upgrades as well, and of course “Hockey 

Night in Canada” will broadcast the pre-season NHL [National 

Hockey League] game from an arena in the winning 

community. In this case, we know which arena it will be for 

sure. Mayor Eaton says the competition has been great for his 

community. 

 

And I just want to point out, Mr. Speaker, the three ways to 

vote, if I can, in the time remaining. I want to emphasize what 

the Opposition Leader said — this is an occasion where it’s 

okay to vote often. The mayor wants everyone to vote 100 

times and then to start over. And here’s the three ways to do it, 

very quickly. You can go online at 

www.cbcsports.ca/hockeyville. You can do it by toll-free — 

1-866-533-8066 — or you can send a text to VOTE Humboldt 

222111. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Health Sector Leader Remembered 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. February 18, 

Saskatchewan lost a dedicated servant and a citizen with the 

death of Jim Fergusson of Saskatoon. Jim was, among his many 

accomplishments, the CEO [chief executive officer] of the 

Saskatoon Health Region from 1996 to 2004. Jim and I knew 

each other through many of our career changes. I was always 

impressed by his insight, his direct approach, and his frank 

advice. Above all I appreciated his calmness. He rarely got 

rattled. 

 

Jim was committed to the health of Saskatchewan people, the 

health system, and the thousands of health providers who 

deliver our health services. His was a sought-after opinion, as 

he always had a concise grasp of the situation, good advice, and 

a gentle sense of humour. 

 

As CEO of the largest health district in Saskatchewan, Jim’s 

contributions to the health services and their delivery is 

embedded in the culture of Saskatoon Health District. His 

imprint on many initiatives and accomplishments is there, and 

there is a lasting legacy of his leadership in many of the 

successes of the health districts. 

 

Jim’s presence will be sorely missed by his wife, Angie, his 

family, friends, and colleagues. Jim was my sounding board and 

my friend, and I too will miss him greatly. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Weyburn. 

 

Labour Recruiting Drive 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

pleased to stand in the House today and report to this Assembly 

that Saskatchewan remains a land of opportunity. While we are 

not immune to the effects of the global recession, for many 

people across Canada and around the world, Saskatchewan is 

the place in which they’re choosing to work and raise families. 

Since being elected, our provincial government has taken long 

overdue steps to address Saskatchewan’s labour shortage. 

 

One of those steps was a very successful recruiting drive in 

Ontario last fall. That recruiting drive has resulted in a wide 

range of workers, from IT [information technology] 

professionals to engineers and skilled tradespeople moving 

from Ontario to Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, as the 

Premier noted just a few minutes ago, 86 families are now 

living and working in cities like Regina and Saskatoon and in 

smaller communities such as Frontier and Langbank because of 

this drive. These talented newcomers are making an immediate 

difference in their new home communities and we welcome 

them. 

 

[13:45] 

 

Our government, Mr. Speaker, is focusing on ensuring the 

Saskatchewan economy remains strong and steady. We will 

once again accompany a major contingent of Saskatchewan 



2068 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2009 

employers to the national job fair in Toronto later this month. 

We will once again be telling the Saskatchewan story. It is a 

story of opportunity, Mr. Speaker, and by helping this 

province’s employers find the skilled, qualified, and talented 

workers they need, our government is looking to the future. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Moose Jaw School Celebrates Centennial Kickoff  

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On 

Wednesday, February 4, I was very pleased to join the students 

and staff of Empire Community School in my home 

constituency of Moose Jaw Wakamow as they celebrated, on 

the 100th day of school, the kickoff towards their 100th 

birthday which occurs in 2010. Empire is believed to be the 

oldest elementary school still operating in the province, and the 

day was celebrated with birthday cake, storytelling, and some 

wonderful musical performances by students. 

 

Empire Community School has a long history, and before the 

school was built, the location was part of a trail used by settlers, 

Métis, and the North West Mounted Police. The trail was also 

used by the Canadian Pacific Railway as a location to get water 

for steam engines. In 1909 the Moose Jaw Public School Board 

decided South Hill was in need of a school. Empire was built, 

and by 1927, the school expanded, adding four more 

classrooms. In 1961 the school grew yet again to accommodate 

students from the Canadian Forces base south of Moose Jaw. 

 

Empire Community School has become a place to welcome 

new people. It was the first school in Moose Jaw to offer 

English language classes for immigrants and refugees, and it 

was the first temporary home for francophone education in 

Moose Jaw as the first location for École Ducharme. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 

Empire Community School for their centennial kickoff and 

wishing them many more years of providing excellent 

education for students and the community of Moose Jaw. Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Second Annual Premier’s Ride 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, last Friday the member from 

Yorkton and myself had the opportunity to ride in the 

Saskatchewan Snowmobile Association’s second annual 

Premier’s Ride. Unfortunately the Premier couldn’t attend due 

to an infrastructure announcement in conjunction with the 

Prime Minister. 

 

This ride took place in Nipawin, which is in the heart of Carrot 

River Valley constituency; the best constituency in the 

province, I might say. Despite a wind chill of minus 45, the 

rally was well-attended with 35 sleds making the actual run of 

about 50 kilometres, with the member from Yorkton providing 

lots of hot air to warm us at lunch break halfway through. 

 

The following day the SSA [Saskatchewan Snowmobile 

Association] and the P.E.A.C.E. 100 [Police-Elks Assisting 

Community Education] held a combined banquet with 383 

registered attendees. There were sledders not only from 

Saskatchewan but also Alberta, Manitoba, and even a couple 

from Germany. This banquet and silent auction raised about 

$32,000 for the D.A.R.E. [drug abuse resistance education] 

program which is a program that teaches young people the 

pitfalls of drugs and alcohol. Last year 129 D.A.R.E. officers 

taught 4,150 students. 

 

My hat is off to the town of Nipawin, the Nipawin Elks, the 

Nipawin Trail Blazers, and the P.E.A.C.E. 100 organizers, and 

the Saskatchewan Snowmobile Association for this worthy 

event. I ask all members to show their appreciation to this 

dedicated group of volunteers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

United Way Spirit Awards 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It was my 

pleasure to attend the 2008 United Way of Regina Spirit 

Awards luncheon celebrating workplace campaigns all across 

our city. I was joined as well by the member from Regina 

South. 

 

This year’s campaign titled Live United was effective in raising 

more than $3.75 million. These dollars go back into our 

community. I will quote from the United Way’s literature: 

 

We all win when a child is ready to learn on the first day 

of school; stays in the classroom until graduation; and 

plays in a neighbourhood where the shouts are of joy, not 

despair. 

 

That’s what living united is all about. 

 

Because underneath everything . . . everything we are, we 

are one community — connected, interdependent, and 

united. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the United Way through its network of community 

partners puts these values to action, providing needed services 

to our community and offering solutions to some of the 

toughest challenges facing our community. I thank and 

recognize the United Way’s campaign cabinet, its leadership, its 

staff, its volunteers, and the multitude of business, unions, and 

organizations that ensure the ability of the United Way to reach 

its goals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this Assembly to join with 

me in extending our recognition and gratitude. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



March 3, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2069 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Saskatchewan’s Economy 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — Mr. Speaker, I have some very good news to 

report to this Assembly and to the people of Saskatchewan. It is 

contained in the Conference Board of Canada’s provincial 

outlook for the winter of 2009. 

 

The Conference Board is reporting that while most other 

Canadian provinces will experience negative economic growth 

in 2009, the Saskatchewan economy will grow by 1.6 per cent 

this year. Let me repeat that, Mr. Speaker. The Saskatchewan 

economy, unlike most other Canadian provinces, will grow this 

year. 

 

And why is that, Mr. Speaker? Well the Conference Board of 

Canada is crediting measures taken by this government to 

ensure the Saskatchewan economy remains strong and steady. 

 

Let me quote from the Conference Board report, Mr. Speaker: 

“Massive income tax cuts, combined with a swift increase in 

infrastructure spending, will boost Saskatchewan’s economy by 

1.6 per cent in 2009.” 

 

To continue, Mr. Speaker, and I once again quote, “Incomes 

will get a further boost from the province’s $300 million 

personal income tax cut, which will keep retail sales at a 

healthy pace.” 

 

The good news does not end there, Mr. Speaker. The 

conference report also says that the strong economic outlook 

will continue to attract national and international migration, 

further stimulating the domestic economy. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Property Tax Relief 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the 

Premier refused to answer questions from the media about his 

promise to reduce education property taxes. Surely it’s not too 

much to expect the Premier to answer questions on one of his 

election promises. This is an important issue for Saskatchewan 

people. To the Premier: how does he plan to keep his promises? 

What is his long-term plan to reduce the education portion of 

property tax? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 

member opposite for that question. And as he is very well 

aware, Saskatchewan property owners bear a disproportionate 

amount of provincial education costs through education 

property tax. He’s aware of that. His government was 

responsible for producing that situation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have moved in the direction of providing assistance to 

Saskatchewan taxpayers by looking at the rebate program. And, 

Mr. Speaker, as I indicated yesterday to the media, to the people 

in this House, we are looking at options that have been 

presented in the report produced by my colleague, the member 

for Rosetown. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve also done a number of things to address 

concerns of Saskatchewan taxpayers. We’ve looked at the 

income tax savings. And, Mr. Speaker, we just heard how the 

Conference Board of Canada views that particular assistance as 

very significant in the Saskatchewan economy. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there are many more things that have been 

provided by the Saskatchewan Party government, and I’m going 

to outline them after the member asks me the next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — I’m glad the minister already told us that 

he’s not going to answer the next question either. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party promised during the election to 

save the average homeowner at least $450 a year. Yesterday the 

Minister of Education talked about small increases and rebates 

over the next three years — a plan that will result in big 

increases for many homeowners. There was no mention of a 

broader, long-term vision for property tax relief, despite all the 

Sask Party’s promises while in opposition, like when the 

Premier said back in 2006 that people were fed up with being 

told that the issue would be dealt with when things got better. 

 

To the minister: are rebates the Sask Party’s idea of a long-term 

plan for property tax relief? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier, Minister of 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — The answer to that question is no. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose studied this issue for more than a year. The 

minister has the report in his hands, and for some time, but 

wants to hide it from the Saskatchewan people. We still don’t 

know what this report says, but we do know that the only plan 

the minister is talking about is rebates. 

 

To the minister: why the wait? Why is the Sask Party hiding 

this report from Saskatchewan families? Does this report simply 

recommend rebates as a long-term solution to the property tax 



2070 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2009 

issue? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

as I indicated to the media back in the first week of February 

when I received a very comprehensive report from the member 

from Rosetown, this report is guiding me as the Minister of 

Education. It is guiding the Minister of Finance in terms of our 

decision as to what is the long-term solution to the property tax 

question. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have not said that the rebate program is the 

only program. That is the program that was introduced for a 

short-term relief. 

 

And we know very well, Mr. Speaker, and I’m sure the member 

opposite knows, that as I indicated in my first answer, is that 

there is a disproportionate reliance on the property tax to fund 

education. And we are looking at the solution, Mr. Speaker, and 

we are working with the people in finance, and we are looking 

at what is a solution that is going to be acceptable and will be 

sustainable, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Before I recognize the next question, I just 

want to ask members to respect the right of individuals, not 

only to ask the question but to respond. I know everyone would 

to ask and everyone like to respond, but we only recognize one 

at a time. That would be appreciated. Member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — I guess, Mr. Speaker, there’s only two 

explanations for why the Sask Party’s hiding the secret report. 

Maybe they’re hiding the report because they know 

Saskatchewan people will not like it, like they did when they 

failed to announce the creation of a new entity in government, 

the P3 [public-private partnership] secretariat. Or the signing of 

a major interprovincial labour mobility agreement or . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Member from Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Or the opposite. Possibly they’re hiding 

the report because it makes recommendations or suggests 

options that Saskatchewan people would like, but the Sask 

Party has no intention of implementing. To the minister: which 

is it? Why is he hiding the report? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated to the media 

when I received that report — and I did that in front of 

television cameras and I did that in front of microphones — I 

indicated that I was going to use that report, I was going to 

study it, and it was going to guide me in terms of the plan that 

we would release, Mr. Speaker, on budget day. And I indicated, 

Mr. Speaker, that day, and that plan will continue, that we will 

release that report in its entirety on the day of budget, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So that is a promise that I indicated back when I received that 

report. That promise has not changed. We will release the report 

for everyone to see. And, Mr. Speaker, it is a great report. It has 

a number of options that we are analyzing right now, and we 

will follow through with enhanced support to Saskatchewan 

property owners, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Support for the Forestry Industry 

 

Mr. Vermette: — The Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

said back in November that Saskatchewan is in the middle of an 

economic renaissance. But for the forestry workers it’s more 

like the Dark Ages, and the Sask Party and their so-called 

friends in Ottawa seem to be unaware that not everybody is 

benefiting from Saskatchewan’s economic boom. Mr. Speaker, 

what is the Sask Party’s plan to rebuild the forestry industry? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As that 

member will be aware, there are a number of initiatives under 

way, and some deals in the process of being made. A new 

arrangement for forestry allotments is in the making. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a rising tide floats all ships, and Saskatchewan led 

the economy of the country in 2008 with 5.4 per cent growth. 

We will lead the country again, according to the Conference 

Board of Canada, with 1.6 per cent growth in 2009. And some 

banks, Mr. Speaker, are predicting that we will lead the 

economy again in 2010. Mr. Speaker, this negativity is not 

helpful. 

 

The minister responsible for forestry has been working very 

hard and will continue to do so, and the forestry industry will 

survive in this province and make a great comeback when the 

prices turn around. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, the recent federal budget had 

millions for the auto workers and for other sectors, but nothing 

for forestry workers in Saskatchewan. Maybe they figure there 

was no need, given that the Sask Party has spent less than 5 

million out of the 36 million they received in federal 

community trust money for the forest communities. Mr. 

Speaker, to the minister: what happened to the money? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 



March 3, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2071 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — I’d like to thank the member for that 

question, and the fact that he’s asking it shows a lack of 

understanding of the program. All of the money, all of the 

money that was allotted to the first year of the program has 

been allotted to various communities — all of those 

communities, Mr. Speaker, in the forestry, northern part of the 

province, and all of those communities hurt by the downturn in 

the forestry industry. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — The Sask Party threw out the previous 

government’s plan for the forestry, Mr. Speaker. Now they have 

the responsibility to act, but forestry workers in forest 

communities are suffering while this government does nothing. 

And their lack of action on the file has apparently convinced 

Ottawa that it doesn’t need to help either. 

 

To the minister: why has the Sask Party’s relationship with 

Ottawa failed to produce any help for the forestry workers? And 

has Ottawa stopped listening, or did they even bother to ask? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Well I thank the member for that 

question as well. The Community Development Trust Fund 

money, $36.4 million as memory serves, is being spread around 

the forestry communities in this province as we speak. All of 

the allotment, as I say, for the first year of the program has been 

spoken for, and those funds will be disbursed as the 

communities require. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — The Minister of Energy and Resources 

clearly believes that Saskatchewan forestry has no future; 

obviously he’s convinced his friends in Ottawa of that too. His 

advice to the forestry worker has been other opportunities — 

advice which, for the most people living in the forestry 

community, amounts to being told to move. Why is the Minister 

of Energy and Resources telling skilled and experienced 

forestry workers to move? Doesn’t emptying the forest 

community of these skilled and experienced workers amount to 

an admission that this government sees no future for the 

forestry industry? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Nothing could be further from the truth, 

Mr. Speaker. This government sees a bright future for the 

forestry industry. Right now we’re in the worst downturn in the 

forestry industry in the history of the province, with the housing 

market in the United States absolutely collapsing. The recent 

history is, for the benefit of the member, Mr. Speaker, that eight 

mills — eight mills — have closed, six of those under the 

government of the NDP [New Democratic Party]. We are doing 

something about it. We’ll see that turn around before the end of 

this term. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Support for Agriculture 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, on January 20 this year, the 

Minister of Agriculture flexed his muscles at the Cattlemen’s 

Corral dinner in Lloydminster, boasting about the power the 

Sask Party has in Ottawa. And he said, and I quote: 

 

When we go to Ottawa, the whole picture has changed. 

We scared the hell out of them down there. 

 

Now I gather Gerry Ritz, the federal Minister of Agriculture, 

must have missed this speech because it’s crystal clear there’s 

no money coming from Ottawa. So to the minister: can the 

minister tell us what happened to all of his power in Ottawa? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, to the member opposite, let’s go back . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I ask members to come to order 

so that we can hear the response to the question. I recognize the 

Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let’s 

review, in the answer to this question, where the NDP were 

with the federal governments previously when it come to the ag 

file, and this isn’t just the federal Conservatives but also the 

federal Liberals. They were confrontational consistently and got 

nothing out of each government, as they were in place, for our 

ag sector. Now the member opposite is saying that Mr. Ritz 

should be coming to the forefront — which I’ve said on a 

number of occasions now — and putting dollars in. 

 

But the difference being, Mr. Speaker, is when the NDP came 

back to Saskatchewan, they did nothing for our producers in 

Saskatchewan — absolutely nothing. Mr. Speaker, we’ve come 

to the table with our 40 per cent that we put on the table at the 

federal meetings and we have come out with a $71 million 

payment for cattle and hogs, something I believe that is 

appreciated by the industry right across Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, while the minister and his 



2072 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2009 

government use the give-peace-a-chance approach with his 

buddies in Ottawa, livestock producers back here in 

Saskatchewan have been waiting and writing and phoning, and 

waiting and writing and phoning. And when the minister finally 

provided some assistance to producers, he said he believed 

Ottawa would provide cash as well. Well if the minister 

believed all he had to do was to put the provincial share of the 

program up in order to get Ottawa to do something, why did he 

refuse to do anything until a few days before this legislature 

started to sit? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, one year ago the 

cattle industry and the hog industry were in my office asking for 

a $90 million loan. What did we do as a brand new 

government? We provided $90 million in a loan to both parts of 

the industry. Mr. Speaker, that’s what they asked for at the time 

and the member knows that well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the industry didn’t just get in trouble on 

November 7, 2007. These problems were there for a number of 

years under that NDP government, and what was their 

response? Absolutely zero, Mr. Speaker. So for that member to 

get up is somewhat hypocritical to say now, like crop insurance 

and all the other parts of the ag file, we’re supposed to 

straighten the mess out in one year. Well, Mr. Speaker, we did 

respond with a $90 million loan and now a $71 million support 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well I 

think it was the Sask Party that told us all that if we elected a 

Sask Party, that they would improve their relationship with 

Ottawa. Well, Mr. Speaker . . . How’s it working for you? Well, 

Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I can see this is going to be a very 

interesting session. The member from Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s quite clear the Sask 

Party’s relationship with Ottawa has been useless for the 

livestock producers. While other industries in this country are 

receiving cash from the federal government, the Saskatchewan 

livestock sector has been told over and over again they’ll be 

getting nothing. To the minister: will he finally admit that as 

long as the province votes Conservative and delivers 13 out of 

14 MPs [Member of Parliament] to Ottawa, there’s no reason 

for Stephen Harper and Gerry Ritz to step up to the plate and 

help our livestock producers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, I guess I could come 

back from the meetings in Ottawa and do nothing but blame the 

federal government, and then sit and not do anything for the 

producers in this province. 

 

That member should listen to what the producer organizations 

said on Friday after our announcement of $71 million. I didn’t 

see one producer organization that didn’t like what we 

announced on Friday. I didn’t see one producer organization 

last January, when we announced the $90 million loan program, 

that didn’t like the program. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, she should also take a look at the Agriculture 

budget for the province of Saskatchewan in 2008. Under the 

NDP the previous year it was around $299 million. Today, for 

2008, the Ag budget in the province of Saskatchewan is $444 

million. Mr. Speaker, does that sound to that member like we’re 

a do-nothing on this side like their track record shows that they 

did? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Relationship with Federal Government 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. About a month and a 

half ago, Mr. Speaker, the Premier of our province gave the 

federal budget, the federal Conservative budget, the grade of D. 

Now on that particular occasion we were in agreement. 

 

Now as a result of that, the Premier of Saskatchewan then 

called upon the 13 Conservative MPs from Saskatchewan for an 

immediate meeting. Now apparently these 13 MPs couldn’t 

come to Saskatchewan; the Premier had to go to Ottawa to meet 

with them. Now going into the meeting, the Premier said he 

expected a rocky ride — that’s what he expected — when many 

of us thought it was the MPs that should be getting the rocky 

ride. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, my question today to the Premier is: what was 

the outcome of his meeting with the 13 Conservative MPs? 

What did that meeting produce for the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — You know, Mr. Speaker, I would invite that 

member there, the member for Riversdale, the Leader of the 

Opposition . . . And this is an important debate to have and I’m 

more than happy to engage in this debate. I would invite him to 

question his seatmate, his deputy leader, the member for 

Nutana, as to the name that she just hurled across the aisle and 

determine if she thinks that is appropriate, if it elevates the 

debate. 

 

We can have the discussion. We can go down the list of things 

that have been achieved. You can be critical of the record of the 

government; that’s free speech. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 



March 3, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2073 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — And I’ll defend the record of the 

Government of Saskatchewan. As you are critical, I would 

expect your side to do it professionally; you can expect in kind 

from this side of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, a revisionist history from the 

Minister of Agriculture here today as we regularly get from the 

Minister of Agriculture. Now we’ve got a duck and dive from 

the Premier. 

 

The question is very simple: what did the Premier achieve for 

the province and the people of Saskatchewan with his meeting 

with the 13 Conservative MPs in Ottawa? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I knew that I’d 

be there that day at the invitation of the Canadian Nuclear 

Association to give a speech, and so we undertook to meet with 

the members of the federal caucus and express in that private 

meeting, as we have done publicly very much the same, that the 

Government of Saskatchewan was disappointed with the federal 

budget for any number of reasons, that there are a number of 

other files we’re going to continue to advance. 

 

Agriculture was one of them, but certainly the carbon capture 

piece is another file we expect to advance. We expect we’re 

going to work hard towards federal dollars into the province 

with respect to carbon capture. The nuclear association, the 

nuclear industry is something that’s a priority for this 

government. We expect to be able to work with the federal 

government and receive some support there as well. 

 

And in the meantime, Mr. Speaker, this government will do its 

part to ensure, as the Conference Board of Canada has 

concluded again today, that notwithstanding the actions of any 

other government, this province will lead the country, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, let’s get this straight. We were 

told by this government that a new relationship with Ottawa 

would produce significant new benefits for the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan — more in fact than a fair deal under 

equalization would produce. 

 

So let’s review the record. We’ve now had a federal budget. 

The Premier gave it a D grade. Well we agree on that because, 

as we’ve heard today in the House, in that federal budget there 

was nothing of substance to support the forestry sector in our 

province, absolutely nothing to support the livestock sector, 

nothing to show that we’re going to get a fair deal for our 

non-renewable resources. 

 

Now the Premier’s saying, well no, but the relationship with 

Ottawa has all been smoothed over and everything is just fine 

and copacetic. Well I tell you what. I’ve heard today that the 

Premier’s going to Washington. I hope he has better luck in 

Washington than he’s had in Ottawa. 

 

My question to the Premier is: why has he given up on these 

important files of the forestry, of the cattle and livestock 

industry, of a fair return for our resources? Why has he given up 

on these files? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, what we have 

done on these files as a Government of Saskatchewan is moved 

to support the livestock industry in this province. We said to the 

federal government we weren’t going to ask them to do 

anything we weren’t prepared to do ourselves. That is decidedly 

and markedly different from the tactics we saw from them when 

they were in office. They’d go down and they’d yell at Ottawa 

and they came back here and did nothing for agriculture, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s not good enough for the industry in this 

province, and that’s why we’ve moved. 

 

[14:15] 

 

And moreover, Mr. Speaker, I would say this: there are going to 

be times when we disagree with the federal government. There 

are going to be other files where we’re going to work towards 

some co-operation and some achievement for the province. 

That’s the kind of approach that got us a quarter billion dollars 

for a carbon capture project. That’s the kind of approach that 

got us $100 million for a bridge in Saskatoon. That’s the kind of 

project, Mr. Speaker, that’s going to get us further investments 

in carbon capture. That’s the kind of approach that got us 

funding for child care that that previous government left on the 

table, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, again we get now revisionist 

history from the Premier. Not one thin dime has this province 

received, or the people of this province have received, under 

this federal government that we would not have received as any 

other Canadian, Mr. Speaker, as any other Canadian. 

Meanwhile we’re being punished on our resource revenues, 

unlike any other Canadians. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Premier and his government have been 

unsuccessful in getting money from this federal government, 

but in lieu of money they got some advice from the federal 

government. They got some advice from some of these 

Conservative MPs. Do you know what the MPs told this 

government recently? They said they should just go home, they 

should just go home and do for the people of Saskatchewan 

what they promised they would do, and that is a substantial 

reduction in property taxes and a long-term plan. They didn’t 

get the money. 

 



2074 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2009 

My question now to the Premier is: will he at least take their 

advice? Will we see in the budget, as we’ve asked earlier today, 

will we see something more than a little addition to the NDP 

rebate program? Will we see something substantive, and will 

we see a long-term plan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we need to correct the facts. 

We need to correct the hon. member’s facts: $250 million 

allocated for carbon capture in the federal budget last; we got 

240 million of the 250 — not available to other provinces. The 

$100 million for the bridge was competitive — not available to 

other provinces. The 30-or-so million for child care was 

available to other provinces but apparently ignored by members 

opposite, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s not good enough. We know our job’s not 

finished in terms of attracting federal investment to this 

province, and we’re not done working on behalf of the 

province. But in 14 months, that’s 400-plus-or-so million 

dollars, and that’s 400-plus-or-so million more than that 

government got in the last five years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And may I just say this with respect to property tax? The people 

of the province of Saskatchewan can expect something different 

from this side versus that side. That side made promises and 

broke them on education property tax. This side made promises 

and we will keep them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By leave to 

introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The Minister of Highways has asked 

for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the Minister of 

Highways. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would have 

done this earlier, but the glare of the bright lights affected my 

vision and I neglected to notice that in the gallery, in the west 

gallery, two friends of mine from the community of Frontier are 

here with whom I assume are two of the newcomers to our 

province from Ontario. I should have caught on when they 

mentioned the community of Frontier. 

 

Allen Iverson and his wife Monica are visiting us as guests in 

the legislature today. And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like us all to 

welcome them and their new friends to this Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — With leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Agriculture has asked for 

leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. The Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you and through you to the 

members of the legislature, George Haas who is a councillor 

from the RM [rural municipality] of Churchbridge, president of 

my constituency association and long-time friend. And I want 

to welcome him to his legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day 

I’d like to raise a point of order. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. State 

your point of order. 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, in terms of the dialogue that went across the floor of 

this House during the question period, there has been a very 

clear violation of parliamentary language by the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. During the course of the question and 

answer to the Premier from the Leader of the Opposition, the 

member from Saskatoon Nutana used a very unparliamentary 

name that she directed to the Premier. 

 

If need be, I certainly will quote that name because several of 

our members heard it clearly. It’s unparliamentary and I’d ask 

the member to do the right thing: withdraw and apologize to the 

Premier. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I have no difficulty 

withdrawing, but it was directed at another member — and 

apologizing — but it was directed to a Sask Party member who 

sent me a note. It was not the Premier. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I thank the Government House 

Leader for his point of order. I thank the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana for withdrawing the remarks. But I would 

also want to remind members, regardless of where a comment 

was intended to, we need to be mindful of the protocol of the 

Assembly and respect for other members. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 



March 3, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2075 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 72 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff that Bill No. 72 — The 

Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is a 

pleasure indeed to rise today and join in the debate on The 

Traffic Safety Amendment Act. This is a very important Act, and 

I have some comments I want to make specifically around the 

photo identification and the enhanced driver’s licence. I think 

that’s a very important thing. 

 

I do want to take a moment and just say before I get into that, I 

appreciate the second part of the Bill where we talk about the 

circumstance where we recognize volunteer firefighters in our 

smaller communities that allow the municipalities to designate 

volunteer firefighter and first responder vehicles as emergency 

vehicles and, after proper training, allow them to drive contrary 

to the rules of the road as the emergency situations require. 

 

But I really wanted to get up, and I grabbed the opportunity. I 

think I agree with the minister. This is a historic opportunity we 

have here today. And in my role as critic of Social Services, one 

of the issues that I find when I go around talking to people 

about what are the barriers they have, is around identification. 

 

And so what I would like to do is, I think there’s a lot of good 

things in this Bill and, as we move it forward, I will be asking 

the minister in committee some questions about how SGI 

[Saskatchewan Government Insurance] can help out that 

process around reducing barriers when it comes to ID 

[identification]. 

 

I don’t know; I haven’t had the chance to talk to the minister. 

This came up today, so I hope we can have that opportunity. 

But when I go and I talk to people, it’s one of those things that, 

for example, I haven’t had the experience with. I’ve had my 

identification, my family has; it seems to be something that 

works okay for us. But for some people there are barriers, 

whether it’s the cost now that we have for licences, birth 

certificates, that type of thing. It’s becoming more and more of 

an issue. People raise it right away. But I ask them, is it been an 

issue? 

 

And today for example, there’s a story in the paper. Many of us 

may have seen it in The StarPhoenix, a big, full-page story. It’s 

called, “No place to call home.” And one of the people does talk 

about, for example, and I’ll read the quote from The 

StarPhoenix. And I quote, “He used . . .” This is the start of the 

quote: “He used a friend’s address so he could collect welfare, 

but that ended when his benefactors neglected to phone social 

services and confirm Pratt was staying with them.” 

 

So here’s an example, today we hear about identification being 

an issue. So as I’ve talked to people in Alberta — I was there a 

couple weeks ago at a national conference put on by the Faculty 

of Social Work called Growing Home. And actually the 

minister and the member from Yorkton . . . Bob Chartier, Bob 

Chartier was there doing an open-space forum where you got 

issues from the participants about what are the challenges 

they’re facing. Identification was an issue. 

 

Here we see homelessness is becoming more and more 

commonplace throughout our communities. Fact there was a 

community from Alberta, three high school students — 

homeless, absolute homeless, living in their car — they had a 

cellphone, but no fixed address, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So here’s 

an opportunity I think that we can really do something about. 

 

What are some of the barriers when you don’t have your proper 

ID? Of course one of them is to work. And this is where it first 

was brought to my attention by a community-based 

organization, the CBO in Saskatoon, that helps vulnerable 

youth get work. But he phoned me, really frustrated, one day 

and said, why is it that we do so much to reduce the barriers, 

red tape for businesses, but we don’t do the same for young 

people? And he asked me, could you possibly raise this in the 

House. 

 

And I think this is the opportunity. At SGI through their 

identification processes, helps reduce one of these barriers for 

young people, for vulnerable young people particularly, enable 

them to reduce one barrier that they have when it comes to 

getting work. 

 

Another one, Mr. Deputy Speaker, now it didn’t really affect us 

at the provincial level, but last fall we heard a lot about the new 

regulations around voting in the federal election. A lot of people 

did not have the proper ID for that. People just assumed that 

they could just go in and vote like they had before, or that they 

just could . . . It’s in their community, but they were hit with 

much stringent, much stronger regulations about the 

requirements about voting. And one was proper ID. This is a 

huge issue. 

 

When I was in Ottawa, I was talking to some of the folks and 

they said they’ve identified three groups that this is a big issue 

for — students who are in a new community, whether it’s the 

bigger community, say for example Saskatoon, Regina, Prince 

Albert, or Moose Jaw, or some of the regional colleges, where 

they just moved in. Students are disenfranchised. 

 

Another group are seniors, who voted for many, many years, 

have just come to assume they could go to the local school and 

they would be able to vote. Now they need ID. What are we 

doing to help seniors to meet that requirement? 

 

And a third group, and this is — all three groups are very 

important, but one that we’re working particularly hard in 

Saskatchewan — is attracting new immigrants to our 

communities. And we need to make sure that ID is not a barrier 

for them. This is a huge issue, and I think that this is something 

that SGI could take a lot of leadership on. And so we’ll be 

looking forward in committee to work on this. 

 

A couple of other issues that I think are important, when I was 

talking to some folks the other day, they raised the issue around 



2076 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2009 

banking. Many of us take it for granted that we can just set up 

our bank account and we’ll be able to work out how we get paid 

and cash our cheques and all of that type of thing. And of 

course it’s not that easy if you don’t have identification. And a 

driver’s licence or photo identification can go a long way to 

help people who are at risk to solve another issue, another 

barrier that stops them from being fully engaged in our 

communities. 

 

And of course health services is also hugely, hugely important. 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is not, as I said earlier, just an urban 

issue. It’s a rural issue. It’s a northern issue. Of course we’ve 

heard about the northern elections, both in ’08 and ’07, where 

many, many people were challenged about identification. 

 

Now, I do want to say SGI has had a really strong record in 

terms of its corporate responsibility in our community. And I 

hope it continues with that because it looks to see how can it 

solve problems for people in our communities. And I’m 

thinking about the acquired brain injury work that it’s done, and 

it was recognized last fall for their outstanding contributions to 

that group. And I think it’s very important that, with that same 

spirit, that they worked with those folks. As well, many of us on 

New Year’s see the ads around taking free buses — very 

important. And we see their support in the communities — 

whether it’s at a sporting event, a cultural event — SGI has 

always been there as a good corporate citizen. 

 

So I ask them, and I’m asking the minister that these will be 

questions that I’ll be bringing forward into committee because I 

think it is so important that we take a look at what are the 

barriers that those who are less fortunate, who are more 

vulnerable than many of us in our communities. And I don’t 

know the answers. I don’t know how many people are affected 

by the ID issue. But I think if there’s some that we can help, 

why don’t we do this? And I know that it’s a good, strong 

corporation that can tackle these kind of problems. 

 

[14:30] 

 

I know as well this minister is also bringing forward, and we’ll 

be talking more about another Bill, the vital statistics Bill, now 

that it seems to be hooking up with the Information Services 

Corporation, ISC. Another opportunity for us to be leaders in 

our country around making sure that everyone has proper ID 

and there are not barriers to having ID, such as cost, or those 

very first pieces of ID that so many of us take for granted — the 

birth certificate and your driver’s licence. Once you seem to get 

those, other things fall into place. But if you don’t have those 

basic building blocks of proper identification, you have some 

real challenges. 

 

I wasn’t aware of this. I don’t know if the minister was aware of 

this. I don’t know if the government’s been aware of this. But I 

think it’s one that we can all step up to the plate and say, let’s 

be all a little helpful here. 

 

I know, for example — the Minister of Corrections, I don’t 

know if he has an opinion on this — but interestingly I’ve 

talked to some people in parole. At the food bank in Saskatoon 

somebody was getting some food, and they had to give their 

place of residence or ID. He said, well I’m just out of jail. They 

had no ID. How can that be, coming out of jail . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Well, there you go. We’ll find out more as we 

go. 

 

But I think this is very, very important . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . There you go. And I appreciate the help. But I 

think this is very important. It cuts across so many, so many 

ministries over there. It cuts across Corrections, Public Safety; 

it talks about Finance in terms of income tax, making sure 

people get to work; Labour, making sure people are at work and 

they have the correct identification; Social Services; and of 

course SGI. 

 

And I know there are concerns we have. And it’s written in the 

Act, and I think it’s a well-written Act. They talk about fraud, 

that type of thing. You have to be very careful about this, and I 

appreciate that there are some measures. The minister has talked 

about a little card they get. But I think, as we try to get people 

into our communities, they need to have, as much as they can 

have, identification like the rest of us so they don’t cause more 

questions than answers. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think this is an interesting, exciting piece of 

legislation. Of course at the global perspective, now that we’re 

talking about the border regulations, moving into how we can 

cross into the United States as seamlessly as possible, that’s 

very important. The United States is a good friend of ours in so 

many ways, and we travel freely and we want to keep that that 

way. 

 

Business relations, family relations and just good friends down 

there. I know we travel down there as a legislature and many of 

us will be going down there this summer. We value that 

relationship. So on that hand, I think this is a very good piece of 

legislation. 

 

But I do ask the minister when we get into committee to be 

prepared to talk about . . . And if his officials are listening or 

reading Hansard today, I will be asking questions in the 

committee, specifically about barriers for people to make sure 

everyone has proper ID.  

 

And I know there are challenges. But as I said earlier, SGI has 

been a good corporate citizen and has risen to challenges 

before. And they may already have some of the solutions and 

it’s a matter of a public awareness campaign. But I have a funny 

feeling it’s more complicated and it’s getting more complicated 

as we go further down the road here. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I know others want to join in that 

debate, so I think I’ll adjourn, right? Thank you. I’ll take my 

seat now. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

rise today to speak in support of Bill No. 72, The Traffic Safety 

Amendment Act, 2008. Mr. Speaker, this Bill does two very, 

very important things. 

 

The first change puts in place an enhanced driver’s licence 

which will help expedite movement back and forth of 

Saskatchewan citizens across the US [United States], into the 



March 3, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2077 

United States through both land and water crossings, Mr. 

Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s extremely important. 

 

For many Canadians, we visit and have the opportunity to visit 

our neighbours to the south on a regular basis. Much of our 

commerce and activities between the two countries is carried 

out virtually on a daily basis between many Saskatchewan 

citizens. So any ability to enhance and make that travel and 

interaction between our two countries more easily attainable, 

more speedy access, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of course would be 

seen as beneficial by Saskatchewan residents. 

 

I believe Saskatchewan will look upon this particular change 

with a great deal of favour. And as the United States is our 

largest trading partner, many of our citizens, as part of their 

jobs, travel to the United States on many, many occasions 

throughout the year. And every opportunity you have to cross 

the border, Mr. Speaker, and anything you can do to make that 

transition and transaction across the border more easily 

accessible, more speedily carried out, Mr. Speaker, helps those 

individuals — particularly those who would be making those 

trips back and forth on a regular basis. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, any time that you can enhance identification 

for citizens in general is a good thing, Mr. Speaker, because 

many of our Saskatchewan citizens need to have picture 

identification for many, many of their activities within the 

province, Mr. Speaker. Citizens on a daily basis are required to 

show identification and any enhancement to that identification, 

Mr. Speaker, that makes it more clear that the individual is in 

fact who they say they are helps in many ways. 

 

It helps our law enforcement officers throughout the province to 

ensure that the person they’re dealing with is exactly who they 

say they are, Mr. Speaker. It helps many businesses who 

perhaps would be taking a cheque from somebody or something 

to actually ensure that the person that they’re taking a cheque 

from is the person that they are actually speaking to, Mr. 

Speaker. So any enhanced identification processes would be 

seen as beneficial by the majority of Saskatchewan citizens, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The issue of cross border, crossing the border into the United 

States, Mr. Speaker, whether it be by land or sea, is one that is 

still going to take some time to work on. Ideally our two 

countries for many, many years have had basically a seamless 

system which we could cross without having to have 

identification of a nature that would ensure exactly who the 

individual was. 

 

But after the events that occurred in 2001, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

the world became a different place, and the security of 

individual countries became more important. And as a result of 

that, enhanced security between our two countries became 

necessary. They needed to . . . The United States very clearly 

wanted to ensure that those passing into their country in fact 

were Canadian citizens and were who they said they were, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

And vice versa, Mr. Speaker. The Canadian government also 

wanted to ensure that we had enhanced security as well, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, because September 11, 2001, Mr. Speaker, 

made a difference in this world. It made a significant difference. 

Mr. Speaker, the second change to this particular legislation 

deals with the ability of emergency responders to drive with 

lights and sirens, Mr. Speaker, after appropriate training, in 

response to emergencies within their communities. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, a large portion of the citizens of our 

province rely on volunteers, and rely on part-time responders 

responding to many types of emergencies in their communities. 

I’m not sure that everyone would be aware that in most of our 

rural communities — in fact, 95 per cent of the communities in 

this province — their fire departments are entirely volunteer, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, and those citizens provide for those 

volunteers. 

 

And I would actually go as far as to say those heroes in those 

communities, Mr. Deputy Speaker, provide a service for the 

people of our province that puts their lives at risk at times in 

order to respond to help others in their time of need, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And so those citizens need our co-operation in 

responding to those emergencies in as timely a manner as 

possible. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the volunteers in our 

communities that respond either to medical emergencies or to 

fires are themselves going above and beyond to respond to the 

needs and to help others in our communities, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

And these people often live miles from where they’re 

responding to. You may have situations where you have a 

volunteer fire department that has, say, 10 people in the 

community, Mr. Speaker. The volunteers may, by virtue of their 

work, be located in a number of . . . may work in opposite sides 

of the community; in fact, may be out of town doing their job 

some distance from the community. Or the fire they’re 

responding to may be some distance from the community in 

which the volunteer fire department in fact houses their 

equipment. And, Mr. Speaker, these people would be notified 

via cell phone or other means of communication that we have 

an emergency to respond to and they may have some distance to 

travel. 

 

And the fact that we’re going to be able to provide them with 

additional training and the ability to use lights and sirens to get 

to those emergencies quicker can result in saving lives, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. It’ll save lives in our communities. It’ll save 

property. But the net result is, Mr. Speaker, we’re all better off. 

We’re all better off as a result of having those responders get to 

those emergencies sooner. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, many people may not understand, but in 

the situation of a severe auto accident, Mr. Speaker, that first 

hour and the treatment that individual gets in that first hour 

often makes a difference between whether that individual will 

live or die if he has serious injuries, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So 

anything that we can do to encourage and help those volunteers 

and those individuals to be able to reach the scene of the 

emergency sooner, Mr. Deputy Speaker, helps those individuals 

in need and gives them a greater chance of full recovery, Mr. 

Speaker, in the event of a medical emergency. 

 

Mr. Speaker, things like heart attacks and strokes and other 

things don’t occur just in hospitals or in cities or for that matter 

in small towns, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They happen on farms. 

They happen on acreages. They happen on cottages at the lake, 



2078 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2009 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. And it’s these volunteers that respond to 

those emergencies in these communities. 

 

Those first responders, Mr. Speaker, provide needed and 

important initial medical treatment to help individuals survive 

after a heart attack or a stroke, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So 

anything we do to help to get those individuals to the scene of 

that emergency sooner helps that individual, Mr. Speaker, and 

helps our province to be an even better place for our citizens to 

live, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So their changes are very, very 

important. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, our volunteer fire departments throughout 

the province provide services to the citizens of this province in 

every small community virtually in this province. And it’s those 

volunteers that ensure that if we have a fire in our community 

that not only is the fire put out, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but they 

stop further damage to other homes that may be adjacent to the 

house that’s on fire, Mr. Deputy Speaker, or business. But they 

also respond to fires on farms and cottages and on acreages not 

in communities throughout the province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

In this province the majority of firefighters are volunteers. In 

this province, because of the geographical distribution of the 

population, the majority of people who respond to fires and 

work on behalf of the citizens of this province are volunteers. 

So this legislation takes a step to ensure that those individuals 

can reach those emergencies sooner and quicker. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m sure you are aware that in our 

small communities across the province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

getting to the scene of a fire when you have to first leave work, 

and then get to the fire hall and get the equipment there takes 

time. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we all know that the first matter of 

minutes in getting to the scene of a fire can make a significant 

difference to the amount of damage that’s done; and, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, it even makes a greater difference if there are 

citizens who need help to exit their homes or need help to exit 

their business, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So the sooner that we get 

the volunteer firefighters on the scene of that emergency, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, the better off the citizens of that community 

are. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s a difficult task in rural communities, 

as it is in smaller urban areas, to get volunteers because being a 

volunteer firefighter requires regular training; it requires regular 

exercises in order to ensure that you are up to date with all the 

various equipment and techniques that are out there in order to 

fight the fires in the best interest and most efficient way, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. But these people give of their time freely. 

 

They give of their time to practice on a weekly basis or 

biweekly basis, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in order to be there for 

their fellow citizens in their community and surrounding area, if 

and when they need them, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

[14:45] 

 

And these people — who give of their own time to practice, 

give of their own time to train and brush up on techniques to 

fight fires, Mr. Deputy Speaker — came to this Assembly 

asking for support, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and able to get to those 

emergencies quicker. And I’m proud to say that we support 

that. We support the members of the government who are 

supporting this legislation as well. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this legislation deals 

with getting to fires more quickly. But I think we have to go a 

step further, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and we have to provide 

funding and training — greater training — more in-detail 

training for volunteer firefighters in our province. 

 

I had the opportunity to visit with volunteer firefighters in a 

number of communities during my tenure in this legislature, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, and talk to them about their needs. Now, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there were many needs identified by 

communities and volunteer firefighters across the province, not 

the least of is the ability to get some funding in order to enhance 

equipment, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to ensure that they have the 

very best equipment. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that equipment 

is needed to both save lives in these communities, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, but also to protect firefighters. 

 

As an example, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is equipment out 

there today that actually can tell you whether or not there is a 

fire beyond a door, Mr. Deputy Speaker, whether there is a heat 

. . . where the concentration of heat is, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Well if every firefighter had, if every fire department — pardon 

me, volunteer fire department — had that type of equipment, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, firefighters would be at less risk fighting a 

structure fire in their community, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

But more importantly it would be a great enhancement in the 

ability of volunteer firefighters and volunteer fire departments 

to help individuals who may be stuck in the house, Mr. Speaker, 

who cannot exit the house or business because of the fire. It 

would help them be able to locate and understand where the fire 

was and how to get to them, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And that type 

of equipment isn’t available in all rural fire departments, Mr. 

Speaker, because it’s very costly equipment. 

 

So we need to go a step further, Mr. Speaker, to help rural fire 

departments in order to allow them to provide the best possible 

quality service to the citizens of our communities, Mr. Speaker, 

and at the same time, ensure that they, in carrying out their own 

duties, Mr. Speaker, are put in the actual absolutely safest 

possible environment in order to perform those duties, Mr. 

Speaker. So we need to provide them with the right tools, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many of our ambulance services throughout the 

province are also volunteer, and many of our communities are 

serviced by volunteer ambulance services. And those 

individuals have to leave employment often to respond to a 

central area to pick up the ambulance to respond to that medical 

emergency. So this Bill also gives them the ability to use lights 

and sirens and to drive outside the rules of the road, Mr. 

Speaker, in order to get to those emergencies as quick as 

possible. And, Mr. Speaker, as I spoke earlier, that first hour in 

the medical emergency makes a huge difference in the survival 

of somebody who has a serious medical problem. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this helps rural Saskatchewan, so this 

helps all of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, because our province 



March 3, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2079 

isn’t just two cities, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s hundreds of small 

communities and thousands of citizens across this province who 

deserve to have the best possible emergency services that can be 

provided, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a good first step, but we need 

to go further, enhancing emergency medical services and 

volunteer firefighting in our province. We need to be willing to 

take the step to review the level of services in our communities 

across the province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And beyond the 

review, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we need to take steps to improve 

those services. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know that there was a committee 

some time ago set up that was looking at this very issue within 

then one of the government departments, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

and it was looking at how we can enhance protection services, 

how we can enhance fire services in our rural communities, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. Because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it doesn’t 

matter if the person’s from Regina or Saskatoon or from 

Frontier or Climax, Mr. Deputy Speaker. If they’re injured and 

they’re in a rollover on the side of the road, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, we need to respond as timely as we can. We need to 

respond with the best possible skills and abilities to ensure that 

individual’s looked after in the best possible way. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this helps; this particular Bill helps 

because it will assist in getting people to the scene of those 

accidents quicker, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But there is much yet 

that can be done. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, many of our rural 

volunteers who give of themselves for their neighbours and 

their friends and for all of us in this province, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker . . . Because that person lying on the side of the road 

might not be their neighbour or friend, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It 

could be me, it could be any of my colleagues, or it could be 

any other citizen from another area of the province. We could 

not know the people who are responding but, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, they still respond. They still look after that emergency 

and they still do their very best to help the people of this 

province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we all owe them a thank you. We owe them 

a debt of gratitude for their willingness to do that for us. And, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, if we provide them better tools, better 

training, and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, maybe even some funding, 

maybe even some funding while they’re performing those 

skills, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they will not only continue to do 

what they’re doing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but maybe we can 

attract more people, so more people in our communities 

actually do this. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this province, one of the things we need to 

provide for volunteer firefighters, as I said earlier, is additional 

training. One of the ways we could do that, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is in this province have a fire training college, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And it’s a concept, it’s a concept that, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that the professional firefighters in our 

province want. I can assure you that volunteer firefighters in 

this province want it as well. 

 

In my tenure in this legislature, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I had the 

time and opportunity to meet with a number of volunteer fire 

departments, and they would like that opportunity to enhance 

fire training, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They would like the 

opportunity to have better skills, to ensure when they’re 

responding, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that they have the best 

opportunity to provide for their friends and neighbours, but 

also, also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they would like to have that 

training so when they go to those emergency situations, they 

know exactly what they should do in each situation and what 

they do puts a minimal risk to themselves because they’ve been 

trained to deal with it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a fire college would give an opportunity for 

volunteer firefighters in this province to get enhanced training, 

to improve their skills, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and provide better 

services then to the people of our province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this could be accomplished in a number of 

ways. It doesn’t necessarily have to be a hugely costly 

initiative, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but nothing, nothing is free. It 

would require some injection of funds, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but 

that would be a very important injection of funds to help the 

rural communities of our province, Mr. Speaker, better protect 

their property, better protect their friends and neighbours, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and the people from their communities. But 

most importantly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it would show that we 

cared about the service that they were providing, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and that we understood what their needs were. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I indicated, this piece of 

legislation goes one very small step to improving the well-being 

of citizens in our communities by encouraging and allowing a 

greater and more expedient response time. But, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, we can do more, and we should and we must do more. 

Firefighters who volunteer in our communities need to know 

that we understand what their needs are and that we want to 

help them to improve their training and improve their ability to 

respond to emergencies. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this is a piece of legislation that, 

unfortunately, is time sensitive. Parts of it are going to be 

implemented or should be implemented as early as April of this 

year, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So we’re going to need to take the 

opportunity to speak to this Bill at length today. It may be all 

that we actually get a chance to speak to today, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, because we need to ensure that we speak at length to 

this Bill and that we fully explain to the citizens of this province 

what we’re doing and what we’re not yet doing, and we need 

yet to do to help those rural fire departments and those rural 

emergency responders to in fact carry out their jobs in their 

communities. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, many of these people . . . I refer to them as 

jobs, but many of these people work for nothing. This is all 

volunteer people in many communities, and they volunteer their 

time for their neighbours and friends because they believe that 

helping one another is what our Saskatchewan character is all 

about, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We believe, as part of our makeup, 

that helping one another is very, very important. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, those who live in communities that rely on 

volunteer firefighters and emergency responders, they 

understand what they do. But it’s very, very important that we 

discuss at length the important nature of this particular 

legislation. 



2080 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2009 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this, as I indicated earlier, is but a 

small step, but it’s an important first step in recognizing the 

importance of these individuals to our communities and to the 

people of our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those who respond to these emergencies may in 

some cases actually be professional paid individuals as well, 

Mr. Speaker, but who are off duty. And when additional help is 

needed, they can also then use the changes and provisions that 

are provided in this legislation to respond in a more timely 

manner. 

 

As you’re well aware, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in many of our 

communities the policing situation is such that there are very 

few police officers on duty at any given time in a rural area. In 

fact there may be only one police officer on duty in a rural area 

at times during the 24-hour period of a day, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. But if an emergency were to come up, they’re required 

to have a response of more than one individual. Many of those 

responding are coming from home and they’re coming from off 

duty. And they may not have with them a vehicle at their home. 

They may in some cases, but they may not. But this would also 

allow those individuals to use the lights and sirens in their own 

private vehicles in an attempt to respond to that emergency, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

And we all appreciate that, and we all know that they’re doing 

this without thinking about their own well-being, Mr, Deputy 

Speaker, but thinking about the well-being of the community, 

their neighbours, their friends, and those citizens of our 

province. Mr. Deputy Speaker, this legislation, although not 

quite as comprehensive as we would have liked, does provide 

an initial first step and will in fact help enhance the well-being 

of the citizens of our province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

But it doesn’t replace the other things. I indicated earlier we 

need training; we need new equipment. We need to provide 

these volunteers with, as an example, extrication equipment. In 

some communities out there, the extrication equipment . . . If 

there is a motor vehicle accident and somebody has to be 

extricated from the vehicle and you have to have a jaws of life 

or equipment to cut an individual from a vehicle, you could be 

as far away as an hour or more from that equipment in our 

province today. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s shameful. 

That’s absolutely shameful. 

 

And I hear a member opposite saying it’s because we closed 

hospitals. Well I have to tell the member opposite, we don’t 

keep extrication equipment in hospitals, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

No, they’re kept at volunteer fire departments — those who can 

afford to buy it, Mr. Deputy Speaker — in some cases with 

ambulance services and first responders, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

But no, we don’t keep that equipment at hospitals, Mr. Speaker. 

And I hope the member opposite . . . You know I’ve helped him 

to learn something about his community and others. We don’t 

keep extrication equipment at hospitals. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, this Bill does a very good first 

step but it doesn’t go all the way. It could provide more 

training, Mr. Speaker. It could provide funding, Mr. Speaker. It 

could provide funding to enhance extrication equipment in rural 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. It could do a number of things that 

needs to be done, Mr. Speaker. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, members opposite are finally 

paying attention. They’re liking what they’re hearing, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And so I hope that we can expect at budget 

time, Mr. Speaker, some money to enhance the services in rural 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, emergency responder services in 

rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, because it is important to do 

so. 

 

If we can enhance emergency response in rural Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker, whether it be fire response, whether it be 

emergency medical response, Mr. Speaker, or for that matter be 

it police response, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is good for our 

communities, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s good for the people of 

this province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we have to compare whether or not the 

actual costs of providing additional services, Mr. Speaker . . . Is 

that too much, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Is that too much? To 

provide a few thousand dollars, a few hundred thousand dollars 

of enhanced equipment, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that, is that 

worth saving lives, Mr. Deputy Speaker? And we say it is, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And particularly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, today 

when we have a government that is flush in money, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, they can provide some enhanced rural services, Mr. 

Speaker, they can provide better emergency services in rural 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

[15:00] 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as we’ve seen on many, many other 

occasions, they can move money forward if they want, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, in from the Fiscal Stabilization Fund, Mr. 

Speaker. So if they wanted to improve rural services, Mr. 

Speaker, if they wanted to improve emergency services in rural 

communities, they could do so, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there are many, many opportunities this 

government can take to show that they support rural fire 

departments, rural emergency services, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

and we hope that they’ll take those opportunities in the 

upcoming budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance is listening, and I hope he 

is paying attention to the fact that with just a few hundred 

thousand dollars he could improve, improve the extrication 

capabilities of rural fire departments in our province, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. He could improve the safety for firefighters in 

the province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 

Finance minister I hope is paying attention, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, because this is an important issue in rural 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we on this side support this Bill. I 

want to be very clear. We support this Bill but we would like to 

see the government go further, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We’d like 

to see them enhance those services. We’d like to see them 

provide additional support to our rural emergency and fire 

services, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But we haven’t yet seen any 

indication of that from the government, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Rural communities need our help. Rural communities want us 

to pay attention to what their needs are, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker we’re taking this opportunity to let 



March 3, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2081 

the government know that there are still needs out there in our 

emergency services in rural communities. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, children in our communities are 

important, regardless if they live in large urban areas or they 

live in small areas or small communities, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

or they live on the farm, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And we have to 

be prepared to respond to those emergencies regardless where 

they are. And anything we can do to improve those services, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, is an improvement, is an improvement. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, several of my colleagues want to speak to 

this Bill, so at this time I’m going to take my seat and allow one 

of my colleagues to continue this discussion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

I wanted to also rise today to take the opportunity to participate 

in the issue of the Bill being forward in the House today. 

 

I was looking through the Bill itself, and I wanted to make sure 

that as a current sitting MLA [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly], that we want to do all we can to support the 

volunteer firefighters that are out there — those that are 

professionally paid and those that volunteer, as my colleague 

said, from Regina Dewdney, volunteer in rural parts of 

Saskatchewan and certainly in the smaller communities 

throughout our land. And I want to also add, from the northern 

perspective, that many northern communities, First Nations and 

Métis communities, also have the incredible services and 

support of the volunteer firefighters and the different brigades 

that are out there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as my colleague said, I want to take this 

opportunity to join him in recognizing some of the work that the 

volunteer fire brigades do throughout the North. I applaud 

them; I congratulate them; and I certainly want to support them 

in every capacity that I have as an MLA. Certainly whether it’s 

everything from responding to community fires — whether it’s 

grass fires or home fires — certainly they’re always there. 

Whether it’s some of the coordination through the Emergency 

Measures Organization that many local communities have as 

their plan for emergency measures, the fire brigades are always 

there in leading and volunteering and helping. 

 

Whether to do with car wrecks along the highway, we find our 

volunteer fire brigades always out there assisting the RCMP 

[Royal Canadian Mounted Police], assisting in forest fire work 

when there’s threats to the northern communities, any problems 

with SaskPower lines in terms of them creating fires within the 

vicinity of communities — these are some of the work that the 

volunteer fire brigades have undertaken in northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So I wanted to certainly add my voice to those members in the 

Assembly that are wishing to take the opportunity through this 

Bill to not only to support what the Bill intends to do but to 

recognize the volunteer fire brigades in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it should be noted that northern 

Saskatchewan, as we know, is much further away from many 

services that we enjoy in southern Saskatchewan. So doing the 

work in many of these northern communities — whether it’s the 

remote communities of Stony Rapids, Uranium City; whether 

it’s the First Nations community of Black Lake; and whether 

it’s Wollaston Post or any of the communities out there — that 

are having difficulty not only training the local fire brigade but 

making sure they have proper equipment, I just want to point 

out, from our perspective as an opposition party within this 

Assembly, that we certainly hear some of their issues. We share 

some of their concerns, and above all else, we certainly respect 

their contribution and want to share that very clearly and very 

openly today. 

 

The primary focus of the Bill today is to actually assist the 

volunteer firefighters and the brigades that are out there 

throughout northern Saskatchewan and southern Saskatchewan, 

by ensuring simple matters of not being ticketed for going 

through a red light or a stop sign. And granted there aren’t very 

many red lights in northern Saskatchewan. There are many, 

many stop signs. And obviously safety is paramount to not only 

the firefighters but the people they’re trying to help. So 

eliminating some of the silly rules that may have existed for a 

number of years and a number of different governments, I think 

is also very important to recognize. 

 

I want to point out that certainly this party when they were in 

government, they done a great amount of work. Some of the 

work that they did was through the fire brigade and the 

firemen’s association, including expanding some of the 

coverage through the occupational health and safety rules to 

make sure that some of the cancers that they get as a result of 

responding to certain fires and certain situations — chemical 

fires and so on and so forth — that they’re more inclusive and 

that they’re included in some of the death benefits and some of 

the long-term illness benefits. And those are some of the hard 

work and sort of the hard slugging that the previous government 

certainly undertook with the professional firefighters. 

 

We also spoke about the need for better equipment, Mr. Deputy 

Chair. I think better equipment is one of the things that folks 

talked about when we were in government and we certainly 

worked to that end. Whether it was better training, more 

comprehensive training for the fire brigades — not only the 

professional, city-based fire brigades, but recognizing rural and 

northern Saskatchewan — training was certainly a key issue 

and we certainly responded. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, how we 

responded was we afforded more dollars to the municipality and 

we worked closely with the different fire brigades. 

 

We also wanted to make sure that throughout our tenure as the 

government that we recognized those of the volunteer fire 

brigades that gave so much, not only their health and time away 

from their family, but time to train, time to become aware of 

more what type of equipment out there, and also to lobby the 

governments for a number of change I spoke of earlier. Those 

were some of the things that I think those that participated in 

the volunteer fire brigades or the professional fire brigade, they 

certainly contributed there again. So not only did they have to 

hazard different chemical fires and house fires and dangers to 

their health, but time away from their family; they also had to 

lobby the province and the government to make a bunch of 

changes which really helped and certainly benefited many of 



2082 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2009 

the firefighters. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would point out that one of the important 

things of this particular Bill that I wanted to take the 

opportunity to do today was to really, quite frankly, recognize 

some of their work. And the Bill gave us a small window of 

opportunity to talk about the recent change. 

 

And I would ask the many people out there, listening out there, 

if you contrast that to what we accomplished when we were in 

government, working with the professional firefighters and the 

volunteer fire brigade, to this most recent effort by the Sask 

Party to not have tickets to those firefighters that may go 

through a red light or a stop sign, well we applaud that minor 

effort — and it is a minor effort. But there’s much more that 

could be done to assist the volunteer firefighters and the 

professional firefighters in our province. And I wanted to take 

the opportunity to say the Bill, through this small measure, is 

great, but if you compare that to what was done when we were 

in government, it’s a very small, insignificant part of a major 

amount of commitment required with our professional 

firefighters and volunteer fire brigade members that are out 

there. 

 

Northern Saskatchewan’s perspective, as you are aware, there’s 

been many challenges in trying to man the different volunteer 

fire brigades in many of these northern, remote communities. 

Training is always really important. You have to know what 

equipment’s available. You have to know how to use it. You’ve 

got to be able to respond quickly, because many times, you 

know, there’s isolation factors in making sure that you have the 

proper equipment and you have the proper levels of some of the 

fluid that are required in some of this equipment, that your fire 

brigade hall is heated, the equipment is warm, and the truck is 

able to be started easily — like all of these different challenges 

in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Many of our fire brigade members have rose above and beyond 

the challenges and certainly have made the protection of people 

and property in our communities their effort and their role and 

their responsibility. And that’s a lot to ask for volunteer 

firefighters. And certainly, as many of my colleagues are doing, 

they are taking the opportunity through this small step that the 

Saskatchewan Party has unveiled as their professional 

firefighters strategy, we want to stand up and say, yes, okay; 

that’s great. We applaud this particular effort. But we need to 

do more to support them through training dollars and to 

increase their ability to upgrade some of their equipment and to 

also make sure that they’re respected, and in the event that they 

gave their health or their lives, in many instances, that their 

families are properly cared for. And that’s not much to ask, Mr. 

Speaker — not much at all. 

 

So I want to take the opportunity to basically get up and say 

today that I’m very proud of the fire brigades, volunteer fire 

brigades in northern Saskatchewan. They applaud every effort 

there is to improve the conditions that they volunteer under, and 

certainly to point out to the rest of the community and to the 

province that volunteer fire brigades in northern Saskatchewan 

are sometimes not appreciated, but they’re held in high regard 

by many people. 

 

And we ought to take every measure we can to appreciate the 

firefighters and the fire brigade members that are out there 

because, as I alluded to earlier, they respond to a number of 

issues. And sometimes, whether it’s the fire brigade or the EMT 

[emergency medical technician] folks that we have in northern 

Saskatchewan, that they are the ones that are at the place of 

crisis or a place of an accident first, and it’s so very important 

that at the very least the community see that kind of response by 

very valuable people in our northern communities. 

 

Again they need a lot of help in terms of being recognized. 

They need a lot of help in terms of being trained. They need a 

lot of help to make sure that they have the proper equipment. 

But the one thing we wanted to do today as a result of this 

legislation is to give time to recognize them, to recognize their 

contribution, and to thank them for their contribution. And to 

make sure that absolutely everybody in this Assembly and 

throughout Saskatchewan always turn, and when they see a 

volunteer fire brigade member, thank them for their 

contribution, thank them for their effort in trying to convince 

government to change various rules that will help them, as is 

the case of this Bill today. And more so is to look at them as 

somebody that’s really building up their community and 

helping protect their community at great peril to their health and 

certainly at the cost of spending time with their family — and 

really a lot of responsibility with very, very little protection on 

their part. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure today to stand up 

and to recognize the volunteer fire brigades that are out there, to 

support this small step — because it is a step forward — and to 

highlight the fact that many, many, many more volunteer fire 

brigades need much more support and a wide variety of 

programs and funding support to become a very effective 

protector of our homes, of our family, and more so of our 

communities. So I think it’s something that we ought to take the 

time to recognize. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I thank the members for allowing me 

the opportunity to express my gratitude to the volunteer fire 

brigades in northern Saskatchewan, encourage them to continue 

working hard and building up their fire brigade centres, and to 

let them know that we sincerely do appreciate and recognize 

their contribution to our northern communities. Thank you very 

much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and it once again is 

truly a pleasure to enter into debate on this particular Bill, Bill 

No. 72, The Traffic Safety Amendment, 2008. 

 

[15:15] 

 

As we note, Mr. Speaker, we look closely at this Bill, that it’s 

obviously we see that it has really two parts of both being 

distinct and separate. But, Mr. Speaker, we also recognize the 

value that exists within the changes that are being made here. 

They are quality changes and one that I would . . . And I don’t 

think anybody has any issue with — certainly not on this side of 

the House — with the quality of changes, the intent of the Bill, 

and I believe that we need to recognize that as we move 

forward. 



March 3, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2083 

The first part of the Bill is the enhanced driver’s licence aspect 

and it’s the first proposed amendment that provides 

Saskatchewan residents with an alternative identification source 

to a passport for the US land and water border crossings. The 

amendment will allow SGI or Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance to provide qualified Canadian citizens who are 

residents in Saskatchewan with the alternative form of an 

acceptable identification to the United States land and water 

border crossings in the form of an enhanced driver’s licence or 

an enhanced photo ID card. 

 

So that means, Mr. Speaker, even for those people who perhaps 

for one reason or another don’t have a driver’s licence, but they 

have no need for a driver’s licence or whatever the 

circumstances might be, they will still be able to obtain an 

enhanced photo ID card that will be acceptable by the US 

customs officers when they are entering into, Canadian citizens, 

Saskatchewan citizens are entering into the US either through a 

land port or a water port. And this will hopefully provide a 

comfort on a number of different fronts. 

 

As we know, the United States has been tightening up their 

borders and been tightening up the ability, I guess you would 

say, for entrance into the US to the point where they have now, 

if you are flying into the United States, the only identification 

they will accept is a passport. So far in Canada here we’ve been 

able to enter into the US with a photo ID of some type, two or 

three pieces of ID that would . . . [inaudible] . . . that would 

certainly be able to identify who we are, and that’s been 

acceptable. 

 

But it is in, I believe it’s June 1, 2009, the United States is 

going to require that those entering into its country through its 

borders, whether they be by air or by land or by port, to do so 

with only with a passport. But I believe there is the opportunity 

and an understanding that an enhanced driver’s licence 

containing the necessary information for the US customs 

officers will be also accepted to the entry into the US. 

 

So with this in mind, I’m pleased to see that SGI is taking the 

initiative and that this government is joining with other 

governments in Canada to provide its citizenship with that 

enhanced driver’s licence, or at least an enhanced photo 

identification card. 

 

The enhanced driver’s licence and the enhanced photo 

identification cards are a volunteer option for Saskatchewan 

residents to be purchased through SGI. They do not replace the 

requirements of having a passport to cross the border by air. I 

think that’s very important to remember and realize that if 

you’re travelling by air into the United States, you will still only 

have access if you have a passport. The enhanced photo ID 

identification card or the enhanced driver’s licence will not be 

acceptable if you are travelling by air. 

 

However they do provide the alternative for Saskatchewan 

residents who do not wish to have a passport or even want to 

perhaps go through the expense of getting a passport, or perhaps 

even the process of applying for and receiving a passport. They 

may feel that . . . Saskatchewan citizens may feel that for many, 

many years now they have had the access to the United States 

and able to enter into the United States with simply a photo ID 

and a driver’s licence and their health card. And they’ll still be 

able to enjoy that luxury; they don’t have to go to a passport. If 

they wish to enter the United States either through a land port or 

a seaport, they’ll be able do so with their enhanced driver’s 

licence and their enhanced photo ID card. 

 

So I think this is something that is going to be welcomed by 

Saskatchewan people. From my conversations with various 

groups across the province and various occasions over the last 

six months or so — certainly since our fall sitting and this Act 

came forward — I certainly found a lot of support for it out 

there, and I didn’t find any resistance. So I think it’s something 

that will be warmly welcomed by Saskatchewan people. 

 

The second part of this Bill, which has been covered in much 

greater detail by my colleague and done an excellent job of it 

. . . And that’s one thing, Mr. Speaker, I have learned through 

experience of sharing — not only the opportunity in the House 

here to speak, but on occasions sharing the platform with my 

colleague, the member from Regina Dewdney, on various 

organizations and various occasions — that I’ve learned that if 

you make the mistake of speaking after my colleague from 

Regina Dewdney, usually he leaves you very little to say, and 

very little time to say it in. But he did an excellent job here, and 

I want to thank him for expounding upon the virtues of the 

second part of this Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the second proposed amendment deals with 

allowing municipalities to designate vehicles owned by 

volunteer firefighters and first responders as emergency 

vehicles. The amendment will allow Saskatchewan 

municipalities to designate volunteer firefighters and first 

responders to operate their vehicle as emergency vehicles when 

responding to emergency situations. This will include using 

flashing red lights, sirens, and driving contrary to the rules of 

the road if, Mr. Speaker, it is done in a safe manner. 

 

And I think that’s very important because we have a lot of 

volunteers in our province, in fact in a lot of the firefighters and 

first responders. A lot of the safety aspects of our communities 

out there is done by our volunteers. And we need to recognize 

that fact and we need to be able to assist them in doing their job. 

I mean, they’re doing this on a volunteer basis. They could be 

doing other things, I’m sure. But they feel that closeness; they 

feel that need to give back to their communities and they 

participate in that way. And I think this is just one small way 

that we can assist them in accomplishing their job. 

 

In a lot of cases, perhaps the ability for them to use the red 

lights and use the sirens and not have to stop at stop signs and 

drive on occasion — in a safe manner — but contrary to the 

normal rules of the road, could even save somebody’s life. And 

I think that’s worth the expenditure of changing some rules 

here. 

 

To ensure the public safety, as well as their own safety, all 

volunteers, Mr. Speaker, will be required to complete an 

emergency defensive driving training before receiving this 

designation. Once designated, these volunteers will be 

recognized as being on the job as soon as they leave their home 

in responding to an emergency situation. So I think these 

changes are long overdue. I think they’re very much welcomed 

by the volunteer community across this great province and I’m 

pleased to see that they will be contained in this Bill. 



2084 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2009 

This amendment shows us to recognize the importance of 

volunteer firefighters and first responders in our province. 

These services are volunteers, Mr. Speaker, provided by some 

6,000 of them across Saskatchewan. They provide a service that 

is invaluable, Mr. Speaker, since they are the best known in 

their community. They are the best known for their specific 

needs. 

 

Municipal leaders will be allowed to authorize this designation. 

This includes making sure that the vehicles are mechanically fit 

and have proper lights and sirens, and they also ensure that 

these volunteers are adequately trained. So I don’t think, Mr. 

Speaker, that you can find much resistance to the intent of this 

Bill on this side of the House. 

 

I think if you visit across Saskatchewan and you ask 

Saskatchewan people, particularly the community leaders in our 

smaller communities, as to the value of this Bill, I think they 

will recognize that it is very worthwhile. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to conclude my remarks on 

Bill 72, The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, and move this Bill 

to committee. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion by the Minister of Crown Corporations that Bill No. 72, 

The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2008 be now read the 

second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this be 

moved to the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 

Agencies. 

 

The Speaker: — Bill No. 72 has been moved to the Committee 

on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

Bill No. 63 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 63 — The 

Saskatchewan Housing Corporation Amendment Act, 2008 be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour 

to rise to speak to second reading here on Bill No. 63, An Act to 

amend the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation Act. 

As general statements, Mr. Speaker, I guess at least, at least we 

could call this Bill housekeeping and at most we could call it a 

modernization that needs to occur on the board side, in the 

structural matter in how our board functions or how our boards 

function. Changes are certainly necessary to increase the size of 

the board, to enhance the ability of the board to respond to the 

community’s needs. So this is important, something that we 

support, Mr. Speaker, but we’d certainly argue that this is at 

best modernization, and a bit of a missed opportunity, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

As we open up this Bill and we put forward, you know, a very 

slim submission and change to this Bill, we had a whole other 

opportunity that’s been missed here. And it’s important to, 

when looking at this, to highlight I guess the context around the 

whole issue of housing. 

 

We’ve had a government change in the province and we had an 

economy that was in full stride, that was pumping on all 

cylinders, Mr. Speaker, with all the demands that an economy 

of that nature has. High, high increasing demand on housing 

within our province — and this isn’t something just within our 

urban centres of Regina and Saskatoon. It’s our smaller urban 

centres. It’s our towns. 

 

We’ve seen a significant reduction in the rental supply, Mr. 

Speaker, in this province, and when we see that through condo 

conversions and through rental conversions . . . And this is a 

challenge for Saskatchewan people. This is a challenge for 

families who are trying to locate and to make their way, trying 

to eke out a good existence for themselves. We need to look at 

the context of the huge rent increases that have occurred across 

our province, and again not isolated to any one or two or three 

communities, but right across Saskatchewan in different 

locations. And certainly this change doesn’t address that in any 

way. 

 

It’s important for us to be aware that, as a province with such a 

strong economy, that we’ve been leading the nation in inflation 

as well, Mr. Speaker. And a big part of why we’ve been leading 

the nation in inflation is the housing side of things, Mr. 

Speaker. The housing costs have really increased in our 

province and it’s placing large pressures on many, many people. 

In not addressing some of the housing circumstances, we 

further challenge our labour market needs. And we know, 

chatting with business people and businesses, that there’s such a 

demand for labour and for workers and for professionals. And 

to fill those gaps, it’s really important that we can provide 

housing to those individuals. 

 

Housing as a whole has such a broader function within society 

and it’s so important to individuals. And if you look at young 

families — any family — one of the greatest indicators of one’s 

socio-economic standing as an adult is sort of where they were 

born into. I think we should strive as a province, Mr. Speaker, 

to provide a province and a region that provides more vertical 

movement, Mr. Speaker, more opportunities to rise out of 

circumstances of poverty, and possibly lesser opportunities 

from the educational side and also from the labour 

opportunities. 

 

Adequate housing and how it relates to educational 

achievement for our students . . . I mean, we know that if your 



March 3, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2085 

stomach is not fed, it’s awfully difficult to learn in the 

classroom. The same could be said, Mr. Speaker, if housing 

isn’t taken care of. And there’s many children, many families 

for no fault of their own that are having many stresses placed 

upon them in this manner. And certainly if we look at 

accessibility of education, and our skills- and knowledge-based 

economy, and how we’re going to need to embrace that 

accessibility and to engage our young people with educational 

opportunities, housing becomes a real big part of that. So it’s 

when we’re looking at housing accessibility, you know, it’s 

important. We’re looking at tuition and these different roles that 

government plays, but it’s also really important to look at the 

role housing plays. 

 

[15:30] 

 

It’s important, Mr. Speaker, as I say, when we’re looking in that 

context that we’ve also had a year of record surpluses and 

record revenues as a government. The fiscal capacity to address 

some of these challenges . . . And I don’t contend that they’re 

exactly simple or easy, Mr. Speaker, but we need to make 

progress and it needs to start with investment. 

 

But specifically to Bill 63, The Saskatchewan Housing 

Corporation Amendment Act, I think it’s important to note that 

Saskatchewan’s housing authorities have long provided this 

province and our communities an invaluable service in making 

sure that individuals have the ability to obtain housing and to 

have adequate housing. They’re still an incredibly important 

mechanism to provide that housing in our communities — the 

Saskatchewan Housing Corporation itself so important in 

making this happen. 

 

So I guess, you know, I’d contend that although this 

modernization that we’re seeing on the board side needs to 

happen, that it also might seem that we have a government 

wanting to appear to be responding quickly to recommendations 

from the task force on affordable housing earlier this year, Mr. 

Speaker. But by responding with this one amendment to this 

important Act, to this critical issue, they’re really choosing 

some pretty low-hanging fruit, Mr. Speaker, to go after a very 

big issue and a really important issue, if we as a province are 

really going to benefit and grow and progress as we move 

forward. 

 

So I would certainly, I guess, challenge the government or task 

the government with looking at some of the other 

recommendations, both from within that affordable housing 

task force but also in other literature that exists out there. And it 

seems right now that the government’s hesitating to do so. 

They’ve picked kind of some of this low-hanging fruit, at the 

same time dismissed some more innovative and more 

meaningful, as far as the actual consequences for people, 

making affordable housing an improved circumstance for 

people here in the province. 

 

There’s such a need, just very simply, for us to increase the 

number of living accommodations, rental accommodations in 

this province, and make more spaces, make more units 

available. It’s fairly simple on that side, Mr. Speaker. I know in 

Saskatoon alone, reports have indicated that there’s 

approximately 3,500 units needed right now to allow it to 

sustain the needs of its population. This is important, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I could argue that there’s never been a more stressful time for 

people seeking shelter in this province. And this is within our 

so-called, you know, boom times. It’s really important that we 

balance where our investment . . . And we’re strategic in doing 

so to make sure that shelter and quality of life is ensured while 

we have new labour market opportunities, and hopefully while 

we have new educational opportunities. In the end, if we can 

marry these many challenges and work towards them, we’re 

going to progress as a society. 

 

You know, as we look at the issue, there has been a large 

reduction in rental properties on the market, and a lot of this has 

come out of some of the, I guess, condo conversions and also 

sale of rental properties that have certainly appreciated in value. 

And it’s important that we create an environment that allows 

rental, our rental supply to grow and to be addressed. 

 

It’s worthwhile that, you know, when we look at some of the 

. . . who’s using our food banks in our province now, it’s 

important for us to recognize that there’s been a huge increase 

in workers and in students using these food banks. And this is 

indicative of just how cost of living is a large pressure, and it’s 

just difficult to kind of get your footing in, you know, in society 

and within our cities and within our province. And it’s 

important that as a government we work to allow people to 

achieve these goals. 

 

When the task force was first struck and reviews the 

circumstances of housing in the province and makes 

recommendations, the government must review the 

recommendations and seriously move in the direction of some 

of the things that are needed most. We need to work towards 

progress on this file. 

 

There is a recommendation specifically to help vulnerable 

people who don’t always have the cash to deal with security 

deposits or first and last month’s rent. The government should 

be moving on . . . this is something we think the government 

should be moving on, and I think it’s classified sort of in terms 

of sort of a rental bank and could add some stability within our 

economy and provide some certainty in the housing 

circumstance of many, many people in our province. 

 

You know, a rental bank wouldn’t be about giving out gifts to 

individuals who were going to be wasteful with these dollars. 

It’s about taking care of a human, a human right, arguably — 

that being the right to shelter. And by taking care of some of 

these security deposit challenges for families, I think we only 

see a bigger, larger benefit when we know that that family and 

those children have adequate housing. 

 

In addressing matters like increasing the size of the board, the 

Sask Party should also increase the number of units for 

vulnerable people within our communities. We’ve had an 

announcement recently with some dollars flowing to housing, 

but the shame, Mr. Speaker, is we’re a year into a new 

government and, you know, it took well over a year, Mr. 

Speaker, to see a new project to be funded and announced. 

 

And this is a year, as I’ve said, I place in context the huge 

challenges of a booming economy that this places on people, so, 



2086 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2009 

and in the fiscal capacity of a government to be acting on this. 

And quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, it shouldn’t just be that those 

booming revenues that allows a government to act on 

something like housing. It should be because it’s quite simply 

the right thing to do. 

 

So the new dollars that were finally made available, I know that 

in fine Sask Party fashion, it also . . . there was much 

back-patting and self-congratulation that went with this. But 

again, Mr. Speaker, I would argue they’re simply doing what 

they should be doing by making sure the people of this province 

have adequate housing; to make sure that the children that are 

going to our schools are housed in safe and adequate housing; 

to make sure that the businesses who are screaming for workers 

and needing workers to continue to sustain the economic 

opportunities, we need to make sure that they can access 

workers who could be housed in safe living environments. 

 

It’s so important, as you know. We look at children. As a 

stabilizing factor in children’s lives, housing is absolutely 

integral that that can go on. This is where something like this 

rent bank might have some significant merit in making sure that 

children don’t have to be moving from school to school to 

school to school in one calendar year because we know that this 

really doesn’t assist them in their academics. We know that it 

significantly challenges student achievement and their social 

well-being and how they’re going to grow and develop. 

 

There has been some good work done, Mr. Speaker, in this 

province, and some focus on housing by different groups, one 

of those groups being the University of Saskatchewan student 

union. And before I cite that, I guess I would make note that 

we’re fully supportive and have called for and pleased to see the 

government finally moving there as far as investing into this 

critical need which is student housing. And this is simply 

recognizing the actual scope of the Act with regard to student 

housing, and it’s a really important and meaningful investment. 

And there is a project that we certainly welcome and champion 

and cheer for up in Saskatoon up at the U of S [University of 

Saskatchewan]. 

 

But of course, Mr. Speaker, that challenges of housing for 

students specifically, and it’s not just students affected by 

housing as I’ve talked about. It’s across our whole cross-section 

of society. But if we’re looking at housing for students 

specifically, those aren’t isolated to Saskatoon. We also could 

expand and support Regina. We could also look at our regional 

college system across the province, and so many of those 

communities growing and having pressures on them from the 

strength in the economy. 

 

I look to the member from Estevan, and I mean the whole 

purpose of a regional college is to provide accessible education 

and to sort of have a successful transition from possibly high 

school. And those regional colleges play such a precious role, 

so I’m pleased to see the scope of the Act being employed, that 

being into student housing. But we need to look beyond this 

investment at Saskatoon and set our sights further and where 

are we going next. 

 

I did mention the U of S, the University of Saskatchewan 

Students’ Union report on housing and residency, and I 

wouldn’t mind sharing. This was released on February 2, 2009. 

I wouldn’t mind sharing just a little bit of information from this 

very worthwhile report, and it’s been really well put together, 

well researched. I quote: 

 

“Students continue to face a big challenge for finding 

decent, affordable housing in Saskatoon,” said Shannon 

Dyck, USSU VP Student Issues who compiled the report. 

“Students must have an adequate place to live if they are 

to excel in their studies and personal development,” said 

Dyck. “Living in inadequate spaces greatly diminishes the 

student experience, which hurts the student as much as it 

does the University.” 

 

This is a compelling quote, Mr. Speaker, and certainly right on 

the mark as far as the real consequences of inadequate housing 

for students. But the report doesn’t just highlight some of the 

challenges that exist. It also goes into recommending some 

action. So the report’s recommendations include, and I’ll quote 

these: 

 

Adequate funding for U of S projects that increase student 

housing on or near campus, as recommended by the 

Provincial Task Force on Housing Affordability; 

 

Updating Saskatchewan Student Loans’ funding to 

accurately reflect the needs of students; 

 

Looking to other Provinces and cities that have already 

experienced similar housing booms, then reviewing and 

adopting certain policies that have helped them stabilize 

their rental markets; 

 

Creating steps to ensure landlord accountability and 

increase awareness of landlord/tenant responsibilities; 

 

Reevaluating Saskatoon’s Condominium Approvals 

Policy due to the repercussion of increased condo 

conversions; and, 

 

Keeping open communication between all levels of 

government and key stakeholders with regard to 

Saskatoon housing. 

 

So these are the report’s recommendations, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I certainly thank the student union of the University of 

Saskatchewan for the work that they’ve done on this file. And, 

you know, just to pluck a couple there, I mean, certainly the 

Saskatchewan student loans program right now, I believe the 

allocation is in the upper 300s for recognizing the cost of living. 

I know that other studies will indicate that this doesn’t come 

close to the actual cost that students are incurring, and the 

actual cost being more in the range — and I don’t have the 

exact numbers, Mr. Speaker — but I think I’m very fair to say 

that between 4 to $600, and that’s substantiated within the 

report. 

 

I think it’s worthwhile as well, where we have this conversation 

within this Assembly, to comment that it’s not just this 

Assembly that’s looking at housing. We could look federally, 

and there’s currently a Bill being looked at there, I guess, that’s 

been put forward and is being debated, and that’s Bill C-304. 

And this asserts . . . is on the premise that housing is a 



March 3, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2087 

fundamental human right. 

 

And certainly if we think about your very basic needs, shelter’s 

right there, Mr. Speaker. And we know that without providing 

shelter that the development and normal development, the 

healthy development to rich and full lives that we certainly 

want to see our children being able to come to realize, is 

significantly hindered and potentially barriered by inadequate 

housing. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we really do need something so much more, 

and this modernization of the board, we welcome it. This is 

something we need to see happen. But let’s look grander here, 

you know — what is our vision. And we don’t see one right 

now. Opening up this Act, there was real opportunities to make 

a real difference, and we haven’t done that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I might just highlight some of the articles that certainly support 

the need that exists in housing in the province, Mr. Speaker. 

And I look to the Leader-Post on November 19 with an article 

that is stated as, “Housing shortage still exists: expert” that’s 

provided this assessment. I’ll quote a little bit here, and this is 

quoting Keith Hanson, executive director of Affordable New 

Home Development Foundation. I quote, “He says governments 

and the housing industry must ask themselves what the need for 

housing is, and find ways to measure the need.” 

 

It goes on: 

 

Hanson sees housing needs either present or developing in 

several demographic groups. 

 

Seniors, for example, require appropriate and safe 

housing. Many seniors are struggling to survive, failing in 

health, and losing independence. They represent one 

market that must be served better by housing [Mr. 

Speaker]. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know we can think of the seniors within our 

constituencies, seniors within our lives, and the importance and 

the value to make sure that that quality of life is there for them. 

These seniors that have put so much into the building of our 

province. 

 

The articles goes on, and I quote: 

 

The aboriginal community also requires better urban 

housing. 

 

He met with one aboriginal family who had lived in 

Saskatoon for 30 years, but did not yet feel as if the city 

was its home. 

 

“I found that really disturbing,” said Hanson. 

 

Low income families round out the five top groups that 

must be served by affordable housing, he said. 

 

And again, just highlighting some of the need. 

 

Another article here, Mr. Speaker, from The StarPhoenix on 

November 26. Title of the article: “Students, workers using 

food bank.” This is what I highlighted before, Mr. Speaker, that 

it’s non-traditional groups — at least from a stereotypical 

perspective — are using the food bank. And that’s because of 

the huge increases in the cost of living, and the lack of action 

from this government in being able to meet those needs. I 

quote: 

 

A lot of those people were first-time users, says 

Merriman. 

 

Even though Saskatchewan is still booming, Merriman 

expects the number of visitors to increase as economic 

uncertainty grows and the cost of living continues to 

climb. 

 

“The gap between the haves and the have-nots just gets 

greater,” he said, noting the “stereotypical image” of the 

food bank user is a thing of the past. 

 

“These people have jobs,” he said. “They’re working and 

they’re still trying to make ends meet.” 

 

[Mr. Speaker] Merriman’s observations are in line with 

HungerCount’s findings. The study showed 20 per cent of 

the food bank clients are employed. 

 

Merriman says the food bank has seen a sharp increase in 

the number of post-secondary students using the service. 

 

And very clearly I’d like to highlight this point, I quote: 

 

The lack of affordable housing in the city is to blame. 

 

“Housing is still a major issue for students in Saskatoon,” 

said Shannon Dyck, vice-president of student issues for 

the University of Saskatchewan . . . “The student 

experience is diminished when housing is a daily 

concern.” 

 

It goes on and talks about some of the supports that the 

University of Saskatchewan is trying to provide students from 

its institution with regard to housing and with regard to food. 

 

In Regina, Mr. Speaker, there’s an article here from the 

Leader-Post, November 18, 2008, titled “Regina city councillor 

wants more from province on affordable housing.” What I’m 

doing . . . Oh, and the . . . Right. So the minister just stopped the 

speech. I’m very glad she’s listening here now. 

 

I did highlight a little while back and certainly did say that 

we’re glad to see that the scope of the Act is being employed, 

and that there has been this full range of student housing, and 

that the minister has mentioned that they are doing a project of 

course in Saskatoon and in Prince Albert. But there are so many 

communities as well. And I know this is a starting point and 

there’s . . . And this is a starting point here right now. But we do 

have so many other small communities with regional colleges 

and certainly many of our other cities that have student housing 

needs as well. So I’d say, good, but let’s keep the ball rolling. 

 

Going back to the article here, one of the city councillors here 

in Regina is cited as saying: 



2088 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2009 

“The thing about housing is choice,” he said. 

 

“Right now, the choice at the low end is almost not there. 

At 1.4-per-cent vacancy (rate), it is almost not there.” 

 

Clipsham insisted that the province needs to act on the 

recommendations of the Task Force on [affordable] 

Housing . . . and create an . . . housing policy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s not just people in Saskatchewan that want to 

see progress on poverty. I can cite a report here that was put 

forward — Canwest News Service on October 27 — an article 

entitled “A majority of Canadians want government action,” the 

study finds. And as I go into this article, basically it just shows 

such large support — 90 per cent support — for addressing 

poverty in this country. And I know the same is here in 

Saskatchewan. We care about our neighbours and we want to 

see our circumstances improved. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think I’ve highlighted some of my comments 

where we welcome the modernization of the board. We see that 

as something that’s important, but we want to see so much 

more. The people of this province need so much more. We push 

and challenge this government to offer much more. It was 

incredibly disturbing to see a year of such fiscal capacity 

without new announcements coming online when they really 

could have made a difference for people in our province. 

 

But at this time, Mr. Speaker, on Bill No. 63, The Saskatchewan 

Housing Corporation Amendment Act, I’m going to adjourn 

debate as I know many more of our members would like to 

speak on this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Rosemont has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 63, The 

Saskatchewan Housing Corporation Amendment Act, 2008. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 67 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 67 — The 

Education Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2)/Loi n
o
 2 de 2008 

modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again it’s my 

honour to rise to speak to Bill No. 67, The Education 

Amendment Act. And we’ve got questions and comments about 

this Bill. I know that . . . I guess on the very front of this Bill, 

Mr. Speaker, an Act that goes about with intent to address 

teachers who might be, have acted in a way that could be found 

to be professional misconduct. Hopefully, Mr. Speaker, it’s a 

rare circumstance that this Act is employed. 

As far as the intent of making sure that our children are safe and 

secure in their school environments and that our teachers are 

held to high accountability, we have no argument with that 

intent, Mr. Speaker. But we do have many questions, Mr. 

Speaker, about how this Bill has been put together and how it’s 

been derived, and we have some concerns. 

 

My very basic questions I would have is, what was the rush 

with this, Mr. Speaker? What was the rush in getting this Bill 

into the House? I know that it’s been cited that it’s been 

inspired because of the interjurisdictional protocol with regard 

to teacher certification, of 1999, Mr. Speaker, but what was the 

rush that all of a sudden had this Bill being presented in the 

Assembly this past fall? 

 

And the reason I say that, Mr. Speaker, is it was a surprise, Mr. 

Speaker, to the sector stakeholders within education when this 

Bill was presented. And it was a surprise, Mr. Speaker, because 

the education sector has a long-standing history and practice of 

being fully involved in the deliberation and input into the 

construction of legislation.  

 

And when this Bill was brought forward, there had been a little 

bit of initial correspondence with stakeholders, with promise, 

Mr. Speaker, from the ministry — and I have written statements 

to prove this — that there was going to be much more to follow 

up — forums and places for the education sector to be able to 

share their respective concerns and their comments and their 

ways to make the legislation stronger or to make it work or to 

represent their members’ needs. 

 

It’s never happened, Mr. Speaker. So this is an ill-considered 

piece of, ill-derived piece of legislation that’s been created 

within a vacuum, Mr. Speaker. The Sask Party’s consultation 

process is fundamentally flawed on this Bill, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

complete departure from the ways of consultation and 

deliberation that’s gone on with stakeholders in education 

through the history of our province, Mr. Speaker. I’m going 

back, quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, through many different stripes 

of government — and when I say stripes, many different 

political stripes of government. 

 

So we’re concerned about what happened here, Mr. Speaker. 

Was this deliberate? Is this a new process in deriving education 

policy in this province? Or was this a mistake? Was this a 

learning process for this ministry and for this minister? 

 

The Act appears to copy what has been done in other 

jurisdictions. But without taking into account what can be 

learned from the experience, certainly when we look at the 

interjurisdictional protocol with regard to teacher certificates, 

certification, Mr. Speaker, it’s not hugely . . . doesn’t describe 

the process in a real constrained manner. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of latitude that this minister was 

afforded and this ministry was afforded to meet the intent of the 

interjurisdictional protocol. There wasn’t one process that had 

to be employed. However the minister choose to go forward 

with one process and to do so without the full consultation and 

engagement of the education stakeholders. 

 

And I know that since the tabling of this Bill that the minister 

and the ministry has been in many, many meetings with the 



March 3, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2089 

stakeholders who have been able to share their direct input and 

concern. This should have happened though, Mr. Speaker, 

before this Bill was placed on the Table. 

 

Before it was read into this Assembly, stakeholders should have 

been well aware of when and where they could have offered 

their input. They should have come together, had the 

opportunity to come together as a group of sector stakeholders 

to understand each of the partners’ concerns and implications 

and to be well aware what this Bill, when it was placed on the 

Table, what it contained and to know what it meant in reality 

for their members. 

 

And it’s not picking one sector partner over another in feeling 

that they weren’t consulted with, Mr. Speaker. Across the entire 

education sector, and I’m certainly not going to point fingers 

too directly here, but basically all of the partners have expressed 

that consultation process was a huge departure from what it has 

been in the past. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when we have good organizations such as 

the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation and the Saskatchewan 

School Boards Association and we have LEADS [League of 

Educational Administrators, Directors and Superintendents] — 

our educational administrators — and our business officials, 

and we have very effective organizations, member 

organizations that are there for a purpose. We need to utilize 

these organizations to bring forward and make sure our policies 

and our legislation addresses both the intent of where it’s trying 

to go, but respects the needs of those member organizations. 

 

Some of the partners, quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, are clear that 

this Bill as it stands here right now is unworkable, that we have 

a Bill that’s been put forward through hasty consultation or lack 

thereof, and now we have a Bill that’s unworkable. So while the 

intent of this Bill is certainly not necessarily a concern, the 

process of how this Bill has been derived is certainly a concern, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, I would argue that the approach . . . The Sask 

Party’s approach to consultation on this Bill, specifically Bill 

67, threatens long-standing relationships within the education 

sector and really important relationships that exist between 

ministry and minister and those sector partners to derive policy 

that, as I’ve said, achieves the intent desired by the minister or 

by protocols that we’re trying to comply with, but also respects 

those member organizations who bring so much, Mr. Speaker, 

to the table that one minister or select ministry officials might 

not be able to recognize on their own. 

 

So I go back, Mr. Speaker, to kind of questioning, I guess, what 

was the rush. Why did this Bill get placed on the Table? And 

why were the stakeholders so surprised with the content of this 

Bill and that it was ready to be tabled? They felt that they were 

still in drafting stages as this came to the House. I guess I would 

have some questions specifically. And I think these questions 

. . . Of course I can’t have questions answered in this forum, 

Mr. Speaker, but I think we’ll look for questions in committee, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it’s my understanding that there’s possibly going to be 

some changes coming forward here that are really valuable. 

And to be honest, Mr. Speaker, that’s why I’m not plugging 

really hard here, Mr. Speaker, and going after the minister on 

failing at this point because I know that the minister’s been 

engaged and the ministry’s been involved in numerous 

meetings with sector stakeholders since the last time. So we’re 

going to see some changes or some amendments presented, 

hopefully, Mr. Speaker, at the committee level. And this, at that 

point, is going to be able to allow us to see and to work with the 

sector partners to see where the dust settles on this Bill. 

 

[16:00] 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, some of the questions that I, you know, I 

think that the partners have and that we would have is just, you 

know, where did this come from, other than I know we relate it 

back to this interprovincial protocol. It seems to have been 

rushed in a broader way. Was there any other push from any 

other level of government to have this come in line, or from any 

other provincial jurisdictions? 

 

Questions around the process right now that’s been described as 

members as a convoluted process, a process that’s not 

incredibly workable and not effective. We’re going to see if 

there’s some amendments to ensure that that changes. 

 

We also want to make sure — and we’ll have questions to make 

sure that principles of natural justice are upheld throughout this 

process — to make sure that all individuals are afforded due 

process in that we want to make sure that . . . We would have 

questions I guess around how is this going to align with the 

current professional controls and governance controls that exist 

within the teaching profession? 

 

Because we’re not going to argue about intent, Mr. Speaker, on 

this Bill. We’re striving towards the same thing on that — 

highly accountable education and safe classrooms, Mr. Speaker. 

But it’s how we get there that we might end up having to have 

some further questions and discussions. 

 

I don’t know, Mr. Speaker, if we’re going to have a clarification 

of what the definition of misconduct is. We’re interested in 

making sure that we understand what misconduct defines for 

teachers. 

 

And there’s other questions as well about . . . I guess questions 

we might have is, does the minister have any concerns from a 

jurisdictional perspective with regard to band schools and band 

teachers? Does the minister recognize that mutual terminations 

have a benefit to school boards and as effective process? And 

will mutual terminations and his desire to move away from that 

process . . . Will he reinstate that process through some of the 

changes? We would like to see that discussion occur. 

 

And we know, Mr. Speaker, that most of the members are well 

supported, as far as teachers, are well supported by the 

Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation. But we do have 

independent schools as well, Mr. Speaker, and independent 

teachers who work for those schools. We need to make sure that 

they’re afforded due process, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we do have lots of questions that are very important to the 

sector partners, very important to education in our province, 

Mr. Speaker. Will this legislation actually work? And I guess 

that’s part of the . . . You know, will it be effective in its intent? 



2090 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2009 

And we look forward to discussions around this. Certainly as it 

stands right now, without changes, there’s contentions to the 

otherwise, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I am pleased to hear that amendments and changes are 

coming, and I’m certainly not going to prejudge what those 

amendments are. 

 

I know it’s been important to some of the business officials, Mr. 

Speaker, that their voice has been heard and their role 

recognized within the education system, and that their 

qualifications are identified and that they’re valued within 

legislation. And we want to make sure that through legislation 

and through regulation, that that is certainly ensured. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I know that many of these questions, many of 

these concerns, could have been . . . [inaudible] . . . a long time 

ago. The sector partners should have been and could have been 

brought together and fully engaged in deriving this policy when 

this Bill would have been placed onto the table . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . The minister says, would’ve, should’ve, 

could’ve. And I agree with him on all those pieces. And so I’m 

glad now that the sector’s been engaged with the minister and 

with his ministry, and we’ll see what kind of changes are going 

to be brought forward. 

 

And again, I’m not going to prejudge those — whether those 

will meet the needs that exist out there, whether they’re going 

to fall short. And hopefully in the end, Mr. Speaker, we have a 

piece of legislation that respects the needs of our member 

organizations that have such a rich history of deriving policy or 

working with ministries to derive policy in this province. And 

hopefully we have a Bill that achieves the intent desired by the 

interprovincial protocol, which offers huge latitude, Mr. 

Speaker, to this minister. 

 

At this point, Mr. Speaker, I’ve got lots of good questions for 

committee. There’s going to be lots of good consultation that’s 

going to occur on this side and on that side with regard to the 

potential changes that are put forward. But I’d like to say, Mr. 

Speaker, we welcome those changes, and we look forward to 

further discussion and debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? The 

question before the Assembly is the motion by the Minister of 

Education that Bill No. 67, The Education Amendment Act, 

2008 be now read the second time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee will this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It will be 

referred to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Committee on 

Human Services. 

 

Bill No. 69 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 69 — The 

Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 

2008/Loi de 2008 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur l’exécution des 

ordonnances alimentaires be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to rise and make comments and join the debate on Bill 

No. 69, The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act, and it 

also makes related amendments to The Workers’ Compensation 

Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe there’s any of us probably in this 

Assembly that hasn’t, at one time or another, received a call to 

our constituency office from a family or a parent that is having 

difficulty with the enforcement of maintenance orders and 

issues that can arise. And for many of these people that can be 

single parents — any number of children — but when the court 

has made an order, there is an expectation that it will be 

followed and that as law -abiding citizens, we just follow the 

law. 

 

But that isn’t always the case. And I know often you will get 

calls at the constituency office from parents and families that 

are absolutely at their wits’ end, not sure what they should do 

because they rely on this income. It’s been ordered by the court. 

So every expectation is there that it will be forthcoming to 

support the family and the children. And many people have 

difficulty collecting and having a regular income coming in for 

their family. 

 

So it’s always interesting and always an issue when you see 

where this whole process can go wrong and what needs to be 

put in place to address the issues and make sure that the support 

payments are forthcoming, that families and children are able to 

maintain a quality of life and move forward with their lives in 

the changed circumstance that they are. So, Mr. Speaker, it’s 

very important that the enforcement of maintenance orders 

continues to evolve because as we move along, as people 

become more mobile — as we may move from province to 

province or city to city — it can be even more difficult to 

enforce maintenance orders that are in place. And it can mean 

extended periods of time where you are struggling to make ends 

meet, can mean extended periods of time where you are living 

with that uncertainty 

 

And I’m sure all of us as MLAs have received calls at our 

constituency office and have tried our best to address the issues 

that are put before us and to be able to achieve some, well to be 

able to receive some support for these families and give them 

the support that we can as MLAs. 

 

So as we deal with these issues, there’s often glitches in the 

system. There’s always circumstance that are unusual but there 

are often circumstances that will be repeats at our office when 



March 3, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2091 

we get the phone calls. 

 

So this legislation is one that really has been in a process of 

continual evolving to meet the needs that are out there and to 

meet the, I guess to meet the needs that are out there, but also to 

meet the needs of the families that are involved. And we need to 

make sure that the changes are appropriate and that the changes 

don’t have unintended consequences. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’ve had a look at the legislation, I’ve had a 

look at the comments that the minister made when the 

legislation and the changes were tabled, but also I’ve had a look 

at the comments that were made from members from our side of 

the House, and how they viewed the changes and what 

impacted them. 

 

And when I’ve gone through not only the Bill itself but the 

explanation of the changes that are being put before us, I guess 

the first one that really impacted me, and that I feel truly is an 

important part of this, it really is that it puts the families first, as 

a first priority when there is . . . What it does, it establishes a 

priority for maintenance orders over any other unsecured debt, 

other than another maintenance order. And that really does put 

the family’s needs first. 

 

The last thing we want is that families would be having to wait 

for other demands on that income, other demands on those 

assets that are there, before family members being able to 

access monies that had been ordered as support payments for 

them. What it does also is it extends the priority that currently 

exists in the Act where property is seized and money is realized 

to a situation other than where property is seized. This defines 

more appropriately the processes that need to be followed. And 

the new provision also will limit the priority of a maintenance 

order to an amount equal to one year’s payments. 

 

Now there may be some that would argue or disagree with this 

point, especially when we are looking at some cases where 

there may be unusual amounts of monies that are owing, but we 

also have to be reasonable and we have to make sure that all 

circumstance are taken into consideration when the decisions 

are made. 

 

In the explanation for section 15(1), it also talks about the 

money received by the director pursuant to this section cannot 

be attached or garnisheed by another creditor. So that is 

important because in clear language it really puts the family 

first. And I truly believe that that’s where the priority should be. 

 

Also when we look at the changes that are made, it allows the 

director to use his or her discretion to enforce against a lower 

amount of ongoing support where an order is made for the 

support of two or more children. So in other words, if the 

original order had been issued for two or three children, and one 

of those children ceases to be a dependant — whether they have 

reached the legal age — instead of having to reapply for a new 

order, the director can use his or her discretion to enforce 

against a lower amount of ongoing support. So this gives more 

flexibility in the original orders, and it also should make the 

system easier for families to deal with. 

 

I can remember quite clearly one of the cases that we had dealt 

with from our office where an order had been issued. Some of 

the circumstances had been changed, and the only recourse was 

to go back through the process and make another application for 

an order to be issued. So instead of the director having some 

discretion to reassess, and whether it is for one child or another 

no longer being a dependant or whether some of the other issues 

had changed, that flexibility was not there. And there was a 

constant stress and a constant pressure on the parties waiting for 

maintenance orders to be enforced, relying on those dollars and 

that support for their family’s day-to-day needs. They would 

have to again go through a process of reapplying for an order. 

So, Mr. Speaker, this is something that I believe will be well 

received throughout the community and throughout those that 

rely on maintenance enforcement to assist them whenever their 

problems arise with the orders that they have. 

 

One of the other sections that is new to the Act is section 40.5 

through 40.91. And what it does, it’s added to allow the 

maintenance enforcement office to attach money set aside to 

create an annuity pursuant to section 74 of The Workers’ 

Compensation Act, 1979. So what this does, Mr. Speaker, it 

puts workers’ compensation annuity . . . If you are on benefits 

for 24 months or longer, if you are a worker that is receiving 

WC [workers’ compensation] benefits, there is a process where 

an annuity is set aside for you in lieu of pension, so you will 

have ongoing income when you reach the age of retirement. 

 

[16:15] 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, as many people will know, pensions and 

RRSPs [Registered Retirement Savings Plan] can be attached 

through support payments, but there was no access to the 

annuity that is payable through WCBs [Workers’ Compensation 

Board]. So this changes that. And what it does, it ends up 

bringing WCB annuity in line with what has been a traditional 

practice or an ongoing practice in the way that pensions and 

RRSPs are dealt with. So I believe that this is good; it is a good 

move for families. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you go through the legislation, you will also 

see laid out in point form how the attachments will occur when 

the changes to The Workers’ Compensation Act, and this 

mirrors the attachment of pension provisions that are currently 

within the Act. But it also allows the director to enforce a 

maintenance order by attaching an annuity if, and it lays out 

criteria that have to be met and it also lays out how the notice 

will be given to both the board and the payor, how the notice of 

an attachment will be handled. And also the notice of intention 

requires the board to provide the information regarding the 

annuity within 30 days to the director and to the payor. 

 

So there are some guidelines, some very specific guidelines that 

need to be met, notices that have to be given. And that’s all 

contained within the legislation. So, Mr. Speaker, I believe that 

that is a good improvement to the maintenance enforcement 

Act. 

 

There is also a number of areas within the maintenance 

enforcement Act that will allow for the suspension of, if 

someone is delinquent in the payments that they have a 

responsibility for, there has to be written notice given, and it 

tells you how that notice can be given — there’s a couple of 

options — but the director can direct the administrator to 

suspend a respondent’s licence. 



2092 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2009 

So this is a pretty drastic way of addressing the issue of 

delinquent payments. But, Mr. Speaker, it has proven to be 

fairly successful over the past few years that it’s been in force 

where we have seen some substantial numbers of payments; and 

driver’s licence suspensions have been enacted, and 

maintenance enforcement offices have suspended a total of 

4,463 drivers’ licences, and that was up until the fall of last 

year. So that’s pretty significant because we don’t take this step 

. . . the step is not taken if there isn’t a number of months of 

delinquent payments, and it really comes as a bit of a last choice 

for sure before this type of move is made. 

 

Also we can look at existing provisions that are within the Act. 

There is some changes that are being proposed. And when it 

comes to the suspension of driver’s licence, there is an addition 

to require that where a suspension is cancelled as a result of a 

suitable payment arrangement having been made, there is some 

criteria that needs to be met and “the director shall notify the 

payor that the suspension . . . [can] be revived if, within 12 

months, the payor fails to follow through with the payment 

arrangements.” 

 

So this Act, in a number of places what it does, it gives that 

flexibility and instead of having to stop and start the process all 

over again if there’s been payment made, it can be revived 

through a certain period of time if those payments fall into 

arrears again. 

 

So suspending a driver’s licence, that’s pretty drastic, but it has 

been used in a number of cases. And, Mr. Speaker, when people 

do not accept the responsibilities that they have for their own 

actions — and obviously too many are not taking the 

responsibility for the orders of the court that have been assigned 

to them —and if that responsibility isn’t taken, then, Mr. 

Speaker, I fully agree with the changes that are being made and, 

as drastic as they may seem, at some point in time they’re 

necessary for sure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is also a number of other changes that are 

made. First and foremost some housekeeping . . . But it’s all 

worthwhile and, Mr. Speaker, I want to say again that it is 

important that the maintenance enforcement process continues 

to evolve and that we continue to put in place the changes that 

are necessary to meet the needs of those that rely on these 

maintenance orders. They can be in pretty dire circumstance if 

these orders are not being enforced and if the payments are not 

being made in a timely fashion. So I think all of us would agree 

that any changes to the maintenance enforcement Act are good 

changes indeed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do want to say since this program has been put in 

place, Saskatchewan really has an excellent record of 

maintenance enforcement. This program has been very highly 

spoken of and I think has been very successful in the work that 

they do, and perhaps it is one of the best programs in Canada. 

 

And while this legislation is about further improving the 

maintenance enforcement program and ensuring that our justice 

system is there to ensure that a court order results in benefits 

being received, first and foremost that’s what it needs to do. 

And as we move along, I’m sure we’ll continue to see this Act 

evolve. We will see changes made on an as-needed basis to 

make sure that families will always be first and that as adults 

we need to be responsible for our actions in life. And children, 

of course, are where one of our main responsibilities are and to 

make sure that they are adequately cared for and that we follow 

through with the responsibilities that we have as adults. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, that’s a number of the comments that I wanted 

to make on the Act, but I know that some of my colleagues also 

have comments that they would like to make on the 

maintenance enforcement Act. And with that I would adjourn 

debate on Bill 69. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Moose Jaw Wakamow has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 69, The Enforcement 

of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 2008. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 60 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 60 — The Senate 

Nominee Election Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 

rejoin the debate on the Senate election nominee Bill, the 

so-called Senate election nominee program, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It was said of the Holy Roman Empire that it was none of holy 

or Roman or an empire. And I think it can be fairly said of the 

democratic election nominee proposal from the government that 

it’s none of democratic, an election, or even a nominee or 

nomination program, Mr. Speaker. Now I assume that there are 

aspects of the Holy Roman Empire that were actually holy, and 

there might even have been some Roman connection, and there 

was probably some imperial ambitions, if nothing else, Mr. 

Speaker. So it was a kind of blanket statement, and it’s rather a 

blanket statement to say that this Bill is not democratic or an 

election or a nomination. I think it has some tone of that. 

There’s some gloss there. There’s an image that’s being cast. 

But in fact when you look beyond the smoke and mirrors, really 

it does have nothing to do with democracy or elections or 

nominations. And if that wasn’t clear, Mr. Speaker, the first 

time I rose to speak to this Bill last fall, the Prime Minister 

made it very clear since, Mr. Speaker, that the Bill is a sham. 

And the promise of the Prime Minister on which the Bill rests is 

a sham. So even if the Bill itself was not a sham, its foundation 

has been swept away by the actions of the Prime Minister. 

 

Now I want to address each of those aspects of democracy — 

an election, a nominee — briefly. We have an opportunity, Mr. 

Speaker, in a couple of different ways to actually find out 

democratically what the people of Saskatchewan would like. 

One is that we could have a plebiscite, Mr. Speaker. Now I 

understand that the members opposite didn’t . . . would have 

said last sitting, oh no, oh we’ve got a vacancy. We don’t have 

time to see if the people of Saskatchewan even want to continue 

with an anachronistic-appointed Senate because we’ve a 



March 3, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2093 

vacancy to fill and we want to fill it.  

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we don’t have a vacancy any more. And as a 

matter of fact, we won’t have a vacancy before 2011. And if the 

government really cares about democracy, really cares about 

what people think about this institution, whether this institution 

can be changed or whether this institution should continue to 

exist more into the 21st century than it already has, Mr. Speaker 

— an appointed upper house in a modern democracy of Canada 

— whether this should continue or not, well now we have the 

opportunity, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we have no pressing vacancy any longer. The Prime 

Minister relieved us of that. That was his commitment to an 

election senate — much like his commitment to fixed election 

dates, Mr. Speaker. It was about as real. It was about as 

substantial. It was about as sincere as that, Mr. Speaker. It was 

about as sincere as that — maybe even less so, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But since he introduced his fixed election legislation, well he 

called an election and not on the fixed date. And since he 

promised that he would honour provinces who wanted to elect 

senators or nominate senators by some kind of polling process, 

well no, not really, Mr. Speaker, he didn’t really want to do 

that.  

 

What he really wanted to do was what prime ministers have 

done before and at least been honest about it, Mr. Speaker — at 

least they have been honest about it. But now if the government 

was committed to democracy, that would be certainly an option 

to them and that option will remain, that option will certainly 

exist in 2011. They could tag it onto the election vote. It 

wouldn’t cost any more than whatever we would’ve been doing, 

electing a senator in the vacancy that a senator’s already been 

appointed by the Prime Minister who supposedly supports the 

election of senators, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The government impresses me in this respect on this Bill. I 

think it took something, it took something to bring this Bill 

back for debate after what the Prime Minister did. I mean, after 

the Prime Minister stepped back from his fixed election date 

promise and stepped back from his nominee suggestion to the 

province — they stepped back from that — for them still to 

bring forward a piece of legislation that is now completely 

irrelevant, Mr. Speaker, shows something on the part of the 

government, and I think I would call it chutzpah. I’m just 

surprised. 

 

And I know the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy has already 

risen to speak, so he can’t answer this on this Bill. But I wonder 

if any member opposite wants to explain exactly what the intent 

of bringing this Bill back for debate was, Mr. Speaker. And 

what is the intent? I mean the Prime Minister has said, oops, 

sorry, I’m pulling the chair away from you. Except I don’t think 

he told them that first. They fall to the floor. They get back up, 

and they say, oh we’re going to carry on with the Bill. There’s 

been a senator appointed and members opposite know it. So I 

think it took a lot of chutzpah. I think it’s maybe difficult to 

explain why they want to bring the Bill back. 

 

But I would just say, as I think the government can say on a 

number of issues — fixed election dates, equalization promise 

— the Prime Minister just changed his mind. Just changed his 

mind when it came to his commitments to the people of 

Saskatchewan and the Government of Saskatchewan and that’s 

what happened. And why will we bring this Bill forward for 

debate, Mr. Speaker? So that briefly, briefly addresses the issue 

of democracy.  

 

I do want to make one point of a constitutional change 

somewhere along the way here and maybe I’ll make it here 

while we’re discussing the pseudo-democratic aspects of this 

Bill. And that is that there’s a way of this legislature expressing 

its opinion about the makeup of parliament and the existence of 

the Senate. And this legislature doesn’t need to debate an 

irrelevant Bill that would take effect if we had a prime minister 

in this country that kept his promises. That’s not the way to do 

it. The way to do it is by a resolution in this legislature saying 

the Government of Saskatchewan, the legislature of 

Saskatchewan, wants a Senate that looks like this. 

 

[16:30] 

 

Now one legislature can’t change the Senate; one legislature 

can’t even hardly start the constitutional process. But if there is 

truly across the country a commitment to constitutional change, 

particularly on the makeup of the Senate, a number of 

provincial legislatures, acting in concert and relatively close 

period of time together, can effect constitutional change. 

 

There’s a formula, Mr. Speaker, and there’s a number of 

provinces that have to be involved and they have to have a 

certain amount of the population, Mr. Speaker. And we would 

be a relatively small part of such a group. But we would be one 

province and that we can do, that we can do. We can be the one 

out of the seven, I think it is, Mr. Speaker, that starts it off. And 

that’s what we can do if we believe that the constitution needs 

to change in respect to the Senate and how the Senate is chosen 

or whether the Senate continues to exist. 

 

We might do that after consulting the people of Saskatchewan, 

if we really wanted to be democratic about it. And I know that 

the members opposite sort of had the ballots prepared, the 

process prepared for the polling — the popularity contest for 

who the next senator out of Saskatchewan would be — but 

they’ll have to put that aside because the Prime Minister had 

other plans. 

 

Members of a certain age who will remember when Coca-Cola 

decided that they could capture some younger beverage drinkers 

by putting more sugar in the Coke, making it taste more like 

Pepsi, and it didn’t work, Mr. Speaker. It didn’t work. They lost 

Coca-Cola drinkers; they didn’t pick up any Pepsi-Cola 

drinkers. Mr. Speaker, you may have been one of them. 

 

Members of a certain age, Mr. Speaker, will also remember that 

Bill Cosby was selling Coca-Cola on television at the time. And 

there was a cartoon — an Aislin cartoon, I think; a Canadian 

cartoonist — showing Mr. Cosby holding up the can of new 

Coke, and the hand coming in from the side with the old Coke, 

which the announcer decided to call Classic Coke, and he goes, 

Huh? And that’s the government of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Prime Minister said, oh we’re going to have a democratic 

Senate. We’re not going to change the constitution. We’re not 



2094 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2009 

going to make it really democratic. We’re not going to make it 

really elected. We’re not going to do that. We’re not going to 

open that can of worms, constitutional can of worms. 

 

I can understand that, Mr. Speaker — opening up a 

constitutional can of worms. At one time, a lawyer, I studied 

constitutional law in law school and I thought if I heard the 

word constitution one more time I’d go insane. I’d rather people 

drag their fingernails down a blackboard. I understand why a 

country doesn’t want to get involved in the debate too often, 

Mr. Speaker. But if you want to change how the Senate works, 

that’s the work you have to do. That’s the work you really have 

to do. 

 

You can’t do this: we’ll run a popularity contest in this province 

and this province and this province, and pretend that we are 

electing people. That’s not how a country’s constitution is 

made. That’s not how it works, Mr. Speaker. But particularly if 

he has . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . As the member from 

Regina Dewdney says, particularly if you don’t do it. 

Particularly if you’re out there . . .  

 

The members opposite, the government, they’re holding up the 

new Coke and the Prime Minister goes, no, I’m going back. I’m 

going back. I liked it the way it was. I liked it when the Prime 

Minister got to pick who it was. I liked it when the Prime 

Minister got to pick people who took their speeches from the 

Prime Minister’s office, like Senator Mike Duffy, and just gives 

them straight, without editing — and maybe without reading 

beforehand either, Mr. Speaker, from all reports. 

 

That’s what he likes . . . [inaudible] . . . and he wants to back to 

that. And he’s gone back to that, Mr. Speaker. He’s gone back 

to that. And that’s what the members opposite are stuck with. 

 

They’re stuck with a Bill based on a promise that’s been 

broken. And it’s not, it’s not a serious promise, Mr. Speaker. It 

wasn’t like the equalization promise; it wasn’t even like the 

fixed election promise, Mr. Speaker. It was cosmetic. I mean, 

that’s the point. It was cosmetic. But still, it was a promise. 

 

So in big things, when he promises the people of Saskatchewan 

that natural resource revenue will not be included in 

equalization: well no, I don’t need to keep that one. And in little 

things like this, like the Senate election nominee process: well, I 

don’t need to keep that either. 

 

So in great and small, essentially the Prime Minister says, and 

to the continual embarrassment of the members opposite of the 

government who believe, who believe they have some influence 

— maybe they don’t believe that any more today but —

believed they have some influence to their continual 

embarrassment, Mr. Speaker. The chair is pulled out from under 

them again and again. It’s like Charlie Brown and the football 

— first it’s equalization, then it’s fixed election dates, and now 

this. You know, they took another run at that football and got 

pulled away again and back on their backs. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the election part of course is probably the 

least appropriate term used in the title of this Bill because, of 

course, it was never going to be an election. There was never 

going to be an election because the person the people of 

Saskatchewan would have voted for in the greatest number was 

not going to be elected to any office because this Bill did not 

change the Constitution of Canada. 

 

We still have an appointed Senate. Senators are still appointed 

at the whim of the Prime Minister, and that’s not hypothetical. 

We know that. He just did it. They weren’t going to be elected 

to anything except to the position that the winner of a popularity 

contest is, Mr. Speaker. The winner of that election is the most 

popular person in that vote. I won’t call it an election. It’s not 

an election. Nobody’s elected to that office. The Senate would 

have continued to have been, continue to be, an appointed body; 

everybody in it appointed by the prime minister of the day. 

 

They wouldn’t be elected to anything. There would be a vote. 

There would be a poll. There would be a popularity contest. 

And why would the government members call that an election? 

They would call that an election because the Prime Minister 

promised to appoint the winner of the popularity contest to the 

Senate. 

 

Well that does not make it an election. As a matter of fact, in 

this case, that doesn’t even make it a promise. And of course 

the legislation says he might; the legislation doesn’t require him 

to do it. The legislation can’t require him to do it. It’s not the 

prerogative of this legislature or the people of Saskatchewan to 

elect senators. 

 

The people of Canada have had an appointed Senate since 

Confederation. It long outlived its usefulness. People have 

called for its abolishment . The movement to which I’m a proud 

heir has called for its abolishment for a long, long time. My 

colleagues on this side of the House who’ve spoken on this Bill 

have called for its abolishment. I don’t know if that’s where the 

people of Saskatchewan are at. Maybe they want to reform it. 

 

We can ask them now. The members opposite were prepared to 

have an election or a vote. I have to correct myself, Mr. 

Speaker. They were prepared to have a vote to determine who, 

of the people who put themselves forward as potential 

appointments from the Prime Minister, was the most popular 

with the people of Saskatchewan, or most popular with the 

people who decided to vote in what is not really an election, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

They were prepared to do that. So are they prepared to ask the 

people of Saskatchewan whether they even support the 

institution of a Senate? Are they prepared to do that, Mr. 

Speaker? It won’t cost any more; I think it would cost 

considerably less than this popularity contest that they were 

going to have before the Prime Minister pre-empted it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Prime Minister did that, and one of my 

colleagues asked how he did that. He did that because that’s his 

prerogative. That has been the case since this country was 

founded in 1867. Nothing about this Bill changes that. Nothing 

about this Bill makes this an election. 

 

Now the members opposite, and the member from 

Weyburn-Big Muddy in particular, made as persuasive an 

argument as can be made that this was an election because it 

was, as the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy said, a matter of 

evolution. You know, it would become a convention. Provinces 

would have these votes, and the person that won these votes 



March 3, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2095 

would be appointed to the Senate. And over time, that would 

become a constitutional convention. I think that was the 

argument from the member of Weyburn-Big Muddy. 

 

And I suppose that’s true, you know. I suppose that is true that 

eventually, eventually, I don’t know how many decades, I don’t 

even know how many centuries it would take for this to become 

a convention, but the way it becomes a convention, the way it 

becomes a convention . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . The 

member from Meadow Lake is shouting across about 

conventions as well. 

 

The way it becomes a convention is it works in practice. You 

have the vote, you have the vote, Mr. Speaker. Then the Prime 

Minister makes the appointment. Then you have another vote 

and the Prime Minister makes the appointment. Then you have 

another vote and the Prime Minister makes the appointment. It 

doesn’t work, Mr. Speaker, if you pass a Bill so you can have a 

vote and the Prime Minister says no, I didn’t really mean that. 

I’m going to have the appointment. You don’t have to have the 

vote, I’m going to fill the vacancy. Mr. Speaker, this Bill, this 

Bill is going to be irrelevant until there’s another vacancy in the 

Senate. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the next Prime Minister of Canada may not 

make this same commitment, and the fact that this Prime 

Minister has made this commitment is obviously meaningless, 

Mr. Speaker. Absolutely meaningless. So we have a 

meaningless commitment, and then we would pass the Bill 

based on a speculative commitment that we would get a prime 

minister that would make the same promise to this government 

and keep it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know. Why don’t we wait and see? 

Why don’t we wait and see if that happens? And in the 

meantime, in the meantime, Mr. Speaker, this legislature can 

express its opinion about what kind of Senate we would like. 

The people of Saskatchewan could be asked first in a plebiscite. 

I think we may have plebiscites on less important things 

actually, Mr. Speaker, if that’s possible. That could be done, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the third part of this, the third part of this is the nominee 

part, Mr. Speaker. It’s not democratic, Mr. Speaker. It’s not an 

election, and it’s not really an nomination program, Mr. 

Speaker. Because if it was going to be a nomination, then 

somebody — and I guess the government position is somebody, 

the people of Saskatchewan in this case, I think, would be the 

proposal of the members opposite, government — would 

nominate someone for the Senate. Well that’s contradictory 

with the second part, the election part. 

 

It’s either an election, Mr. Speaker, which I think we’ve agreed 

it’s not, or it’s a nomination. It can’t be both. And I would 

argue that it’s neither. But it certainly can’t be both. We either 

are electing somebody to the Senate of Canada . . . which of 

course we’re not, for two reasons.  

 

First of all, the vote doesn’t result in them taking the office, as it 

does when people elect people to this Chamber or to the House 

of Commons. And the second reason, of course it doesn’t have 

that effect, is because the Prime Minister isn’t appointing these 

people anyway. He’s appointing somebody else. He’s 

appointing his choices. But even if he was going to appoint the 

winner of this vote, that would make it an election. 

 

Arguably the nomination, the nominee part, is a little bit more 

accurate, Mr. Speaker. Arguably if the Prime Minister hadn’t 

done what he did — pull the chair away, pull away the football 

before Charlie Brown over there could give it a good kick, put 

back the old Coke, Mr. Speaker — if all of that hadn’t been 

done, you might be able to argue that, okay, is kind of like a 

nomination. The winner of the vote isn’t elected to anything, 

but is nominated by the people of Saskatchewan.  

 

[16:45] 

 

But that’s not how the members opposite want to sell this. The 

members opposite want to sell this as a democratic decision 

where people are now electing their senators, and of course 

that’s not what it is at all. 

 

The nominee proposal’s a little bit better, but again it depends 

upon, it depends upon someone selecting the nominated person 

in an actual election. You’re nominated to seek office — often 

we understand it to be by political parties or by bodies — and 

then someone else makes the final decision about you going on. 

 

Well as I understand it, the idea was, the concept was here that 

the government would appoint the person who got the most 

votes. Well they’re not the nominee. They’ve won. They’ve 

won under this system. They’re there. We’re not nominating a 

group of people. Alberta isn’t nominating somebody and 

Saskatchewan isn’t nominating somebody else and somebody 

else decides who gets there. 

 

Arguably that kind of worked for the Supreme Court. You 

know, unfortunately each province doesn’t get its own Supreme 

Court justice. I have a personal bad experience with this, Mr. 

Speaker. Saskatchewan was robbed — by this Prime Minister 

again, Mr. Speaker — of its Supreme Court justice. But we 

don’t all get our own Supreme Court justice. 

 

So there is sort of a contest there where the three prairie 

provinces nominate candidates. The previous Liberal 

government kind of formalized the process by which these 

people were chosen, and then a final decision is made in 

essence by the Prime Minister — and that’s the nominee 

process.  

 

But that’s not what’s going on here, Mr. Speaker, or what was 

supposed to be going on here. What was supposed to be going 

on here is that the winner of this vote would end up being the 

senator from Saskatchewan, not in an election, not in a 

democratic process, and not truly being nominated in any kind 

of contest. The winner of that popularity contest was supposed 

to become a senator, and that is supposed to make the Senate a 

more democratic place because it has amongst its many, many 

dozens of members, it has two now, maybe three, maybe four 

. . . How many senators were just appointed by the Prime 

Minister? 

 

An Hon. Member: — 18. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — 18? 18. So 18 out of that whole group — 

people who won popularity votes, people who won popularity 



2096 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2009 

votes — 18. And that makes it the democratic place, Mr. 

Speaker? I don’t think it does. I don’t think anybody would 

argue that it is a more democratic institution because a very 

small handful of the people sitting there weren’t appointed by 

the Prime Minister without a popularity vote being held in their 

province beforehand. That would not make it a democratic 

institution, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But we don’t need to worry about that facade, Mr. Speaker. We 

don’t need to worry about that because the Prime Minister 

realized that it’s a facade. The Prime Minister realized it was a 

facade and the Prime Minister realized that what he held out to 

governments, like the Government of Saskatchewan — that 

they would allow those governments to look democratic, allow 

those governments to look populist, to allow those governments 

to look like they’re forward thinking, that they want progressive 

change — the instrument that he was going to use to allow 

governments like the Government of Saskatchewan to do that, 

he decided, well no, I changed my mind; I want to make these 

18 appointments myself. 

 

I don’t think the Senate is much less democratic for his 

decision, Mr. Speaker. I really don’t. And how can it be? It was 

only going to be a minority anyways, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I do want to wrap up. I know that there’s other members 

who want to speak to this Bill, and I know specifically there’s 

one at least who wants to speak to it today. But as I started off 

at the beginning, I want to conclude by saying the Bill is not 

democratic. It wasn’t going to make the Senate democratic, and 

it’s not democratic consultation with the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

It’s not an exercise of the constitutional power of this 

legislature to initiate constitutional change. It’s not an election. 

Nobody was being elected to office if this Bill had passed and if 

the Prime Minister had kept his promise. Nobody was. 

Somebody was going to win a vote, Mr. Speaker, if the Prime 

Minister had kept his promise and this Bill was passed. And 

that person would have been, if the Prime Minister kept his 

promise, appointed to the Senate. 

 

But that’s not an election, Mr. Speaker. That is a sham, and that 

would have kept, in the Prime Minister’s back pocket, the 

prerogative that they’ve always exercised, and they exercise 

again, again, after holding out that he would not, to appoint 

senators. And it’s not truly and would not have been truly a 

nomination process. 

 

I would sincerely . . . Mr. Speaker, I don’t often ask for the 

government to withdraw legislation, Mr. Speaker. And I said at 

the beginning I admire their chutzpah for even bringing it back 

on to the floor. But I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, if they care 

about democracy, if they care about constitutional change, let’s 

have a plebiscite at the next provincial election on the Senate. 

 

Let’s put the option of abolishing the institution; this 

undemocratic, appointed institution on that ballot and see what 

the people think. The people may support an elected Senate. If 

they do support an elected Senate or they support abolishing the 

Senate, then let the next legislature initiate real constitutional 

change by resolution of this legislature as we are empowered by 

the constitution to do. Let’s do that, Mr. Speaker. Why not do 

that? 

 

There is no urgency, Mr. Speaker. The Prime Minister has taken 

away the urgency. There are no Senate vacancies. There is no 

reason why there can’t be democratic consultation and 

democratic constitutional change initiated by this legislature, 

Mr. Speaker. There is absolutely no reason why we cannot do 

that. That’s what I call upon the government to do, to put some 

meaning in at least one of the words, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We can’t put any meaning, unilaterally we can’t put any 

meaning into the word election. We unilaterally cannot put any 

meaning into the word nominee. But we can, Mr. Speaker — 

we can if we care to, if the government cares to — put some 

meaning into the word democratic, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Those conclude my remarks. I know that the member from 

Regina Northeast has some comments to make, and so I will 

take my seat. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — With leave to request to introduce guests, 

please. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Massey Place 

has asked for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you I would like to introduce to all members of the Assembly 

someone seated in your gallery, and that’s Mr. Bill Ziebart. Mr. 

Ziebart is a long-time family friend of my family’s and he’s 

lived in Saskatoon Northwest constituency with his wife Linda. 

He also has two children, David and Kyla. 

 

Bill informs me this is his first trip or visit to the Legislative 

Assembly so it’s a great honour and privilege to have him here 

with us today. 

 

He’s had a number of occupations in his life. Highly involved 

in the business community and in his community as a whole 

and also in his church. And I would ask . . . He’s presently here 

. . . Well he’s presently employed as the executive director of 

the Saskatchewan Association of Automotive Repairers. So I 

would ask all members to join me in welcoming Mr. Ziebart to 

the Assembly, please. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — I would also ask leave to follow the 

introduction. 

 



March 3, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2097 

The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — I would also like to echo the member from the 

opposition. Bill is a good friend of mine, and I’m looking 

forward to having supper with him tonight. And he’s involved 

on my executive and my fundraiser, and we’ve been good 

friends for years. And it is good to see him down here joining 

his legislator, legislation, and the fellow that he supports as his 

MLA. I welcome all members to give welcome to Mr. Bill 

Ziebart. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 60 — The Senate Nominee Election Act 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m honoured and 

privileged to have the opportunity to rise in this House and 

participate in the debate on Bill No. 60, The Senate Nominee 

Election Act. It’s an interesting Bill, Mr. Speaker. It’s almost a 

waste of time really, when you look at the reality of what has 

occurred over the last few months. But the Senate has always 

been a topic of conversation wherever you go in Saskatchewan, 

whether it be in rural Saskatchewan or urban Saskatchewan. 

 

In my past life, Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity of working 

for a couple of members of parliament: Simon De Jong as his 

constituency assistant, and then later with Lorne Nystrom as his 

chief of staff. And during that experience I found probably a 

close relationship to the Senate at that time as being an issue 

that would often be discussed in Saskatchewan. I had a 

gentleman once tell me that talking about the Senate in 

Saskatchewan was sort of like talking about the weather — 

everybody talked about it, but nobody did anything about it. 

 

And that’s a little what we’re seeing here now, Mr. Speaker. 

We have a Bill here suggesting a process to elect a nominee to 

the Senate — well, to a body that really provides absolutely no 

service to the reality of the political spectrum or the democratic 

process in Canada here. It’s a body that’s really, in reality — if 

we cut through all the frills around it — it’s a body that’s really 

a very lucrative, sophisticated, illustrious retirement program 

for old political hacks. And if you look at the make-up of the 

Senate you’ll see that that’s basically what it is. The prime 

ministers of the past have always taken the opportunity, prime 

ministers of the present have always taken the opportunity to 

present, to appoint their nominees to the Senate. It’s interesting 

that they usually follow the same political lines as that of the 

prime minister. 

 

In many cases the senators, they do good work. I won’t say they 

don’t do good work. I think most of them if not all of them are 

good, solid, honest people who believe in their roles and take 

their roles seriously, and they do provide good work. It’s just 

the fact that the Senate itself doesn’t really play a major role in 

the democracy of the great country of ours. 

 

And it could be. I think there’s opportunity to reform the 

Senate. I think there’s opportunity to make the Senate be more 

effective and efficient, but it has to also be accountable. I 

believe the present system of appointing individuals to the 

Senate simply takes away that accountability. They’re really not 

accountable to anybody. They’re certainly not accountable to 

the taxpayers of this province and of this country which bear the 

cost of the operation of that Senate. So I think that there’s an 

opportunity for us collectively across Canada to engage in a 

meaningful discussion, a meaningful debate about the role of 

the Senate, about the future of the Senate. 

 

I think that the Senate in its present form serves virtually no use 

at all to our democratic process. That’s why I probably believe 

that the real alternative to the Senate is to abolish it. It doesn’t 

offer any real purpose in the present form. It doesn’t really offer 

any meaningful dialogue as far as democracy is concerned. And 

I think there’s an opportunity here to either in a meaningful way 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: — It being now 5 p.m. the Assembly will recess 

until 7 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly recessed until 19:00.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2065 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2065 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2065 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2065 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2065 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2066 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2066 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2074 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2074 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2096 

  LeClerc .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2097 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2066 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2066 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2066 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2066 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Hockeyville 2009 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2067 

 Health Sector Leader Remembered 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2067 

 Labour Recruiting Drive 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2067 

 Moose Jaw School Celebrates Centennial Kickoff  

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2068 

 Second Annual Premier’s Ride 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2068 

 United Way Spirit Awards 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2068 

 Saskatchewan’s Economy 

  Chisholm .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2069 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Property Tax Relief 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2069 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2069 

 Support for the Forestry Industry 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2070 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2070 

 Support for Agriculture 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2071 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2071 

 Relationship with Federal Government 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2072 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2072 

POINT OF ORDER 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2074 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2074 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 72 — The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2008 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2075 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2076 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2081 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2082 

  Gantefoer (referral to committee) ......................................................................................................................................... 2084 

 Bill No. 63 — The Saskatchewan Housing Corporation Amendment Act, 2008 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2084 



 

 Bill No. 67 — The Education Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2/) 

 Loi n
o
 2 de 2008 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2088 

  Gantefoer (referral to committee) ......................................................................................................................................... 2090 

 Bill No. 69 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 2008/ 

 Loi de 2008 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur l’exécution des ordonnances alimentaires 
  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2090 

 Bill No. 60 — The Senate Nominee Election Act 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2092 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2097 

 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 




