




















































Hansard: April 22, 2009


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 51A  WEDNESDAY, APRIL 22, 2009, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2787 

 April 22, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

Clerk: — I wish to advise the Assembly that Mr. Speaker will 

not be present today to open today’s sitting. 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood 

River. 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, thank you. I’d ask 

for leave to do an extended introduction. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Wood River has 

asked for leave for an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member from 

Wood River. 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Well, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is indeed my pleasure today to introduce 

through you, to you, to the House, a number of guests sitting in 

the Speaker’s gallery that are representatives of the military. 

Earlier today along with many of our colleagues joined me in 

unveiling a decal in support of our troops that will be displayed 

in government vehicles. 

 

And I would like to introduce the members one at a time. 

Master Corporal Neil Bird who spoke on behalf of the military 

earlier this morning. Master Corporal Bird has served one tour 

in Bosnia in 1997, one tour in Afghanistan with the Princess 

Patricia’s Canadian Light Infantry. He’s currently serving with 

the Royal Regina regiment. 

 

Sergeant Melanson. He was posted to 15 Wing Moose Jaw until 

1999 when he was posted to Gagetown, New Brunswick. In 

March 2005, he served on a UN [United Nations] tour in Haiti 

for six months. Sergeant Melanson was recently posted to 16 

Service Battalion in Regina armouries and is still currently 

serving in the Canadian Armed Forces. 

 

Corporal Tellier. Corporal Tellier volunteered for a tour in 

Afghanistan in September 2006, began the training in 

December 2007. He was employed as a driver for the task force 

protection convoy escort company and returned from 

Afghanistan in September 2008. 

 

Bombardier Weir. Bombardier Weir entered the military in 

2005 in Regina. He was selected to go on a tour to Afghanistan 

where he was employed as a M777 gun detachment member 

and driver. Bombardier Weir returned from Afghanistan in 

September 2008 and is now employed as a part of the 10th 

Field Regiment in Regina. 

 

Sergeant Fitzpatrick. Sergeant Fitzpatrick joined the Canadian 

Forces as a reserve soldier in 1984. He has participated in 

peacekeeping tours in Cyprus and two tours in the former 

Yugoslav Republic. He’s employed as chief clerk of 16 Field 

Ambulance reserve unit in Regina and supervisor of the Regina 

Armoury Garrison’s orderly room. 

 

Corporal Brian Milne. Corporal Milne began his military career 

in 2002 in Regina. In 2005 he applied for task force 1-06 in 

Kandahar and spent the next nine months there in several 

positions throughout Kandahar. After returning home Corporal 

Milne spent the summer of 2007 in Shilo working in 

demonstration platoon where he was selected to create a lesson 

plan for and instruct a class on vehicle checkpoints and searches 

of persons and vehicles. 

 

Warrant Officer Pociuk joined the Canadian Forces in 

Winnipeg, Manitoba, as an armoured soldier in June 1985. 

Warrant Officer Pociuk has completed three peacekeeping tours 

in Bosnia and two combat tours in Afghanistan. Warrant 

Officer Pociuk is currently employed as the Regina Garrison 

Sergeant Major and the public affairs representative. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re very proud of our military, and I would ask 

all members to please join me in thanking these men for their 

contributions to our country and welcome them to their 

legislative. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Very quickly if I 

can on behalf of the government to join with the member for 

Wood River and the Government of Saskatchewan’s Armed 

Forces liaison in welcoming these gentlemen to their 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

I had a chance to talk with some of them outside during the 

unveiling of this new sticker, and it was just a great honour and 

pleasure to talk with them, and I want to on behalf of the 

Government of Saskatchewan as well welcome them to their 

Legislative Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again 

briefly I want to on behalf of the official opposition join with 

the government in welcoming our guests here today. As 

members know, my son serving in the reserves spent six months 

in Afghanistan and returned in September 2008 like a couple of 

the gentlemen in the gallery, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And there are many people in Saskatchewan that have a 

personal connection with the mission in Afghanistan. There are 

too many people in Saskatchewan who have an unfortunate 

personal connection with the mission in Afghanistan. I think all 

Canadians share in the high ideals of that mission in which, I 

might add, I think Canadians have carried more than their fair 

share, Mr. Speaker, but have carried it well and proudly and 

everyone in this Chamber, I know, is proud of and welcomes 



2788 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2009 

our guests today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Sutherland. 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, today I would like to 

have you join with me in welcoming and introducing three 

people from Ducks Unlimited. Ducks Unlimited is one of the 

most successful conservation programs in the entire world. We 

welcome today Jeff Nelson, executive vice-president; Brent 

Kennedy, Saskatchewan provincial manager; and Peter Carton, 

Chair of the board for Canada. I ask members to help me 

welcome them to their legislature. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 

to join with the member for Saskatoon Sutherland in welcoming 

the gentlemen here from Ducks Unlimited. They play an 

incredibly important stewardship role in the province and we’re 

very proud to have them join us in the legislature today. Thank 

you very much and I welcome you to the legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

South. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, seated in the gallery today are students and chaperones 

visiting Regina from Yokohama, Japan. There they are. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Our guests from Japan include 

school administrators and teachers, Yoichi Sakakibara, 

Tsuyoshi Saitoh, Yoshiko Honma, Maiyu Komatsu, and 

approximately 50 students, as you can see. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Read their names, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — We’ll do our best. They are 

accompanied by Campbell Collegiate teacher and program 

organizer, Mr. Bob Stephenson and Mr. Larry Schier, Chair of 

the parents group. 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Japanese.] 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Now, Mr. Speaker, these students 

are part of the Regina Yamate Gakuin and student exchange 

program. They will stay in our province for two weeks learning 

about another culture. Then in July a group of Regina-based 

students will make a return visit to Japan. In preparation for that 

visit, the Regina students have been taking language and culture 

classes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Yamate Gakuin is a private, coeducational high 

school in Yokohama with 1,600 students. The school was 

founded in 1966 and has been organizing these international 

student exchanges since 1969. The school believes the 

international experience is an important part of the educational 

process. 

 

Members of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, please join me in 

welcoming these students to Saskatchewan. We know they will 

have an enjoyable and informative stay. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I just 

would like to join in on behalf of the official opposition in 

joining our guests from Japan. And it’s a wonderful role that 

our school system here in Regina and particularly Campbell 

Collegiate — some familiar faces up there today — are playing 

in this exchange. I hope that the exchange is worthwhile. I 

know that it will be and I thank you for joining us here today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present a petition calling on the government to do 

repair to Highway No. 123. That is the only access road to the 

community of Cumberland House, Saskatchewan. And the 

prayer is as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

Government of Saskatchewan to stop denying the money 

that was allocated to the highway and commit immediately 

to providing the repairs to this highway that the people of 

northeastern Saskatchewan were promised. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks and 

leadership from the village of Cumberland House and 

Cumberland’s First Nation. I so submit. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour today to 

present petitions. The petition is in support of changes to The 

Highway Traffic Act to be referred to as the Gallenger 

amendment. The petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to enact changes to The Highway Traffic Act, 

to be referred to as the Gallenger amendment, which 

would require all vehicle traffic to slow to 60 kilometres 



April 22, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2789 

per hour when passing a snowplow with their warning 

lights activated on Saskatchewan roadways. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions come from Edgeley, Rocanville, 

and Regina, Balgonie, and other communities in the Regina 

area. Mr. Speaker, I present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise and 

present petitions in support of indexing the minimum wage. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, we all know that the minimum wage increases 

are often sporadic and do not always reflect the rising cost of 

living faced by minimum wage earners. And the petition reads 

as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to indexing Saskatchewan 

minimum wage to ensure that the standard of living of 

minimum wage earners is maintained in the face of cost of 

living increases. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petitions, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are signed by residents of 

Balcarres, Lipton, Fort Qu’Appelle, Esterhazy, Grenfell, Silton, 

and Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 

present a petition in support of my colleague from Cumberland, 

and in support of the fine people of Pelican Narrows: 

 

The petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. Legislative 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to pave 

the 7 kilometres of Highway 135 through the community 

of Pelican Narrows, as committed to on August 24, 2007 

[Mr. Speaker]. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this petition was signed by the many good 

folks of Pelican Narrows and area. And I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise today to 

present a petition calling for wage equity for CBO 

[community-based organization] workers, and we know, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that research demonstrates that Saskatchewan 

citizens who work for community-based organizations are paid 

often on an average of 8 to $10 per hour less than employees 

performing work of equal value in government departments. I’d 

like to read the prayer, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the development and 

implementation of a multi-year funding plan to ensure that 

CBO workers achieve wage equity with employees who 

perform work of equal value in government departments. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, these good petitioners come from the 

12 ridings in Saskatoon. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise today to 

present a petition on behalf of rural residents of Saskatchewan 

who question why the Sask Party government is leaving them 

behind with respect to providing safe and affordable water. And 

the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to financially assist the town of Duck Lake 

residents for the good of their health and safety due to the 

exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency, and that this government fulfills its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And these petitions, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are signed by the 

good residents of Beardy’s First Nation, Duck Lake, and 

Rosthern, Saskatchewan. I so present. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition in support of fairness for students here in 

Saskatchewan through the necessary expansion of the graduate 

retention program. Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately expand the graduate retention 

program to include master’s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are 

students here in Saskatchewan at the University of Regina as 

well as the University of Saskatchewan. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



2790 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2009 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

in support of a long-term care facility in La Ronge. The prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately invest in the planning and 

construction of long-term care beds in La Ronge. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by the good people of La 

Ronge and area. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[13:45] 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres. 

 

Earth Day 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, Earth Day is celebrated on April 22 around the globe 

to inspire appreciation for our natural environment and to bring 

awareness of environmental challenges that place the health of 

our planet at risk. Climate change is a challenge unlike any 

other the human family has faced, and requires us to work 

together to restore the health of our planet. 

 

Saskatchewan generates a significant amount of greenhouse 

gases. These are contributing to warming in our Prairie region 

occurring at a faster rate compared to the rest of Canada. Mr. 

Speaker, much more must be done to reduce greenhouse gas 

emissions which lead to more drought, declining surface water 

levels, increased number of forest fires, and more severe 

weather like tornadoes and floods. 

 

Unfortunately this Sask Party government will not keep its 

commitment to Saskatchewan people to take action on climate 

change. On Monday, the Environment minister conceded that 

the Sask Party will not even try to meet the carbon emission 

reduction targets they adopted during the 2007 election. Instead 

they will adopt less stringent targets. From the biased nuclear 

power process to funding cuts to climate change plans to the 

abandonment of their election promise to reduce greenhouse 

gas emissions, the Sask Party government already has a dismal 

record on the environment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan cannot be a responsible global 

citizen if the Sask Party government chooses to be a laggard on 

the environment. This Earth Day, we must resolve to do more 

for our environment, Mr. Speaker, not less. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood 

River. 

 

Support Our Troops 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, this morning I had the honour of participating 

in the launch of the new Support Our Troops decals for 

government vehicles. Although this is just a small gesture, it 

represents a larger effort of our government to keep the selfless 

sacrifice of Canada’s women and men in uniform top of mind, 

lest we forget that they serve in our name for our freedom. 

 

We hope that these small stickers summon us to remember 

those from Saskatchewan who have given their lives for 

Canada, and continue to pay with their lives during the current 

mission in Afghanistan: Master Corporal Jeffrey Walsh of 

Regina, Corporal Bryce Keller of Regina, Corporal David 

Braun of Raymore, Corporal Brendan Downey of Saskatoon, 

Master Corporal Josh Roberts of Saskatoon, Corporal Dustin 

Wasden of Spiritwood, Sergeant Prescott Shipway of Esterhazy, 

Corporal Shane Keating of Dalmeny. These eight soldiers died 

in Afghanistan serving us. These eight soldiers and the troops 

that continue to put themselves in harm’s way for us should be 

remembered, not just on anniversaries, not just on 

Remembrance Day, but every day. 

 

The vehicle decals unveiled this morning are just one small, 

everyday reminder. We hope that they remind others to honour 

our troops and call attention to the disproportionate burden our 

soldiers and their families bear serving our country. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Administrative Professionals Day 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, today is 

Administrative Professionals Day, a day set aside to express our 

gratitude for the hard work and invaluable contributions that 

administrative professionals provide on a daily basis. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, behind every successful office there’s an 

efficient and dedicated administrative support staff. In today’s 

high-speed, demanding, and technical world, the role of the 

administrative professional is ever-changing and becoming 

increasingly dynamic. Aside from handling the mail, answering 

telephones, writing letters, and sending emails and faxes, 

administrative professionals play an essential role in public 

relations. 

 

Whether they’re greeting our constituents over the phone or in 

person or maintaining a solid working relationship with our 

colleagues and the various organizations and institutions, our 

administrative professionals are the backbone of our offices. 

They ensure that the day-to-day business runs smoothly, and 

quite frankly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we couldn’t function 

without them. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, on behalf of my colleagues, I take this 

opportunity to acknowledge the hard work of all administrative 

professionals throughout the province and commend them for 



April 22, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2791 

their tireless efforts and commitment. Today to all of our 

constituency assistants in my office, Tracy, and the 

administrative professionals in our office, Jannet, Val, Jane, and 

Gail, thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Yorkton. 

 

Earth Day 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 

pleased today to rise to speak about a very important day, Earth 

Day. Earth Day is the largest, most celebrated environmental 

event worldwide. It was designed to inspire awareness and 

appreciation for the environment. 

 

Saskatchewan people care about the environment and want to 

better understand how they can do their part in their day-to-day 

lives. The Government of Saskatchewan is committed to 

helping Saskatchewan people make informed choices and to 

help residents, businesses, and communities benefit from 

greener technologies and practices. Our government is 

providing $70 million over the next four years to the Go Green 

Fund to support innovative activities and projects in such areas 

as climate change and water quality and conservation. 

 

The Ministry of Environment works year-round to develop and 

support initiatives that reduce our province’s environmental 

footprint, such as recycling and hazardous waste management 

programs, energy efficiency and renewable energy programs, 

and water quality and natural resource management initiatives. 

 

Today also marks the one-year anniversary of the NDP [New 

Democratic Party] Environment critic’s request that we adopt 

the federal government’s greenhouse gas emissions reduction 

targets. I ask all members to join with us today in celebrating 

Earth Day and the fact that on this important issue of climate 

change our government and the opposition have placed 

partisanship aside and found common ground on the targets we 

should be setting. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 

Albert Northcote. 

 

Prince Albert Team Wins Girls’ Provincial 

Hockey Championship 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, two years ago, hockey fans in 

Prince Albert celebrated the Mintos’ back-to-back national 

titles. This year we have new champions to be proud of. The 

A&W Bears are the 2009 provincial midget girls’ hockey 

champions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the A&W Bears had to work hard for their trophy. 

They overcame a two games to none deficit in a best of five 

series and it was against the regular season champions. In their 

last three games, they faced a do-or-die situation. Playing under 

that pressure in three successive games, they showed everyone 

what real guts and determination do, showed everybody what 

it’s like to be from Prince Albert, and won the provincial 

championship. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan midget girls’ program is still in 

its infancy, but as the P.A. [Prince Albert] Bears proved, the 

sport is growing. The advancement of the women’s game 

cannot happen without the growth of the game at the entry level 

and Prince Albert is proud that our players are leading the way. 

 

The Saskatchewan midget program is allowing many young 

women to pursue a high level of hockey. There was a time not 

so long ago where these young women would have had no 

choice but to suit up for a boys’ team or not play organized 

hockey at all. Thankfully those days are long gone and these 

young Prince Albert women have shown that they have what it 

takes to play great hockey and provide a great showcase for so 

many. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join with me in 

congratulating the Prince Albert A&W Bears, the coaches, 

parents, fans, and organizers in winning the 2009 provincial 

girls’ midget championship. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Batoche. 

 

Administrative Professionals Day 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. On behalf of 

the government I would like to congratulate the administrative 

professionals, where we take time to show our gratitude and 

appreciation for the hardest working people in our workplace. 

These valuable co-workers do so much to make our office run 

smoothly and efficiently and brighten up our day with their 

positive attitudes. Without them we would truly be at a loss. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are almost a half million persons employed 

as administrative professionals across our country. These 

people are an integral part of any organization, whether it is 

public or private sector. 

 

But I now would like to take this opportunity to mention a few 

of these important individuals who are closer to home for me. 

In our government caucus office here at the Legislative 

Building, we are lucky to have Marianne Hoffart and Brooklyn 

Elhard, who both demonstrate the best qualities of 

administrative professionals and make our lives so much easier. 

At my Batoche constituency office, I have Mary Anne Telfer 

who keeps my life in order and running smoothly. These ladies 

bring a level of enthusiasm and dedication to their profession 

that is certainly admirable and greatly appreciated. 

 

I would ask that all members join me in recognizing the 

administrative professionals in their lives and take a moment to 

let them know how much they are appreciated today. Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 



2792 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2009 

Earth Day 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As we’ve 

noted, today is Earth Day, a day celebrated around the world to 

increase environmental awareness. 

 

I had the wonderful opportunity to spend the beginning of Earth 

Day with students at Bedford Road Collegiate this morning. 

Hosted by a class of innovative grade 12 students who are 

showing real leadership and citizenship, this Earth Day event 

saw numerous groups from high schools, elementary schools, 

and community organizations coming together to celebrate 

sustainability. 

 

Students came to see displays with the intention to get ideas and 

inspiration for future work — there were earth balloons, great 

earth cookies, giant earth balls, and an earth display, plus face 

painting, a video, and an Eco-quest trivia contest along with a 

trade show. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I also want to make note of two special 

groups that I met today, the Earth Keepers from Aden Bowman 

Collegiate and Eco-quest, a special grade 8 program dedicated 

to environmental education in Saskatoon. And they’re just 

doing great work. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the Bedford students began this work earlier 

in the year by hosting a sustainability conference at the U of S 

[University of Saskatchewan] in November. They focused on 

three pillars of sustainability — social, economic, and 

environmental. They work to raise awareness, but more 

importantly, they want to see some action. People have to put 

theory into practice, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well every day should be Earth Day, and I ask all members to 

join me in wishing the students at Bedford and right across this 

globe as they celebrate this very important day. And we too 

should include their three pillars of sustainability into our 

everyday lives. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Women’s Issues 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, earlier this week the Premier wrote to the 

Prime Minister encouraging him to ensure the advancement of 

human rights, justice, and equality for the women of 

Afghanistan. And while we strongly support the Premier’s 

sentiment, the plight of Afghan women reminds us all that we 

have work to do ourselves in Canada and in Saskatchewan. The 

work of advancing women’s equality is not yet complete. 

 

My question is to the Premier: will he assign a minister 

specifically responsible for the status of women and raise the 

profile of the office to deal effectively with women’s issues still 

outstanding in Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, thank you very much for the 

opportunity to speak to such an important issue. And it’s an 

issue that was raised recently during the federal-provincial 

meetings on the status of women. It was a time where in fact 

there was a clear consensus around the table regarding the 

sentiments that our Premier has expressed this week regarding 

Afghanistan. Obviously the discussions went well beyond that 

focus, Mr. Speaker. The discussion ensured that there was a 

tight focus on issues of empowerment; issues of skills training, 

education, and employment. Mr. Speaker, obviously there was a 

special focus on issues of security which means so much today, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is an administrative and organizational legacy 

that is left from the previous government and, Mr. Speaker, this 

government is dedicated to working forward on behalf of all the 

people within Saskatchewan — men and women, Mr. Speaker 

— to ensure that they are able to reach their full potential. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the reality is that 

government decisions affect men and women differently. 

Investments in infrastructure, for example, tend to create jobs 

for tradespeople, which the majority of whom are men. 

Investments in child care, on the other hand, are critical to 

women’s participation in the work force. In order to approach 

equality, governments need to look at how their decisions affect 

women when crafting budgets and government policy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: will he commit today to reinstate 

the full force and responsibility of the Status of Women office, 

and visibly commit to the equitable treatment of Saskatchewan 

women? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 

Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, as we have highlighted 

previously, and I’ll do it again, the opportunities available for 

both men and women in Saskatchewan are growing. Mr. 

Speaker, for employment records for March 2009, we can focus 

on the 8,900 new employment opportunities for women in this 

province. I think that’s reflective of the opportunities that are on 

the rise for women in this province. 

 

There’s certainly more to do. Just last week, I was actually in 

La Ronge and I went to the women’s shelter in La Ronge, and 

that was a very humbling experience, Mr. Speaker. There’s 

obviously more to do to help protect families in need. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we look at weekly earnings, for the first time in 

Saskatchewan’s history, we see that they are up over $800 per 



April 22, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2793 

week, Mr. Speaker, and this is very, very important. It’s 

reflective that we’re doing our best to ensure the benefits of the 

growth that are under way are being shared with the people of 

this province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s surprising that 

the minister would use employment numbers when we’re 

talking about equity and equality. The average woman in 

Saskatchewan gets paid 84 per cent of the wage of an average 

man. And this disparity is somewhat narrower in the public 

sector because of the former government’s commitment to the 

pay equity policy . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:00] 

 

Ms. Higgins: — But in the private sector, the gap widens. 

Many Saskatchewan women believe that the success of pay 

equity in the public sector means that the time has come to 

introduce pay equity province-wide legislation. 

 

So my question is to the Premier: will the Premier commit to 

introducing provincial pay equity legislation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 

Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, it’s obvious there’s a lot of 

work to do. I can think about the research that’s been done by 

Professor Eric Howe. And a few years ago, he came out with a 

report that talked about the need for increased skills training 

and education. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s an obligation and an 

imperative that we all share because his research showed that 

statistically for First Nation and Métis women without grade 12, 

they are likely to earn less than $100,000 in their life. 

 

I don’t think the members opposite want to stand on their 

laurels to talk about the progress that’s been made. We all know 

there’s a lot of work to do, Mr. Speaker, and on that we remain 

committed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose 

Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in a Saskatchewan report it 

states that for every dollar earned by an Aboriginal woman, a 

non-Aboriginal man earns $2.34. And that’s appalling. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there have been a number of sobering reminders 

that violence against women is a problem right here at home. 

There is simply too many missing women in our province, too 

many women living in abusive situations without any options at 

all, too many transition houses struggling to keep their doors 

open, and too many rural communities without supports for 

women living in family violence. 

 

To the Premier: will he commit today to adequate funding and 

support to address these issues facing Saskatchewan women? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social 

Services and Housing. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Perhaps, Mr. Speaker, the member 

opposite was not aware that was a campaign promise of the 

Saskatchewan Party government; and it was a promise made, 

promise kept. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — We increased in our very first budget 

— which was only months after forming government, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker — we increased the budget for sexual assault 

centres and transition houses by $1.1 million, Mr. Speaker. That 

is along with, they also will have received since we formed 

government the 12.3 per cent increases that all the other CBOs 

received. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Douglas Park. 

 

Federal Transfer Payments 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, last fall I tabled The 

Reporting of Federal Transfers Act. The entire point of this Act 

was to make public the dollars that the people of Saskatchewan 

were receiving from their federal government compared to other 

provinces — and in my view, not an unreasonable request, Mr. 

Speaker. And yet the government members voted against the 

Bill in this Assembly. 

 

To the Minister of Finance: can he provide clear reasons for not 

telling the people of Saskatchewan how much money the 

federal government gives them, as compared to Canadians in 

other provinces? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to the member, we have taken the time in the Ministry 

of Finance to look very carefully at the proposal that the 

member implied in his private members’ proposed legislation. 

And quite frankly, it was deemed that, by the ministry officials, 

that this was impractical and unworkable from a common sense 

approach. 

 

There is, as the member should know, federal transfers to 

provinces occur on a number of different levels. They occur 

multi-year, some of the provinces can take several years of 

transfers into one year with a commitment to allocate them over 

time . . . 



2794 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2009 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — There are issues of privacy and 

willingness of other provinces to disclose what their transfers 

from the federal government may well be. And so from all of 

these aspects, the intended suggestion by the member is 

impractical and unworkable. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Douglas Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, every penny, every penny 

that is spent by the federal government is reported in the federal 

public accounts. It’s not a major undertaking for finance 

officials to determine how much it is that the people of 

Saskatchewan are receiving from their federal government 

through the federal public accounts, as compared to the 

expenditures that are made in other provinces, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So a simple question, Mr. Speaker: why won’t the minister 

share that information with the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Well, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, if 

that member is so knowledgeable about how the federal 

transfers are reported, I would invite him to go to the federal 

public accounts and look at the numbers at his leisure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the intent of the Bill as I understand 

it was to make comparisons between provinces, to ensure that 

Saskatchewan was being reasonably treated in comparison to 

other jurisdictions. That indeed is a worthwhile exercise to have 

happen in terms of relationships between the province and the 

Government of Canada. The practical reality of the legislation 

that was proposed is unworkable and impractical because there 

is no meaningful way to get absolute comparisons in every 

given year for these transfers. 

 

And so while it’s an interesting academic exercise, our 

government and our ministry are working on an ongoing basis 

with the federal government to ensure that we qualify for each 

and every program that is an entitlement of the province of 

Saskatchewan, and we’ll continue to do that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Douglas Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — So as I understand it, Mr. Speaker, 

listening to the Minister of Finance, what he is saying is that if 

the people of Saskatchewan want this information they should 

go get the federal public accounts, they should figure out for 

themselves, they should figure out for themselves what it is that 

the people of Saskatchewan are getting compared to other 

provinces, that they should do that kind of analysis. 

 

My position is that is the responsibility of the provincial 

government to provide that kind of information. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Why is the Minister of Finance afraid of 

letting us know what it is that the federal government is 

spending here as opposed to other provinces, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I would like to refer the member to the secret 

document called the Estimates of the province of Saskatchewan. 

And, Mr. Speaker, in this secret document on page 14, it 

illustrates transfers from the Government of Canada — Canada 

Health transfer, social transfer, and other transfers. They are 

reported each and every year in this secret document, and I 

would invite the member to look at this document and 

documents across Canada if he wants to see what’s transferred 

to other provinces. 

 

And I would recognize that these numbers can be somewhat 

misleading because several years and several plans may be 

lumped together . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Douglas Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I guess the point is that it 

was this government and this Premier that has been going 

around the province and saying that Saskatchewan people are 

doing better with the federal government than ever before. 

That’s been their point of view, Mr. Speaker. They even 

dropped the equalization lawsuit saying that it wasn’t needed 

any more and that we’re doing great under Stephen Harper. But 

when we give them a chance to prove it, they say no, we don’t 

want to do that. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, will the Premier admit that his giving peace a 

chance plan with the federal government is just more 

exaggerated rhetoric? And will he relaunch the equalization 

lawsuit so that the people of Saskatchewan get what it is that 

they are entitled to, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 

point out to the member opposite one of the founding principles 

of the Saskatchewan Party is that we would deal professionally 

and responsibly with any federal government that was elected in 

the country. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — And, Mr. Speaker, we intend to keep 

that promise and that commitment to the founding principles of 

our party because in order to maximize the benefit to any 



April 22, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2795 

individual province, it needs a provincial government that’ll act 

responsibly, act professionally, and lobby aggressively on 

behalf of our citizens. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Members allowed the question to be 

asked, I would ask the members that they be able to hear the 

answer. The Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I can report to the Assembly that this government is 

doing its job in terms of lobbying the federal government to 

ensuring that there is no dollar left on the table in relationships 

with the federal government. We have done that. We will 

continue to do it. And we’ll do it into the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 

Albert Northcote. 

 

Storage of Nuclear Waste 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, the UDP [Uranium Development 

Partnership] report recommended that Saskatchewan be open to 

the idea of nuclear waste storage. It recommends to the 

province, in addition to that, support any community that’s 

willing to come forward to store nuclear waste. Simple question 

to the minister: under his government will nuclear waste be 

stored in Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 

Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker, I appreciate the question. The UDP was developed and 

tasked with examining all elements of nuclear power, the whole 

cycle. We’re talking about refining. We’re talking about 

enhancement. We’re talking about enhanced mining, as I’ve 

said before. There’s a concern in this province about 

Saskatchewan losing their pre-eminence as the number one 

miner in the world of uranium. We’re also going to look at 

medical isotopes and what research and innovation can be done 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

And yes, we’re going to look at storage. Storage is something 

that the experts are looking at. We’re wanting to hear what 

Saskatchewan residents have to say about that, and that’s what 

the consultation process is for. And we’ll be hearing much more 

about the consultation process later today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 

Albert Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, there’s a fundamental reason why 

people in Saskatchewan don’t trust these guys with this file. 

You’ve got him saying nuclear storage is on the table. The 

Premier said we have a moral and ethical responsibility to store 

it, and the minister responsible says there’s no possible way it’s 

going to be done. So which is it? They get the same page on at 

least one of these issues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, nuclear reactors create nuclear waste. The waste 

needs to be managed. Simple question again to the minister: 

what will his government do with nuclear waste stored, the 

nuclear waste produced at a power facility? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 

Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. Well the people of Saskatchewan have been clear to 

this point that they’re not wanting to go down the path of 

examination of storage. UDP has looked at the proposal. 

They’ll be consulting further with Saskatchewan people; we 

want to hear what they have to say. But there’s many other 

areas where we have to look, and areas of much more 

importance to Saskatchewan residents. 

 

I know that members opposite agree because I know that their 

leader said on November 2, 2005 — it was a trip to Asia — and 

I quote, “Calvert said the province would consider any business 

case to establish a reactor or nuclear waste storage facility in the 

province . . .” Well if that was a priority then, I’m sure that it is 

consistent right now. 

 

But what we’re going to look at is hear more from 

Saskatchewan people. But we’ve heard them up until this point, 

and they’re not interested in storage. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 

Albert Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Well once again, the duplicity, Mr. Speaker. 

First there’s no government money involved in this process; and 

then the minister said that government money is on the table. 

We’re going to have a decision this year, says the Premier; the 

minister says the decision is a few years away. The Premier 

says we have a moral and ethical obligation to store waste; the 

minister says there’s no way we’re going to store waste. 

 

And now it’s back on the table. How can they be trusted at all? 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: will he admit today that nuclear 

waste will be stored in this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 

Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — What will happen very shortly is 

we will have the most extensive consultation with people of 

Saskatchewan to talk about the Uranium Development 

Partnership. We’ve asked Mr. Perrins to be the Chair, an 

individual who is well respected by all members of this 

Assembly and most people in Saskatchewan that know him, and 

all people of Saskatchewan, I believe. So he will undertake that. 

 

We will look at everything. But what has been very clear — and 



2796 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2009 

the minister has said that, and I say that here today — that 

Saskatchewan residents up until this point have been clear that 

storage is not an area that they want to pursue. 

 

Yes, we want to hear more of what Saskatchewan people have 

to say; that’s what will happen here. And we always look 

forward to that input. I said yesterday, whether it’s the Green 

Party, whether it’s the NDP Party, or even more so the people 

of Saskatchewan, we want to hear what they have to say. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Official 

Opposition. 

 

Consultation Regarding Nuclear Power 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a very simple 

question, either for the minister or the Premier, whoever wants 

to speak on behalf of government. Does this government 

believe that the people of Saskatchewan ought to have as much 

information at their disposal as is possible before they are asked 

to make a decision about a nuclear reactor and the future of 

electrical generation in this province? Do they believe that the 

people of Saskatchewan deserve as much information as 

possible? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — It’s very clear. People want to 

have this debate. They want to educate themselves. And that’s 

why they’re encouraged by this government undertaking the 

most extensive consultation ever in the history of our province 

on this particular topic. That’s why there will be consultations 

across the province. That’s why a person of Mr. Perrins’s 

stature has been asked to serve this province and to take on this 

responsibility. 

 

We look forward to that debate. And people across 

Saskatchewan look forward to educating themselves and 

learning more from the process. What could possibly be wrong 

with that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Official 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, whether this is the most 

extensive consultation or not is a very debatable point. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, what is not debatable is this: the people of 

Saskatchewan do not have the information they need to make 

an informed decision. 

 

Even this government cannot answer questions about a reactor. 

They cannot answer the questions where would power be 

exported to. They cannot answer the questions about waste 

which are asked today. They cannot answer the questions about 

infrastructure necessity. They cannot answer the questions 

about cost and feasibility. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, will the Premier commit to provide to the 

people of Saskatchewan a process that gives them much, much 

more information before they are asked to make a decision? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, it’s been very 

interesting to see that member and members opposite criticize 

the consultation process. It is the most extensive consultation 

process the province will have ever undertaken on the issue. 

Not that other governments, previous NDP governments, have 

avoided decisions on nuclear power, we know that they have 

made decisions. 

 

We know that secretly they commissioned studies by 

SaskPower on nuclear power, Mr. Speaker. We know that that 

member, when he was the Premier, went to Asia to promote 

potentially nuclear power. We know that he came back and 

said, and I quote from the Leader-Post “[Calvert] said the 

province would consider any business case to establish a reactor 

or nuclear waste storage facility in the province [of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker].” 

 

I would say this, Mr. Speaker, it’s hard for the people of the 

province, members on this side of the House or others, to take 

any advice or lectures from that member and that party on 

engaging Saskatchewan people on this issue, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Official 

Opposition. 

 

Consultation Regarding Energy Sources 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I invite the Premier to 

consult the archivists at the Leader-Post to check the headlines 

in the Leader-Post the day after the article he quotes. He ought 

to just check the headlines because, you know what, Mr. 

Speaker, on that very same day, this Premier, this Premier said 

he would have nothing to do with waste in Saskatchewan. Now 

he goes about the province saying, well he has a moral 

responsibility to it. 

 

He has a UDP that recommends fundamentally three things: the 

repository for waste, expansion of mining, and the creation of a 

nuclear reactor. That’s what the UDP says. It says, on a medical 

isotope facility or a small reactor, well that’s a big maybe. An 

even bigger maybe is this enrichment facility. And the UDP 

says, forget refining; that’s gone somewhere else — forget 

refining. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, yesterday this official opposition laid out a 

very reasonable proposal to provide opportunity for 

Saskatchewan people to become fully informed about choices 

they are asked to make about the future of their electrical 

generation, a reasonable proposal. Why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

will the Premier and his government not accept this reasonable 



April 22, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2797 

proposal? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, you know it is absolutely true, 

it is a matter of the record, notwithstanding the correction or the 

flip-flop on the waste issue, that the members opposite have 

investigated secretly the option for nuclear power. At least they 

wouldn’t make the reports public. 

 

Neither did, when the then premier came back from Asia to say 

that he supported potentially a business case for nuclear power, 

neither did he engage in any consultation at all, Mr. Speaker — 

not single public meeting, not a website, not any kind of a 

forum at all. So that’s why people have problems I think taking 

the member seriously on this line of questioning. 

 

But I will say this, I think the suggestion from the NDP earlier 

this week has some merit. There are two issues here: one is 

uranium value-added. That’s much bigger than electricity, Mr. 

Speaker. Electricity may be part of it, but the UDP is much 

bigger than that. So that’s one process, and that we want 

members opposite and the people of Saskatchewan to be 

engaged in. 

 

But we would also welcome all members of this Assembly to 

engage in a process on the exploration of a bigger question, and 

that is how will we generate affordable, safe power for a 

growing economy years into the future. 

 

I think members opposite are going to have a chance to vote on 

how serious they are about what I think was the constructive 

spirit of their proposal earlier this week, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Official 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is exactly why 

yesterday we unveiled a proposal for a very reasonable 

approach to providing information to the people of 

Saskatchewan — not alone on the nuclear option, but on a 

carbon-based option, on alternate renewable energy options, on 

demand management, and conservation options, Mr. Speaker — 

a reasonable proposal. And all this proposal would do, will give 

credibility to the minister responsible for this file who says a 

decision is months, years away — contrary to what the Premier 

said it would be made by the end of the year. 

 

So let’s go with the minister’s approach. Let’s understand this 

decision is several years away and let’s take the time at the 

beginning to inform the people of Saskatchewan. I ask the 

Premier again, will he accept the proposal we made yesterday? 

Will he give the people of Saskatchewan a real opportunity to 

become informed before they’re asked to make a decision? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the vast majority of the 

proposal, the principle of the proposal we heard from the NDP, 

we do accept, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We said that yesterday. The 

minister responsible said we believe it is important. And I think 

about a week ago I invited that hon. member to also consider 

the all-party committee of this legislature to engage in precisely 

what that party over there has now proposed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That proposal, that offer remains today. In fact I think we’ll 

take the next step. At some point I think we should be able to 

have this Assembly consider a resolution that would direct all 

members of that committee — there are New Democrats 

obviously on that committee — to undertake exactly what the 

hon. member is talking about and what I spoke about about a 

week and a half ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we encourage, we encourage the members 

opposite to carefully consider this idea so that we can provide 

affordable, safe power into the future for Canada’s fastest 

growing economy, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Crown and 

Central Agencies. 

 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

instructed by the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 

Agencies to report Bill No. 87, The Income Tax Amendment 

Act, 2009 without amendment. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

request leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole 

on this Bill and that the Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has 

requested leave to waive consideration in the Committee of the 

Whole on Bill No. 87, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2009 

without amendment and that the Bill be now read the third time. 

Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. The minister may proceed to 

third readings. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 87 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2009 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move that this 

Bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Finance that Bill No. 87, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2009 



2798 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2009 

without amendment be now read the third time and passed 

under the title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of the 

Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 

88, The Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 2009 without 

amendment. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I request leave 

to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill, 

and that the Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has 

requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole on Bill No. 88, The Corporation Capital Tax 

Amendment Act, 2009 without amendment, and the Bill be now 

read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. The minister may move to 

proceed to third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 88 — The Corporation Capital Tax 

Amendment Act, 2009 
 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — I move that this Bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Finance that Bill No. 88, The Corporation Capital Tax 

Amendment Act, 2009 without amendment be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for 

the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Chair of the 

Standing Committee on House Services. 

 

Standing Committee on House Services 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

instructed by the Standing Committee on House Services to 

report Bill No. 59, The Election Amendment Act, 2008 without 

amendment. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I request leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill, 

and that the Bill now be read the third time. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested 

leave to waive consideration of Committee of the Whole on Bill 

No. 59, The Election Amendment Act, 2008 without 

amendment, and that the Bill be now read the third time. Is 

leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move 

third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 59 — The Election Amendment Act, 2008 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that this Bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Finance that Bill No. 59, The Election Amendment Act, 2008 

without amendment be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 



April 22, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2799 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Chair of 

House Services. 

 

Standing Committee on House Services 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

instructed by the Standing Committee on House Services to 

report Bill No. 60, The Senate Nominee Election Act without 

amendment. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I request leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill, 

and that the Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill 

No. 60, The Senate Nominee Election Act without amendment 

and the Bill be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The minister may proceed to third 

readings. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 60 — The Senate Nominee Election Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move that this 

Bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Justice that Bill No. 60, The Senate Nominee Election Act 

without amendment be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Deputy Speaker, thank you very much. 

Asking leave for the introduction of a guest. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Labour has asked 

leave for introduction of guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the minister. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — To you and through you, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I would like to introduce Ms. Kelly Kozak. She is a 

representative of the University of Saskatchewan here today. 

She’s part of the delegation that has been working with our 

special guests from Vietnam looking to enhance ways to help 

facilitate and ensure increased co-operation with that country 

and communities in that country. 

 

As well she serves on the Saskatoon school board, and has 

distinguished herself both across campus and across our 

community. Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I 

would ask that all members of the Assembly welcome Ms. 

Kozak to her Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Hon. members, before orders of the 

day, I lay before the Assembly, pursuant to section 14.1 of The 

Provincial Auditor Act, report to the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan on the financial statements of the Crown 

agencies for year ending the 2008 calendar year and a report to 

the Legislative Assembly on the 2008 financial statements of 

the CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan] 

Crown corporations and related entities. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I wish to 

table the answer to questions 343 and 344. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Government Whip has moved to 

table questions no. 343 and no. 344. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Point of order. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House 

Leader. 

 

[14:30] 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today on a point of order concerning remarks made by the 

Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour on 

Monday in the Assembly, Mr. Speaker. This is the first 

opportunity I’ve had to rise on this matter. 

 

In response to a series of questions, the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Labour directly calls into question 

the integrity of the member from Saskatoon Massey Place. And 

I quote from page 2768 of the Saskatchewan Hansard, “. . . I’m 

happy to talk about the lack of integrity regarding those 



2800 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2009 

questions, Mr. Speaker.” The quote was clearly intended to 

demean the integrity of the questioner, the member from 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

I draw Mr. Speaker’s attention to page 525 of Marleau and 

Montpetit in which it is stated, and I quote: 

 

The proceedings of the House are based on a 

long-standing tradition of respect for the integrity of 

Members. Thus, the use of offensive, provocative or 

threatening language in the House is strictly forbidden. 

Personal attacks, insults and obscene language or words 

are not in order. 

 

Mr. Speaker, not only are the remarks of the member a personal 

attack, Mr. Speaker, but it directly contravenes the tradition of 

respect and integrity of the members. Mr. Speaker, I ask for an 

apology from the Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I would like to speak to the substance of the motion. 

 

I think it’s very clear that there’s a fundamental difference 

between commenting on the integrity of a statement that’s made 

by someone and that individual’s personal integrity. A world of 

difference, and I think that for the Opposition House Leader to 

be trying to draw that connection is simply frivolous and out of 

order. 

 

Mr. Speaker, members in this House do have respect for each 

other as individuals and as persons, but we do take umbrance at 

many occasions with the statements that we make and we take 

exception to statements we make and there’s a very important 

and fundamental distinction between the two. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Since this event took place on 

Monday, I will have to review Hansard and discuss that and 

come back with a ruling on it. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 73 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Norris that Bill No. 73 — The 

University of Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 2008 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 

stand this afternoon and speak to Bill 73, The University of 

Saskatchewan Amendment Act — an amendment to an Act, Mr. 

Speaker, that has a fairly high degree of significance for one of 

the most important institutions here in Saskatchewan, in our 

province, the University of Saskatchewan. 

 

Of course everyone in the province, Mr. Speaker, has I think a 

deep affection for the University of Saskatchewan. Individuals 

in government, outside of government, and truly individuals 

outside of our provincial boundaries and outside of our national 

boundaries recognize the University of Saskatchewan as a truly 

important institution that does cutting-edge research and, of 

course, serves the needs of Saskatchewan people very well. On 

a personal level, having completed a degree at the University of 

Saskatchewan and as a member of convocation, I of course 

have many fond memories of my time at the U of S and enjoy 

any opportunity I have to return to the university. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the amendments that are put forward in Bill 73, 

The University of Saskatchewan Amendment Act, as stated in 

comments earlier on in this legislature by the minister, these 

requests have been made by university administration as a 

means as what they would see as an opportunity to modernize 

and an opportunity to ensure that some of the structures in place 

on campus are as responsive and as effective as they need to be, 

that the structures in place on campus match up with the 

expectations that we have for the university and the important 

role and the important function that it has in this modern age 

that we live in now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s three general areas that these amendments 

are concerning. The one area, Mr. Speaker, the first area would 

be looking at eliminating the role of visitor which has 

traditionally been filled by the Lieutenant Governor. That’s the 

one area. The second area is extending the term limits for board 

members, and the third area has to do with changes to how the 

chancellor is selected for the University of Saskatchewan. And 

I’d like to make a few comments about these three areas, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The first area with eliminating the role of visitor, I would agree, 

Mr. Speaker, that as our democracy evolves and that as our 

democracy progresses there are structures in place, Mr. 

Speaker. There are approaches if someone does feel like they 

have a problem or have not been treated fairly. There are 

mechanisms within the university structure that are avenues of 

appeal for those individuals, and of course there are 

opportunities outside of the university’s structure. On this 

aspect, Mr. Speaker, I would see this as an appropriate step in a 

sense of bringing a more modern approach to how the 

university needs to operate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The second area that was addressed, Mr. Speaker, was 

extending the term limits of board members from two to three. 

And I think for members in this Assembly who have had the 

opportunity to sit on a board or be involved in any type of 

organization, whether that be paid or volunteer, clearly the 

longer one stays involved in that organization the more 

experience they have, the more knowledge they have about the 

ins and outs of the organization, and the more they are able to 

contribute. 

 



April 22, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2801 

Of course that needs to be balanced with the realization that 

sometimes in any organization individuals can maybe stay a 

little longer than would be appropriate in order to ensure that 

there is a turnover of people and new ideas are brought in, and 

that the mandate or the actions of the organization stays fresh. 

 

But there would be best practices, Mr. Speaker, that suggest that 

this move of moving from two to three terms is, in fact, an 

appropriate one, and that this could improve the effectiveness of 

how the board operates in the years going ahead, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The first area was discussing the elimination of the role of 

visitor. The second one was extending the term limits and, Mr. 

Speaker, the third area was how the chancellor is selected. 

 

Traditionally, Mr. Speaker, this has been done through a 

process of voting where anyone who is a member of 

convocation, anyone who has graduated from the University of 

Saskatchewan has the opportunity to have their say, has the 

opportunity to vote and say who they would like to be the 

chancellor of the university. 

 

And what this request from the University of Saskatchewan 

administration is asking, Mr. Speaker, is that no longer would 

there be an election or a vote that is held by convocation, but 

instead it would be a decision or a recommendation that would 

be put forth by a group involving members from the board of 

governors as well as members from the senate who are elected 

representatives to the university, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I think most likely I would expect, Mr. Speaker, the 

rationale for this choice would be that, with a fairly low level of 

voter turnout in these elections there’s a degree of effort and a 

degree of expense, Mr. Speaker, that perhaps the selection of 

chancellor could be done in a more effective way that could 

serve the needs of the university, Mr. Speaker. 

 

On a personal level, Mr. Speaker, I do see the merit of this 

approach in terms of how the chancellor would be selected, but 

that is not to say I have not received feedback from other 

individuals, whether that be from the public, the university 

community, or some other members of caucus as well, Mr. 

Speaker, who do have perhaps some concerns that this might be 

a way that individuals who have had a particular involvement 

and who have a deep affection for the University of 

Saskatchewan, that perhaps this is decreasing their level of 

involvement with the institution once they complete their 

training and join convocation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So on a personal level, I do see the merit in these three changes 

that have been requested in this amendment that has been 

brought forward, but I’m also cognizant and I do not want to 

dismiss the concerns that I have heard from individuals in this 

Assembly and outside of this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. So I do 

look forward to have the opportunity to ask a few questions, 

Mr. Speaker, in committee on this Bill, some questions 

concerning how, with these changes, the university is ensuring, 

how these legislation changes would still allow individuals to 

participate in the institution that they care so much about and 

still have a say with how the governance occurs at the 

University of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I’ll voice my support for these amendments, but do look 

forward to the chance to ask some questions on these 

amendments, Mr. Speaker. So with that I would conclude my 

remarks. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

the motion by the Minister of Advanced Education and Labour 

that Bill No. 73, The University of Saskatchewan Amendment 

Act, 2008 be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the Standing 

Committee on Human Services. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the 

Standing Committee on Human Services. 

 

Bill No. 68 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Tell that Bill No. 68 — The Arts 

Professions Act/Loi sur les professions artistiques be now read 

a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to rise today to speak to Bill 68, The Arts Professions 

Act. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the artists of our province are an 

extremely important part of how we feel about ourselves, about 

how we tell the stories about ourselves, and about how we 

present ourselves to the world. And they’re important because 

this place that we live in is important to us. And so this 

particular legislation today is an attempt to show the importance 

that the government places on this particular profession. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to start off my discussion this 

afternoon with a reading of a poem by Andrew Suknaski, and 

it’s called, “Indian Rings on the Edge of Tonita Pasture.” And 

as many people know, Andy Suknaski is from southern 

Saskatchewan and I think he now lives in Moose Jaw. But this 

poem goes as follows: 

 

the meadow lark’s song proclaiming spring 

waters lazily flowing from wood mountain peat moss 

springs 

becoming five mile creek running north 

through this coulee 

where i caught fish and swam in boyhood unaware 

of three indian rings that nearly vanished 

beneath dust from a field 

lee soparlo’s father worked 

trying to feed his family in the thirties — this 



2802 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2009 

and standing here now in this great centre ring 

where something holds 

me around the heart the way 

the wired stone anchors a cornerpost of the nearby fence 

stretching north 

and west to the village where i grew up — i claim these 

things 

my ancestral space to move through and beyond 

chronicling the meaning of these vast plains 

in a geography of blood 

and failure 

making them live. 

 

That’s Mr. Suknaski’s poem. And it talks about something that 

I think all of us who are from Saskatchewan feel, is that this is 

our ancestral place and that we have a role in telling the stories 

about this place, so that we can chronicle the meaning of the 

plains in the geography of blood and failure. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the role of doing that over the last 100 years 

plus of our province has been reflected in each generation of 

people retelling the story and how they connect. 

 

I think what’s quite interesting about Mr. Suknaski’s poem is 

that it was written in the ’70s when people were starting to try 

to make the connections between the settlers and the people 

who had been here first — our First Nations and then the Métis 

people. And what happens is that artist, that poet, is in a 

position of talking about and dealing with some of these 

currents that are part of our lives. 

 

Many of us who are in this Chamber have strong roots in the 

land. Our families, our parents and grandparents and 

great-grandparents were part of the farmer group that came to 

Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, sometimes we don’t always 

value the artists like the poets or the painters or the musicians in 

as great a way as we should. Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s what this 

particular Bill is about. 

 

Now unfortunately we as Saskatchewan people are similar to 

other Canadians in how we value our artists. And part of the 

goal that I think that our government should aspire to is to be 

better than the rest of Canada as it relates the artists of our 

province. 

 

[14:45] 

 

Now just last month there was an article in The Globe and Mail 

which talked about the number of artists in Canada. And 

basically there’ve been a number of articles over the last year 

that have been based on work done related to the 2006 census 

of Canada, but the story on Thursday, March 5 in The Globe 

and Mail on page R3 basically has a headline, “Artists decline 

as percentage of work force.” And basically the study that was 

released by a company called Hill Strategies that had done the 

work on behalf of a number of agencies in Canada which 

included the Canada Council for the Arts, the Department of 

Canadian Heritage, and the Ontario Arts Council, basically Hill 

Strategies said that looking at the 2006 data, the number of 

artists had decreased and that the average earnings had also 

been taking a hit. 

 

Now that was based on 2006 information. We’re now in the 

year 2009 and we know that there are even greater pressures on 

all members of our community. Another part of the Hill 

Strategies work for some of our national arts agencies related to 

some key facts that they were able to report about the working 

lives of artists in Canada. 

 

And I think it’s important that we put this information on the 

record here as we lay the groundwork for a discussion about 

The Arts Professions Act. A report released by Hill Strategies 

on February 4, 2008, was called A Statistical Profile of Artists 

in Canada based on the 2006 census, and it shows in that year 

there were 140,000 artists in Canada who spent more time at 

their art than at any other occupation as of May 2006. Now 

artists include actors, authors, choreographers, craftspeople, 

composers, conductors, dancers, directors, musicians, 

producers, singers, and visual artists. 

 

Now that number — 140,000 — was slightly higher in May 

2006 than the number of people employed in the automobile 

industry in Canada, which was 135,000. As we know, that 

number has been reduced substantially over the last couple of 

years. 

 

This report also identified the fact that the broader cultural 

sector in Canada had about 609,000 workers and that these 

workers actually comprised 3.3 per cent of the overall labour 

force in Canada. So that’s one in every 30 people in Canada 

have a job in a cultural occupation. That’s double the number 

involved in the forest industry and double the number that’s 

involved in the banking industries. 

 

But with that positive news, there’s also some things that are 

disturbing. The first point is the average earnings of artists are 

very low. The average earnings of artists in Canada are 

$22,700, compared to an average of all Canadian workers of 

$36,300. So there’s a gap of about 37 per cent between the 

average earnings of workers in Canada and artists. They’re in 

that bottom group. 

 

The average earning of artists is only about 9 per cent higher 

than Statistic Canada’s low-income cut-off for a single person 

living in a community of 500,000 people or more. So six of the 

nine arts occupations have average earnings that are less than 

that of the low-income cut-off for Statistics Canada. So 

basically the point is that artists’ earnings are very low in our 

Canadian society. 

 

Second point is a typical artist in Canada earns less than half the 

typical earnings of all Canadian workers. So for artists, the 

median earnings are only about $12,900, and that’s about half 

of the median earnings of Canadians, which is $26,900. So once 

again a comparison shows that the artists are in a low, low 

income area. 

 

But six of these arts occupations, the median earnings of an 

artist are less than or equal to $10,000, and that means that a 

typical actor, artisan, dancer, musician or singer, other 

performer, or visual artist earns only about $10,000 or less. I 

remind everybody this information comes from the review of 

the information provided to Statistics Canada. 

 

Now the other sobering factor, as we look at artists’ earnings, is 

that before the current recession started, the average earnings of 



April 22, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2803 

artists were decreasing already. So between the year 1990 and 

2005, the averaging earnings of artists decreased by 11 per cent, 

even after adjusting for inflation. Compared to the overall 

labour force, the average earnings for the whole labour force 

grew about 9 per cent during the same time frame. So we 

actually have artists’ earnings going down in the last number of 

years since 1990. And basically the earnings gap between artists 

and the overall labour force has gone from 23 per cent in 1990 

to 37 per cent in 2005. 

 

Another fact that this Hill Strategies report laid out was the fact 

that there are more female than male artists, but the women 

artists earn much less than men. So there are about 74,000 

female artists, which is about 53 per cent of the artists, 

compared to an overall workforce number of 48 per cent of the 

workers being women. And these female artists still end up 

earning less than their male counterparts. 

 

Another factor is that Aboriginal and visible minority artists 

have particularly low earnings. The Aboriginal artists have a 

particularly low average earnings of about $15,900, which is a 

39 per cent gap when compared with all Aboriginal workers in 

the Canadian labour force. So these earnings for Aboriginal 

artists are about 30 per cent lower than the average for all 

artists. Visible minority artists are in a similar category, and 

their earnings are 38 per cent less than the average earnings. 

 

Now a sixth point that this study makes is that the economic 

returns to higher education are much lower for artists than for 

other workers. Basically university educated artists earn 38 per 

cent more than artists with a high school education. This is 

compared to the overall situation in the workforces where a 

university education shows a doubling of the earnings, 

compared to those people with just a high school education. The 

number of artists with at least a bachelor’s degree of university 

education is nearly double the rate in the overall labour force. 

The numbers of artists is about 39 per cent versus 21 per cent in 

the overall labour force. 

 

Another factor is that many artists are self-employed. So in the 

overall workforce in the country, about 7 per cent of the people 

are self-employed. As it relates to artists, 42 per cent are 

self-employed, and the self-employed artists are earning 

substantially less than the earnings of other self-employed 

workers in Canada. 

 

An eighth point that this Hill Strategies report set out was that 

there are relatively few opportunities for full-time work in the 

arts, so nearly twice as many artists as other workers indicated 

that they worked part-time in 2005. So about 42 per cent of the 

artists in Canada worked part-time versus 22 per cent of the 

overall workforce. Basically this is also reflected in the fact that 

many artists are employed fewer weeks in a year than other 

workers. This also clearly affects the overall income for artists. 

 

Now one point that this report brought out which was 

interesting and, I think, positive was that there’s been a 

substantial growth in the number of artists since 1971. And so 

there was a fairly dramatic increase of the number of artists as 

part of the overall labour force in Canada between 1971 and 

2006. But basically in the last number of years that growth rate 

has started to level off, and that ends up being a concern as 

well. 

Another, I think, positive point, but also one that causes some 

reflection — and that’s the tenth and final point in this summary 

of this report — was that artists as a group are becoming more 

diverse, older, and better educated. And so between the years 

’91 and 2006, there’s many more visible minority groups who 

are artists. Artists who are 45 and older have more than doubled 

in number. There’s 90 per cent more artists with university 

certificate, diploma, or degree in 2006 than there were in 1991. 

And basically the overall labour force as it relates to artists is 

well trained and well experienced. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve spent a little bit of time laying 

out some of this information about artists because the goal of 

this legislation is to improve the lot of artists in Saskatchewan. 

And this is the latest version, the version brought forward by 

this government, to deal with the arts profession. And we know 

that there were previous versions of this legislation, both 

initially and in 2002, and it was based on work done over, I 

guess, almost two decades now with government policy 

officials and with the artists in a broad sense in Saskatchewan. 

 

In the year 2002, there was a proposal that was going to deal 

with some of the status of the artist work. And this was 

subsequently introduced in the year 2006 as Bill 68, status of 

the . . . well I’m not sure if it was Bill . . . but there was a Bill 

introduced in that year. 

 

And that particular legislation was quite interesting and actually 

caused a fair amount of discussion because it involved a 

number of things that had come from within the artist 

community. And I think if I just even outline a few of the areas 

that were listed in that particular legislation, it’ll allow me to 

make some comparisons with the legislation that was proposed 

in ’06-07, which ultimately wasn’t passed, and the present Bill 

that was introduced in 2008. 

 

[15:00] 

 

Basically that legislation had a part 2 which was about 

recognition of artists, and I think it ended up having some of the 

same substances as what is in this particular legislation. 

 

But part 3 of that 2006-2007 Bill was called professional 

relations. And basically the Bill was an attempt to set out a 

process of negotiation and bargaining within the artistic sector 

to allow for some standards around compensation, around a 

number of the typical employment issues that relate to people 

who are doing work that is of benefit to society or to particular 

institutions. 

 

And much of the legislation had been developed over a number 

of years working together with both employers, people who 

were going to hire artists of various kinds, and the different 

groups of artists. And this was both individual artists, but also 

the various professional groups that represent different 

segments within the whole field of artists. And the goal was to 

end up having agreements that would set the employment terms 

and the scales of payment right across different sectors that 

were being bargained for. 

 

And this ended up being a work that had many, many hours of 

thinking and policy development behind it. Now ultimately it 

ended up not making it through the legislative process. And 



2804 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2009 

unfortunately in the election there was an indication from the 

present government that they were going to bring forward 

legislation as it related to the arts professions, and so we were 

hopeful that they would bring forward something that would be 

similar to the work that had been developed before. 

 

But when Bill 68 arrived last fall, what we’ve found out was 

that anything that related to the bargaining or setting scale 

agreements or negotiation or dealing with unfair practices, those 

kinds of things, all of that kind of work was removed from the 

legislation. And what we got was the legislation that we have 

here today, which has some positive things in it, but it’s missing 

the big chunk of the Act that would actually benefit the wages 

of artists in general. 

 

Now let me talk briefly, or well maybe not so briefly, but in a 

form that’s understandable around the things that are in this 

particular legislation that basically comes from the work that 

was done before. And where I will go is to say that in this 

legislation, the definition of artist is helpful. It sets out who 

would be included under this legislation, and it does that in a 

comprehensive way. And I think that’s important that it does it 

that way. 

 

But one place that is lacking, it relates to the whole area of 

multi-media arts and Internet arts. And as we know, this is a 

growing field. It’s where there’s much money. All you have to 

do is travel to Vancouver or even to parts of Regina where the 

number of people involved as multi-media artists or Internet 

artists is expanding. And as we know it’s an area where many 

of the younger people are being trained, and they’re actually 

finding very good jobs. None of that is included in this 

particular Act. 

 

Now there is a provision, which is section 2(e), which allows 

for other fields, artistic fields to be added by regulation. That’s 

an option here. I think it would be helpful if we actually knew 

. . . And maybe we’ll find out some of this information when 

this Bill gets to committee. But the important part is that there’s 

a whole area of the Internet arts, multi-media arts, which isn’t 

included in this particular legislation. 

 

Now the next point in this legislation, and once again we’re still 

in section 2, relates to artists’ associations. And because they’ve 

totally removed any of the issues as it relates to the 

employee-employer relationship and anything that hints at 

something close to the use of the Labour Relations Board, there 

had to be some changes. And we see some of those as we look 

at some of the definitions in section 2. 

 

Now when you go to the definition of a professional artist, and 

that’s also in section 2, that definition is pretty similar to what 

had been there in the previous legislation, except it’s added one 

clause which is the very last clause in that definition. And that 

basically says that people have to have a business licence if 

they’re carrying on artistic activity and if they want to get 

included in this particular Act, and that’s I guess something 

that’s there. We’ll find out the rationale for that, I think, when 

we get to committee. 

 

Now when we get to the recognition of the artist section, which 

is section 4 of the new legislation, it’s interesting to note the 

addition that’s made in that particular section in the definition, 

which is to basically say, instead of emphasizing the importance 

to artists of being fairly compensation for the creation and use 

of their professional works, it adds the word — professional. So 

in other words, this is not going to protect the ideas and 

brilliance of some of our Saskatchewan people who are artists 

but they don’t fit into that whole professional artist category, 

and I think that’s a little bit offside with a recognition of the 

people who are going to do this kind of work. But we’ll have a 

chance, I think, to find out more about why that change is there. 

 

We see the similar emphasis on professional artists when you 

get to section 6, which is headed, the policy respecting artists. 

And this is once again a shift in this protection of artists to 

something that is defined in another place. I’m not sure what 

the full effect or intent is of the government as it relates to this, 

but it’s the kind of thing that we’ll need to ask some very good 

questions about when it does get into the committee. 

 

Now the next section is section 7. It’s got the same heading. It 

says, the undertaking of the government. And let me just read 

the section 7 that was there in the ’06-07 Act: 

 

7 The Government of Saskatchewan undertakes to do the 

following: 

 

(a) to promote and protect the status of the artist by 

considering artistic work, including innovation and 

research, as a public good and service to the community; 

 

(b) to promote within government the working 

conditions of artists. 

 

The new Act, section 7, says: 

 

7 The Government of Saskatchewan undertakes [and then 

it puts a big condition] as far as it considers it reasonable 

and appropriate, to do the following: 

 

(a) [And then it goes into talking about promoting] . . . 

artistic work, including innovation and creativity, as a 

public good and service the community; 

 

(b) to respect the working conditions of . . . artists. 

 

So that section 7(b) is basically one line to say, well we respect 

the working conditions without having all of the protections that 

were in the previous legislation. So they’ve encapsulated pages 

and pages of protection for artists with this one line about 

respect. And then once again, it designates professional artists 

as opposed to artists. 

 

And so we end up having a much watered down, much 

weakened Bill that builds on some of the work that was done 

there before. Now if we put the best construction on this, we 

can see it as a step towards getting better protection for artists 

and the arts professions. But practically it’s a fair step back 

from the kind of work that was there just, you know, a couple of 

years ago. 

 

Now the next section in this legislation relates to an advisory 

committee to the minister. And that concept continues and it’s 

possible that out of the work there that some of the protections 

and some of the important clauses that had been developed 



April 22, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2805 

previously may resurface. And that’s why I say there are some 

possibilities of moving this forward, but once again it leaves 

much to the discretion of the minister. 

 

And I think the key line basically in the whole Act is to say, the 

Government of Saskatchewan undertakes “as far as it considers 

it reasonable and appropriate, to do . . .” whatever’s in this 

legislation. So it continually has, rather than a legislative 

directive, it has this huge hole that allows for the government to 

do what it thinks is appropriate no matter what the legislation 

says. 

 

Now the final section of this new legislation, and in many ways 

the most substantial part of this particular legislation, relates to 

the individual contracts — goods and services from 

professional artists. And effectively what this does is it sets out 

the conditions that should be present in any kind of a contract 

where you secure goods or services from an artist. 

 

This is good work. It’s got good clauses in it. It deals with many 

of the issues that professional artists have encountered over the 

years. And so I think that that particular area, we may have 

some questions about it as we move forward into committee, 

but there are basically the main points that you would want in 

any contract of engagement of an artist. 

 

Now I would point out though that the regulatory power which 

is given in a subsequent clause, which is clause 10 in the 

regulations, effectively allows the Lieutenant Governor in 

Council to exempt “. . . engagers, professional artists or 

transactions or classes of engagers, professional artists or 

transactions from the requirement to have a written contract 

. . .” which is the main clause in section 9(1). 

 

So you have given a strong statement about the fact that you 

should have contracts for professional artists, but right in the 

next clause it allows for regulations to remove whole areas of 

artistic endeavour from the provisions of this particular 

legislation. I think we need to get on the record in committee 

what the minister intends to do as it relates to regulations in this 

area. It’s unfortunate that it couldn’t have been clearer in the 

legislation itself what kinds of areas are, you know, the plans 

are there to exempt because in many ways the whole legislation 

will be quite useless if the areas where the most problems have 

arisen are not included. 

 

[15:15] 

 

So this legislation is a faint shadow of the work that was done 

previously, but it is a shadow. It does reflect some of the things 

that were there in previous versions of the legislation, and it 

does have some things that we will want to make sure are 

substantial and allow us to provide protection for the artists in 

our community, but it only is a small step in that direction. 

 

Now I encourage the government to continue to work in this 

area, work with the various groups that are involved and make 

sure that as we go forward we in Saskatchewan can end up 

having the best protections possible for our artists. Because 

once again I return to the fact that the artists of Saskatchewan, 

whether visual artists or musicians or the Internet people, 

multimedia people or the writers and storytellers, all of these 

people are the ones that reflect our sense of place, our 

understanding of how we live and how we operate on the earth 

in Saskatchewan. And it’s important that we give these people 

not only short-term protection and words like respect, but that 

we also set up a system to fairly compensate these people and 

make sure that they can end up with a good living doing the 

work that we all want them to do. 

 

And this legislation is a step along that road to the proper 

respect which includes proper compensation. But unfortunately 

it doesn’t go the full mile, and we need to keep working at that. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would say that this legislation should now go 

to committee so that we can ask questions about a number of 

the issues that I’ve raised today. And I will end my remarks 

there. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is Bill No. 

68, the arts professional Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We would 

refer this to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 85 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Hutchinson that Bill No. 85 — The 

Municipal Grants Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, in his second reading remarks in explaining the Bill, 

the minister tells us that the government is implementing a new 

municipal operating grants program. And the idea is that this 

particular program will provide predictable funding to support 

municipal operating expenditures. We’ll see whether that is the 

case as we go down the years here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It has been a tradition of Saskatchewan governments — and I 

don’t how far back it goes but certainly of the governments that 

I’m aware of — for provincial governments to provide funds to 

municipalities to assist those municipalities with their operating 

programs, that the municipality should not rely solely on the 

property tax base to fund all of the programs that they need to 

carry out but that there is a responsibility for the provincial 

government. 

 

After all, the municipalities are a creation of the province. They 

are in effect administrative units of the provincial government 

to enable municipal works be carried out on a local basis, 

subject to the direction of councils elected by people in those 

municipalities. And so there’s a degree of independence. 



2806 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2009 

Nevertheless municipalities are a responsibility of the 

provincial government. 

 

Now the minister tells us it replaces — this new Bill, this new 

program, operating grants program — replaces The Municipal 

Revenue Sharing Act and provides then a new legal framework 

for the government to implement the new program. 

 

He says that the municipal operating grants will grow based on 

the growth in the provincial sales tax. This year the municipal 

operating grant is proposed to be 90 per cent — 90 per cent of 1 

per cent point of the PST [provincial sales tax]. So that’s how 

it’s proposed to be calculated this year. And he indicates that in 

the following year, 2010, 2011, and then in each following year, 

1 full percentage point of the PST will be provided to 

municipalities for operating expenditures So the idea is that as 

the value of the PST, the provincial sales tax, increases, so then 

will the value of the amount of funds set aside by the provincial 

government to provide to municipalities for their operating 

grants. 

 

That’s the theory behind the Bill. That’s how it’s proposed to be 

operated. We’ve always, I think if memory serves me correctly, 

have seen an increase in the value of the provincial sales tax, 

some years more so than others. And that’s one of the issues 

that I will deal with, that we need to concern ourselves with, 

because sometimes the amount of money that the provincial 

government will take in under one point of the provincial sales 

tax can be changed because of changes that the provincial 

government is making to the sales tax itself. So again the 

principle is that as the value of the PST increases, so will the 

grants. 

 

The minister tells us that this Bill, once it received the assent of 

the Lieutenant Governor, it’ll come into force retroactively 

April 1, the very first day of the current fiscal year. 

 

With many different interests involved and stakeholders 

involved, making changes to revenue sharing is a very 

complicated process, Mr. Speaker. You can imagine that not 

only do you have the two cities of Regina and Saskatoon, but 

you have the other cities in Saskatchewan, each that has a 

different perspective on its needs and what kind of support it 

needs from the provincial government. 

 

And then of course you have towns and villages. And all of 

these municipalities may be in different states of development. 

Some municipalities may, because of economic development 

activities within their borders, may see an increase in 

assessment growth within their boundaries and therefore will be 

able to get more money from the interests and citizens within 

their boundaries because of this increase in assessment growth 

without increasing the rate for people as opposed to other 

municipalities. 

 

We all know that in Saskatchewan that some municipalities 

have seen more of an increase in population than other 

municipalities. Bedroom communities, so-called, Mr. Speaker, 

those communities that are or have been established in the areas 

close to major cities, especially Saskatoon and Regina, have 

seen a very significant growth over the years reflecting a desire 

by people to build and have homes in those communities. 

 

So those communities have seen very rapid growth, and it also 

means that those communities have seen a very rapid demand 

for services in those communities to be able to accommodate 

that growth, whereas other communities that don’t have that 

kind of influence and may see and are pure service centres for 

the agricultural sector. And what we know in terms of 

increasing farm sizes, fewer farms, therefore fewer people 

living on the farms, larger farms going to larger centres to 

secure the supplies, provisions, the machinery that they need to 

carry out their farms bypassing some of those communities. 

 

We know that some rural communities have struggled over the 

years, so we see great disparities in state of development 

between communities in Saskatchewan. Complicating the issue 

and pointing out there are different interests, not only do we 

have so-called urban communities of cities, towns, and villages, 

we also have northern communities, Mr. Speaker, which are in 

a class by themselves, have far different ability to generate their 

own revenue compared to southern communities because in the 

main these are communities that are located in isolation of each 

other, in isolation of surrounding countryside that might provide 

the basis for services and the basis for businesses that need to 

provide services to the surrounding countryside. 

 

So we have great disparity between northern communities and 

southern communities and that too is then a consideration when 

it comes to the process of making changes to the grants that 

should be going to municipalities. 

 

Further complicating this is the question of rural municipalities 

and how they should be treated. Historically, rural 

municipalities . . . Well, not historically I guess. At least for the 

last 10, 15 years or so if my reckoning is correct, rural 

municipalities have received funds from the provincial 

government — to be sure out of the municipal revenue sharing 

— but their distribution had been based on the number of 

kilometres of grid roads that they had within their 

municipalities as opposed to population. So in terms of revenue 

sharing compared to urban municipalities, those rural 

municipalities have always had roughly speaking a certain 

percentage of the overall pot so to speak that is then distributed, 

and we’ll have to keep an eye on that. But that’s certainly a 

further complication in terms of the process of defining what it 

is that should be received by municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 

So discussions on those changes started to take place in 2006, 

2007 — I might say before the change in government in 2007, 

Mr. Speaker — when the municipalities sat down with the 

provincial government to determine how it is that the question 

of revenue sharing should be approached. The process that was 

established, at least with the urban municipalities, was to try 

and define what kinds of activities it was that should be the 

responsibility of property tax payers, what kinds of things is it 

that the property tax payer should be paying for as opposed to 

something that the provincial government should be paying for. 

 

As an example, you know, work that’s done for residential 

streets as opposed to streets that might form part of a provincial 

road network, but say residential streets, sewer and water, those 

are really the responsibilities of the local citizens as opposed to 

the provincial government which has clear responsibilities when 

it comes to health, education, and also provide services in our 

municipalities. So the question was, what is it that the local 



April 22, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2807 

taxpayers are responsible for as opposed to what it is that the 

provincial government was responsible for and as opposed to 

what might be seen to be a joint responsibility of both local 

taxpayers and the provincial government. 

 

So it was a complicated process. I’m not sure the process is yet 

fully completed, even though we do have this proposal for a 

point of the sales tax to become the basis for future municipal 

operating grants. I’m not sure that process is yet completed, but 

that was the idea when we sat down with municipalities to try 

and determine out of that process what is it that municipalities 

are responsible for, what is it that is 100 per cent provincial 

responsibility, what is it that is a joint responsibility. And then 

when you know that, then you’re in a position to be able to 

calculate what it is that municipalities need in terms of 

operating grants from the provincial government to reflect 

something that is, strictly speaking, a provincial responsibility 

and something that is a joint responsibility or a joint 

undertaking of the provincial government and municipalities. 

 

[15:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it’s fair to say that the budget provisions 

this year for revenue sharing, the 90 per cent of one point of the 

provincial sales tax, have been generally received well by the 

municipal sector, again because they feel that they’ve been part 

of the creation of the program and the legislation itself. But 

everyone knows that this process began some years ago and 

long before the members opposite were elected. 

 

I might say that there are reservations because there are people 

in the municipal sector who say that, how can you determine 

that it is one point of the sales tax which is required to fully 

support municipalities in Saskatchewan? Should it be a point of 

the sales tax or should it be something greater in today’s terms? 

Should it be a point and one-quarter or should it be one and a 

half points of the sales tax that is the right amount of funds that 

should be provided to municipalities in the form of operating 

grants? 

 

And so I look forward to asking the government at some point 

how the process of consultation with municipalities . . . to try 

and determine what it is that municipalities are responsible for, 

what it is that the provincial government is responsible for, 

what is a joint responsibility, what the analysis is as to what 

kind of funds municipalities should be provided when you do 

that analysis, and therefore whether it is in fact sufficient to 

provide municipalities with one point of the PST. 

 

I might say that my own cursory assessment when I was 

involved in that process would seem to suggest that 

municipalities, if the provincial government is to provide 100 

per cent of the funding for provincial responsibilities in 

municipalities and their share of joint responsibilities, that 

perhaps the amount of funds that should be provided to 

municipalities on an ongoing basis would likely be larger than 

one point of the PST. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I might say that one of the concerns I have with 

the legislation is that it turns what was once a revenue-sharing 

process in legislation into a grant by and large in regulations. 

And I might explain for the public that are watching that when 

you have legislation, the legislation provides a broad outline of 

what it is that the Government of Saskatchewan is seeking to do 

through certain legislation, and then subject to that legislation 

you may have regulations as to how that legislation is in fact to 

be played out. 

 

It’s not unusual, as an example, for the government, once 

legislation is passed by the Legislative Assembly, for the 

responsible officials in the ministries involved to take the time 

to work with the groups and individuals that might be affected 

by legislation to develop the regulations pursuant to that. 

 

You know a legislation might, for example, say that there 

should be stop signs. Legislation might say that, but the 

regulations might further define as to what’s a proper location 

for a stop sign. I’m not saying that, you know, provincial 

government prescribes where stop signs will be placed. But I 

use that as an example that there is a difference between 

legislation — which has to be passed by the Legislative 

Assembly, that all of the members of the Legislative Assembly 

then have a role, potentially a role, in questioning the legislation 

and how it affects people and interests within Saskatchewan — 

as opposed to regulations. Regulations that are published by the 

administration, not subject to review by the Legislative 

Assembly — although they are subject to review by legislative 

committee, but is one step further removed from the 

responsibility of legislators and into the hands of administrators. 

But we’ll have to see how that process works out. 

 

In regulations the minister can have any term, any condition, 

any prescribed term or condition attached to these grants. It 

doesn’t necessarily need legislation to change that. It’s done 

through regulations versus legislative change every year. And 

again, although committees of the Legislative Assembly have 

within their areas of responsibility a review of regulations that 

are promulgated by the administration pursuant to the 

framework that is within legislation, it’s not the same as the 

Legislative Assembly itself, for example, saying this is what 

shall be done. 

 

Historically we, in terms of the so-called municipal 

revenue-sharing grants, it’s been the responsibility of the 

provincial government through legislation to set forth each year 

the amount of funds that will go to municipalities. And so every 

year the provincial government puts a Bill before the legislature 

and says, this is the Bill that says how much money should be 

going to municipalities. And then the members of the 

Legislative Assembly have to vote on that. And now that’s 

going to be done through committee. 

 

And you know, again the primary role of the Legislative 

Assembly, and why people elect members to the Legislative 

Assembly, is to pass legislation but also to provide the 

government with the funds that it needs to operate. And so 

there’s a question here as to whether it is really appropriate for 

this kind of expenditure to be done through the regulations as 

opposed to through the legislation. 

 

And I think a committee of the legislature responsible for this 

will have its work cut out for it to ensure that the regulations 

that are published and that are provided by the administration 

are in fact very clear, understandable regulations, not just for 

members of the Legislative Assembly but also importantly for 

municipal government. 



2808 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2009 

So, Mr. Speaker, that’s an area of concern that I have, 

specifically because of my interests in municipalities but 

generally as a Member of the Legislative Assembly — that any 

time the provincial government takes away from the ability of 

legislators in the Legislative Assembly to be able to say yea or 

nay to a proposed expenditure, any time that that kind of power 

is removed from members of the Legislative Assembly, I take 

the point of view that’s something that really needs to be 

understood, clarified. 

 

And at the end of the day, I think members should move 

cautiously whenever they take away powers of the Legislative 

Assembly because by taking it away from Legislative 

Assembly, by putting it into regulations, one puts more powers 

into the hands of the government itself and the administrators of 

the government. And I’m not saying that’s necessarily a bad 

thing. I’m just saying we do have very clear-cut responsibilities, 

very clear-cut powers as members of the Legislative Assembly, 

and we ought not to easily give up those responsibilities, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to go back, when I said at the outset 

that this legislation will provide predictable funding to support 

municipal operating expenditures, there’s a concern that I have 

about changes to the PST. When the provincial government 

says, look, to know how much money you’re going to get, just 

look at the public accounts for a certain year, and see how much 

money that point in the provincial sales tax raised, and therefore 

you’ll be able to calculate what kind of funds are going to 

municipalities generally, recognizing that there’s further issues 

in terms of distribution of that money to the cities, towns, 

villages, rural municipalities, northern municipalities. When 

you look at that, you also have to recognize that the provincial 

government is in a position to make changes to the provincial 

sales tax. And we have seen such changes over time. 

 

I know that the government that I was a member of, a part of, 

we made changes to the provincial sales tax. And we made 

some major changes at times to the provincial sales tax, not in 

terms of the percentage of the provincial sales tax — whether 

it’s 5 per cent or 7 per cent — but also in terms of what kinds of 

goods in Saskatchewan would be subject to provincial sales tax. 

 

So it stands to reason that if the provincial government makes 

an arbitrary decision to remove something from the provincial 

sales tax, to remove, say, an item that is now being taxed on the 

provincial sales tax . . . Let’s take as an example, I understand 

that health foods are taxable items in health food stores — and I 

might be wrong on that but let’s take that as an example — that 

if the revenues from that are now included in terms of the 

provincial sales tax, if the provincial government were to make 

a decision to not tax those items, then that means that there 

would be a reduction in the amount of sales tax revenue at one 

point. So there is a concern here about what process the 

provincial government will undertake if it proposes to make 

changes to the provincial sales tax. 

 

What kind of involvement does the provincial government see, 

for example, if it pursues the musings by the Premier and other 

cabinet ministers about the provincial government looking 

perhaps at some future point — no doubt after a future election 

if they can get away with it, and to avoid scrutiny on that point 

— but to harmonize the provincial sales tax with the federal 

goods and services tax? That’s an issue that the federal 

government has been actively pursuing, has so for a number of 

years, was able to conclude such an arrangement with some of 

the Maritime provinces where they now have a sales tax. 

They’ve given up their own sales tax to harmonize completely 

with the federal goods and services tax, the federal sales tax if 

you like. The province of Ontario has indicated that it’s now 

looking to harmonize its Ontario provincial sales tax with the 

federal goods and services tax. 

 

Well what happened in Saskatchewan? What kind of 

consultation, discussion will there be with municipalities who 

are now a partner in this sales tax? What kind of discussion will 

there be with municipalities if the provincial government moves 

forward? And, reading between the lines, it certainly seems that 

provincial government is desirous of moving forward on 

harmonizing our provincial sales tax with the goods and 

services tax. What kind of consultation does the provincial 

government foresee when it comes to that eventuality? 

 

And mark my words, Mr. Speaker, that is a direction that the 

current government wants to go down. You read between the 

lines — they say not now, maybe at some future time. And 

those are buzz words for yes, we will consider that. 

 

But the question then is, how does that affect municipalities? 

What kind of role do they see for municipalities in all those 

discussions? Because provincial government is saying with this 

legislation that sales tax is no longer simply a provincial 

government source of revenue, it is now also a municipal source 

of revenue. 

 

So if you then take the point of view that it’s a joint source of 

revenue, not just for the provincial government but also for 

municipalities, and having spelled it out in legislation, then it 

follows that before there can be any changes to the nature of 

that tax, that there should be very clear rules of engagement, if 

you like, or involving the municipalities in Saskatchewan, their 

organizations, in discussions about any changes to the PST. 

 

That is a very considerable concern I have as to how the 

provincial government move forward. And I know people say, 

well you can just take the revenues that you have and calculate 

that as a percentage of some new sales tax figure and provide 

municipalities to that. But that then becomes less than clear for 

municipalities, and that’s the kind of thing that ultimately 

becomes a subject for abuse by governments that are not 

well-intentioned. 

 

So I have that very considerable concern, Mr. Speaker, as to 

whether or not the government clearly knows what the process 

will be if there are to be changes to the provincial sales tax. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, another concern I have with this legislation is the 

distribution of the new operating grants for urban 

municipalities. Again recognizing that when you take the 

money that the government says that this grant that’s being set 

aside being calculated as a percentage of the PST this year, 

being calculated as 100 per cent of the PST next year and future 

years, that then provides a pot of money. That pot of money 

then has to be distributed to the northern municipalities, the 



April 22, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2809 

rural municipalities, and the urban municipalities. 

 

Now for the urban municipalities, the government is saying that 

these funds will be distributed on a per capita basis based on the 

previous Canada-wide census. And you know, that sounds good 

but that creates very, I think, challenging situations for some 

communities in Saskatchewan. 

 

As I indicated earlier, some communities in Saskatchewan are 

very high growth communities, especially the bedroom 

communities around our major cities. They see tremendous 

growth, therefore they need more operating funds to be able to 

provide the goods and services to keep up with that growth. 

And to have a situation where those grants are then calculated 

on census figures that at some point will be five years old does 

not provide, I think, ease of mind for some of the mayors and 

councillors of those bedroom communities, knowing that they 

may have had very rapid growth over a period of five years, 

but, you know, the provincial government’s grants are five 

years out of date. 

 

So I think that is a concern. I think the government needs to 

address that issue. I think the government needs to look at 

models both in Alberta and British Columbia for a more rapid 

calculation, an annual calculation on population figures upon 

which the revenue sharing might be determined. 

 

I know that Saskatchewan for example had a computer model 

back in the 1970s that had as its basis the census Canada 

figures, then tracked changes in hospitalization registrations for 

certain areas and therefore came to conclusions about what the 

municipal census figure might be within municipalities, and 

therefore on an annual basis was able to provide more accurate 

grants based on population growth in the communities in 

Saskatchewan. And that’s an issue that I think the provincial 

government really needs to turn its attention to. I know that 

we’ve asked questions about that but I’m not particularly, how 

shall I say, comforted by the government’s response on this. 

 

So for high growth communities in Saskatchewan there are 

concerns here. The New North, the northern communities, have 

concerns. They have concerns about the northern municipal 

trust account and how this will affect them. I suspect that rural 

municipalities will have concern about the percentage of the 

overall pool of money, the 1 per cent of the PST. Their share of 

that, will that share change as population figures change? How 

will municipalities, rural municipalities, be affected by this? 

That is a considerable concern that I have, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We look forward, Mr. Speaker, to asking very specific, pointed 

questions to the minister about the process for consultation. 

Should there be changes in the PST? That’s more than a 

hypothetical question. I think that’s a realistic question I guess, 

given the history of Saskatchewan where there have been 

changes to the PST. In fact the government itself and the 

government members will be applauding that one of their first 

acts as a government was to change the PST on used vehicles. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, you see from my comments that the notion 

that there will be changes to the PST is a realistic notion, and 

that we ought to address that point and to provide some comfort 

of mind to municipal leaders that their points of view will be 

taken into account when the provincial government looks to 

make changes. 

 

We also will have questions about the process of regulation 

versus legislative change, questions about the distribution of 

these funds to municipalities to take into account; varying rates 

of growth in municipalities, to ensure that’s recognized, Mr. 

Speaker; and to ensure that the needs of northern municipalities, 

which I indicated earlier are very special, are also taken into 

account. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, having said that, I look forward to the 

opportunity along with my colleagues to raise these questions in 

committee. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion that Bill No. 85, The Municipal Grants Act be now read 

a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 89 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 89 — The 

Education Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 3)/Loi n
o
 3 de 2009 

modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour 

to rise in debate of Bill 89 here today. Specifically Bill 89, The 

Education Amendment Act (No. 3). 

 

This Bill is simply attached to the way that education is 

financed in this province, the changes that were brought 

forward in this past recent budget, and directs how the change 

in education funding is going to take place and specifically 

what that impact will be on education in Saskatchewan and how 

we deliver education in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. It’s part of 

the legislation that abolishes the ability of local school boards to 

raise dollars for their local needs, to provide for their local 

needs, and certainly it could be characterized very accurately as 

the Act to centralize education here in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. 



2810 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2009 

The Act, if you look at piece after piece of this legislation, it has 

sweeping powers to the Education minister; provides and 

centralizes power that was once belonged to local communities 

through their school boards, have now been transferred to the 

Education minister. 

 

Under this Act, the minister’s directives that any particular 

minister or government chose to take would take precedence 

over locally elected school board decisions or in fact local 

communities’ decisions, Mr. Speaker. Under this Act the 

minister can now direct and change boards’ plans, their budgets, 

their expenditures — a very profound and direct influence into 

something that has been managed and negotiated and 

influenced locally through our history, Mr. Speaker. 

 

For an example, I guess the minister’s approval is now needed, 

Mr. Speaker, for many pieces that in the past have been the 

responsibility of local school boards and local communities. 

That’s being taken away from local communities across our 

vast and large province, Mr. Speaker. And if we’re talking 

about those specific pieces, we’re talking about the actual plans, 

the future plans of school boards, Mr. Speaker, the budgets of 

school boards, expenditures, how a school board might, how 

their plans might be created, any sale of assets or divestment of 

assets and needing permission, and the minister to be able to 

potentially plan to borrow any sort of money. So we see a very 

limited role left for school boards locally and a very large 

directed role from the minister’s office as we go forward. 

 

Under this Act and the changes to education financing, school 

boards certainly lose their autonomy and their ability to respond 

to their local needs, their communities’ needs, their students’ 

needs. And this is something vital to quality education, Mr. 

Speaker, responsive education. We have a large province with 

many, many communities and spread across rural and urban 

circumstances. And we now need a minister . . . It’s going to be 

important for that minister to be able to understand every last 

local need across our province. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we know that local people know their needs 

best, Mr. Speaker. They know their needs best. These truly are 

sweeping changes that have been made by the Sask Party and, 

quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, made without consultation — and 

this has been well reported on — but really concerning, Mr. 

Speaker, when we see, I guess, a government that has such a 

penchant to legislate first, consult later. 

 

And to do this within a policy environment within education 

that has been so well served, Mr. Speaker, by a strong group of 

well-defined stakeholders, sector partners — the Saskatchewan 

School Boards Association; the STF [Saskatchewan Teachers’ 

Federation]; LEADS [League of Educational Administrators, 

Directors and Superintendents], our educational administrators; 

our business officials in SASBO [Saskatchewan Association of 

School Business Officials] — and for these kind of changes to 

have been brought forward and for that consultation to have not 

occurred, for straight talk to not have occurred with those sector 

partners, it’s a shame, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I’ve shared this before in committee, and I share it here in 

the House, is that certainly we’re well aware that forming 

policy out of consensus isn’t the goal, Mr. Speaker. But to be 

straight and to understand and to hear the perspective of 

stakeholders in a sector such as education is absolutely crucial, 

Mr. Speaker. To have a budget day announcement that pulls the 

rug right out from underneath the feet of school boards in how 

we deliver education in this province, without any sort of 

consultation, is a shame. 

 

I think there’s questions, Mr. Speaker, as to whether or not this 

is a sign of things to come for local governments across 

Saskatchewan. Certainly the Sask Party here in this case was 

very willing to go after a local level of government, that being 

school boards, and to eliminate their authority, to eliminate their 

autonomy, and to eliminate their ability to respond to the people 

for whom they’ve been elected by, the people who should and 

could be directly influencing the education within their 

communities. 

 

And it’s concerning as we look ahead, what direction in 

Saskatchewan’s education sector, what sort of fundamental 

change could occur. A minister at this point in time, any one 

minister — and of course this legislation is in place for 

ministers beyond the one sitting opposite — one minister could 

drive profound change in education and, Mr. Speaker, that’s 

concerning. It’s concerning that one minister or one government 

could look at education in Saskatchewan and say, well you want 

to go this way; we’re driving you that way. And this is a 

concern, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Here in Saskatchewan we’ve long been proud of an innovative 

education climate, of progressive education, of education that 

balances achievement results that we’re working towards and 

achieving, and the whole needs, whole child needs of students 

and the whole needs of communities. A very progressive 

climate, and that’s the ability for local boards and for the sector 

partners to influence this change has really, really been 

hampered. In fact it’s been taken away by this legislation, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Boards, students, teachers, communities are now subject to 

every whim and whimsy of any particular Education minister, 

and it goes far beyond this Education minister opposite. Every 

Education minister to come, of any political stripe, can simply 

grab the wheel to education and dictate what’s going to go on in 

this province. 

 

It certainly raises concern about what it could mean. 

Cumbersome reporting and accounting processes for education 

systems, for teachers, for communities. Strained resources, Mr. 

Speaker, and a deflection of focus on students’ needs and 

progressive innovative education, as I’ve mentioned, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I worry about taking away from our empowered teaching 

profession and inundating them with reporting that may not best 

serve education in our province, and it’s all as a result of the 

new dictatorial environment that the Sask Party has chosen to 

deliver in their budgetary changes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[16:00] 

 

The Bill certainly raises concerns for teachers who already, Mr. 

Speaker, are working in so many ways to meet the needs of 

their students. We worry about bogging them down with 

reporting mechanisms that may not be best serving education. 



April 22, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2811 

The Minister of Education looks at me in sort of an inquisitive 

way, and I guess I go back to the fact that there’s different 

philosophies and approaches as to how to best serve education. 

Now we have one individual, the Minister of Education, and it 

will certainly be ministers beyond this Minister of Education, 

who at any given time can take forward their philosophy and to 

say to the education sector, this is how it’s going to be. 

 

This is a concern, Mr. Speaker, a large concern. We look at 

broader implications that could occur, and we look to our 

western province, British Columbia, which recently put forward 

a budget that cut education funding. They have already taken 

away the board’s ability to access the property tax base, as this 

minister just has done. And what we saw is because of that 

budgetary cut, Mr. Speaker, we see every single school division 

across British Columbia right now cutting programs and 

services. And many of those programs and services, I know, are 

being argued by communities that they’re vital to the needs of 

their students and the needs of their communities. Well this is a 

shame, Mr. Speaker, and I guess it’s a bit of a foreshadowing of 

concerns that can come within the education sector. 

 

Specifically, Mr. Speaker, it’s a concern with the lack of a plan 

that’s in place to address the funding needs of school divisions, 

Mr. Speaker. This isn’t a plan that was developed through a lot 

of policy work within the Ministry of Education, Mr. Speaker. 

This was one that was sprung upon the ministry and said, this is 

where we’re going, and we’re going to quickly have to figure 

out a plan to respond to divisions’ needs. And those needs are 

vast, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The new process right now, boards really are really anxious, 

they’re concerned, and they’re still shocked and surprised with 

the changes. And they’re not certain of what their financial 

futures are, Mr. Speaker. And we talk about financial futures, 

we need to understand what we’re talking about for boards. 

When they don’t know what their revenues or their resources 

are for an upcoming year, it severely hampers their ability to 

plan for the future and for the needs of their students. 

 

We right now have a process going on that’s taken shape where 

the Ministry of Education has gone out and met with each of the 

school divisions to talk about what kind of needs they have. 

Well this is absolutely something that needs to happen, Mr. 

Speaker. But quite frankly, I’m very concerned about the ability 

for the Ministry of Education to actually fulfill on what is a 

very vast activity, to conduct those meetings and make sure that 

school boards are able to be heard, and that a balance is struck 

in finding the right financing needs. 

 

The process that’s been defined — and as I say, it really does 

lack clarity; it really does lack planning and this is part of the 

concern — but certainly it completely lacks transparency, and 

arguably, objectivity. It seems to be potentially an arbitrary 

process. I know school boards and communities and parents and 

teachers are concerned about that right now. It boils down to 

what school boards or an individual is best able to sell or 

advocate their financing needs to the Minister of Education. 

 

There’s concerns that those that are closest to the Minister of 

Education may be best served. This is a shame, Mr. Speaker. 

We need equity in our province. We need fairness, and we need 

our education partners and our school boards to be able to 

respond to the needs that they’ve been sent to represent. It’s a 

very significant centralization of education in our province, a 

very dictatorial environment. 

 

And where we’re concerned as an opposition, we believe that 

this is all about some short-term benefit but with many, many 

negative implications that will be realized as this string plays 

out for many, many years to come, Mr. Speaker. And here as an 

opposition, we’ll be here to raise those concerns as those strings 

play out. Right now we’re very focused on making sure that in 

the immediate that school boards are going to be treated fairly, 

that they’re going to get the dollars that they need so that the 

children and that the students and that the parents within 

communities are treated fairly and that their programs and 

services are respected. 

 

We see a process that’s laid out that is a large, vast, arduous 

task that’s upon the Minister of Education, and it’s incumbent 

that he ensure that his ministry is ready to ensure fair and 

equitable funding. And this process is going to be a very taxing 

activity on this ministry. 

 

I’m concerned when I look into the budget. I don’t see a 

significant change in full-time equivalents. I’m worried how 

much this activity itself is going to take from the provincial 

ministry. Do they have the people that are there? Who else have 

they brought into the fold? Where have they found these 

individuals? Are they going to drain from other initiatives 

within the Ministry of Education? Because of course we do 

have many, many goals here for education in Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. At this point we have more questions certainly 

that we will direct in committee. We know that there’s a lot of 

concern in communities with parents, with teachers, with the 

sector partners, with school boards. And we want to make sure 

that those concerns can be brought to light. Certainly we’ll 

endeavour to do so thoughtfully through committee. 

 

And in just a very sincere way, Mr. Speaker, I really, really call 

upon this minister to ensure that the process before him — 

meeting the financial needs of school boards which means 

meeting the needs of communities and students — I call on him 

to make sure he’s up for the task, to make sure that his ministry 

is up for the task, and to make sure all of the resources are there 

to make sure that nothing else within education suffers as a 

result of this brash, quick, short-sighted decision. 

 

At this point, I refer this Bill to committee, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the committee is the 

motion put forward by the Minister of Education that Bill No. 

89, The Education Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 3) be now read a 

second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 



2812 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2009 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, to the Standing 

Committee on Human Services. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Human Services. 

 

I recognize the Minister Responsible for CIC. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I’m on 

my feet to request leave to introduce a motion of referral to the 

Crown Corporations Committee regarding an analysis and 

proposed hearings outlining all types of power generation in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Crown Corporations has 

asked for leave to address a motion of referral. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave is not granted. 

 

Bill No. 90 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 90 — The 

Miscellaneous Statutes (Education Property Tax) Repeal and 

Amendment Act, 2009 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again it’s my 

pleasure to rise and debate the discussion of Bill 90, the 

miscellaneous statutes Act as it pertains to education property tax 

in our province, specifically the repeal and amendment Act. 

 

This Bill is simply a consequence of the budgetary decision or the 

education financing decision to remove the ability from school 

boards to respond to local needs of their communities, their 

children, their students, their teachers. So this is simply a 

consequence of that. There needs to be long-term certainty in 

education financing for school boards, for teachers, for students, 

for children, for communities. And they need to have the 

confidence that the funding of education will be adequate to 

meet the needs of every local community within this province. 

And of course, Mr. Speaker, the needs of our province are 

diverse in this vast province. 

 

And now in the new centralization of education, where the 

Minister of Education dictates how education operates in this 

province, it’s incumbent on that minister to understand every 

local need in every one of those local communities. And we as 

elected members know that that’s a difficult task to do, and 

that’s why we elect local people to represent those local needs. 

And here we have a group of school board members who have 

been elected by local communities to represent the local needs 

of their communities, of their constituents, and here they’ve 

completely had the rug — as I’ve mentioned — pulled right out 

from underneath their feet. 

There’s a concern that the removal of the board’s access to the 

property tax base will result in the inability to respond to these 

local needs. And there’s concern that funding provided will be 

inadequate to meet the needs of students. And this is a large 

concern for this opposition, the New Democrats. Education is 

so vital to the future of our province, and to start sacrificing 

addressing local needs within our province is of large and grave 

concern. 

 

We can certainly look to other places, Mr. Speaker, as I 

mentioned just moments before in speaking to Bill 89, but as 

we look to a province such as British Columbia, Mr. Speaker, 

who recently in their budget just a short month ago introduced 

cuts to education, and they have a similar education 

environment — a constrained one similar to what the Minister 

of Education has changed our education climate to, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And when they introduce a cut, what that means is that every 

division within the province needs to impose cuts on programs 

and services that directly affect communities, teachers, and 

children, Mr. Speaker; directly affects the ability of that 

education system to effect the kind of positive change and 

outcomes that are desired by that system. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan we’re very proud of a 

progressive, innovative education system that represents local 

needs and that in many ways has lead the nation and North 

America in some very significant innovation, Mr. Speaker. To 

see that all being put at risk is a concern. 

 

We again look at this process and we know that there was no 

consultation, a complete failure to consult on something that 

has historic and profound implications on education in 

Saskatchewan. As the president of the Saskatchewan School 

Boards Association put it, a profound change on education in 

our province. 

 

The concern from this opposition is for the long term, as 

education needs to be supported by various Education ministers 

and governments that will come following this Education 

minister. Right now the Education minister truly does have the 

ability to drive a very direct agenda upon the people of 

Saskatchewan. This is a concern. 

 

But we’re also concerned that on the short term, Mr. Speaker, 

on the immediate task, and that’s making sure that local 

communities and students and teachers, school boards are 

provided the dollars they need to operate and address the needs 

within their communities. We need to make sure that this 

occurs. The task of ensuring this happens after this minister has 

taken away the process to how education is funded, it’s of large 

concern. We’re concerned that this minister and the ministry 

isn’t ready for the task, Mr. Speaker. And I push and push and 

push the importance of this, Mr. Speaker, that we need to be 

able to respond to the needs of these school boards, 

subsequently the needs of communities, of schools and 

communities. 

 

Well I guess there’s one other thought around this education 

financing, and that’s that not too long ago the minister was 

talking about infrastructure investment that is needed within 

Saskatchewan. And he sold it at one point into what he called a 



April 22, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2813 

booster shot for the economy, Mr. Speaker. And we know now, 

as we’ve discussed and talked about why, that that was really 

just some fancy language to make it look like they were 

responding to sort of world pressures, but really more just sort 

of the way they were spinning what they were doing. 

 

But the concern is that if this truly was supposed to be a booster 

shot, Mr. Speaker, we’re concerned now about how school 

divisions are going to be able to deliver on the infrastructure 

capital plans that they’ve been given the opportunity to do so, 

Mr. Speaker. And the reason I say that is right now we have 

around 20 school divisions that are working on delivering 

education capital, building new schools or significant 

renovations in our province, Mr. Speaker. We know that about 

half of those don’t have the 35 per cent reserve in place to be 

able to see that project go forward. 

 

Now by taking away the ability of those school boards to go 

about accessing some other revenues, they’re completely 

bound. And we see a booster shot that’s been sold has seems to 

have come to a bit of a stall, and it’s important that the minister 

figure out a plan into how he’s going to be able to assist those 

school boards that don’t have reserve dollars in place to make 

sure that the schools that they’re entitled to can be put forward. 

 

It has profound implications on teacher local level negotiations, 

on provincial education workers’ local level negotiations, and 

many other concerns that we’ll continue to highlight in 

committee and that we have been highlighting in committee. 

We have a lot more consultation to do, Mr. Speaker, because 

there’s a lot of concern out there in communities — with 

families, with teachers, within the education sector, and with all 

of the stakeholders. And we’ll endeavour to collect that 

information, those concerns, bring those perspectives to 

committee and be part of the constructive thought that occurs. 

At this point, I’m going to refer Bill 90 to committee. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[16:15] 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 

presented by the Minister of Education that Bill No. 90, The 

Miscellaneous Statutes (Education Property Tax) Repeal and 

Amendment Act, 2009 be now read the second time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the 

Standing Committee on Human Services. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Human Services. 

Bill No. 84 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 84 — The 

Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Amendment 

Act, 2009 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to be able to enter into the second reading debate 

regarding changes to the labour-sponsored venture capital 

amendment Act. Mr. Speaker, as I understand it, what this 

particular piece of legislation does is it now recognizes the 

federally registered labour-sponsored venture capital 

corporations and that they will be able to move from 15 per cent 

to 20 per cent on the first $5,000 invested — and this is an 

increase, I understand, from 3,500 — for a maximum tax credit 

of about $1,000. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is the only province in this country 

that presently favours provincial funds over national funds, and 

we’ve been able to do that by enhancing the tax credits that are 

available to locally operated LSVCCs [labour-sponsored 

venture capital corporation] in our province. 

 

We know that there are other provinces in Canada that 

specifically prohibit national funds from being registered in 

their province, and I’m thinking particularly of Manitoba, 

British Columbia, Quebec, and PEI [Prince Edward Island]. 

And as I understand it, Alberta doesn’t have any 

labour-sponsored venture capital corporation program in their 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at issue here really is whether or not our existing 

provincial funds will be able to withstand the competition from 

a national labour-sponsored venture capital corporation, 

particularly now that there will certainly be a neutral tax 

environment. 

 

As I recall the debate — and we certainly had lobbying efforts 

done by a national LSVCC in the past — but as I understand it, 

provincial funds argued that the proposed change that the Sask 

Party government has introduced would really reduce their 

ability to deal with upcoming redemptions and still achieve 

adequate returns for provincial investors, while national funds 

believe that adequate investor demand does present itself in our 

province and it would give them access to those funds. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that with this amendment to the legislation, 

I think it creates some real difficulties. And I’ll be interested to 

know in committee what our two labour-sponsored venture 

capital funds have to say about this. Because certainly in the 

past, provincially registered fund managers have been opposed 

to equalizing the tax credits, and they’ve been able to articulate 

a number of major concerns. And those concerns are the 

following. 

 

The provincially registered funds are locally based and have a 

much better investment track record than any of the nationally 

registered funds. The provincially registered funds have built up 

offices and staff that are all located in Saskatchewan and they 



2814 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2009 

dedicate their resources to our province. 

 

The nationally registered funds are generally larger and much 

more diversified. And the argument is from the two provincial 

funds that they will have a competitive advantage over the 

provincially registered funds, and investment advisers and 

brokers may promote the nationally registered funds over the 

provincially registered funds due to these particular 

circumstances. 

 

As well, provincially registered funds don’t believe at the 

moment that there’s any concrete evidence to suggest that 

equalizing the tax credits will expand the market as opposed to 

fragmenting it. And a fragmented market would be detrimental 

to the existing provincially registered funds. 

 

In addition the provincially registered funds have argued that if 

the province, if the government, if the Sask Party government 

wants to expand the amount of venture capital available for 

Saskatchewan businesses, that the best alternative would be to 

increase the individual investor limits from the current $5,000 

to $10,000. And, Mr. Speaker, as members will know the 

$5,000 limit was set in the 1980s and it hasn’t changed or been 

adjusted to respond to inflation. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we will be very curious to understand from the 

Government of Saskatchewan why they believe that now is the 

time to allow nationally registered funds to have the same 

advantage that Saskatchewan registered — the two 

Saskatchewan funds — presently have in our province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think what the public needs to know is that 

these two funds or the policy was initiated in 1992. It’s been 

successful in developing a viable provincial venture capital 

sector. There are two funds that have, as I understand, over 20 

professional staff and they have close to $180 million in 

provincial business investment. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, just up until recently this national fund was 

in our province, was attracting investment in our province, and 

yet up until recently they did not invest those funds in our 

province. And we know with our two provincial funds that they 

are in fact investing in our companies, in jobs, in our 

communities here in Saskatchewan. So, Mr. Speaker, I think 

that the province is going to need to articulate very clearly to 

Golden Opportunities . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Excuse me. Why is the member from Yorkton 

on his feet? 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — For leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave to introduce 

guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and to all 

members of the Assembly in your gallery I’d like to introduce 

some very special friends of mine. On the far right is James 

Wilson, a good friend from Yorkton, a SaskTel manager. 

Directly next to him is Randy King. He’s a fabricator, a 

musician, and the president of Full Gospel Business Men’s 

Fellowship in Yorkton and here for the banquet today. Beside 

him is his wife Cherie and then next to them is Bryce and Lorna 

Sherring, two very good friends of mine from Yorkton as well 

who have Sherring Gold among other business interests in 

Yorkton. And next to them doesn’t need an introduction but my 

lovely wife, Leone, who is here for the banquet as well and is 

celebrating a birthday tomorrow. So thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. I would ask all members to welcome them. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 84 — The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital 

Corporations Amendment Act, 2009 

(continued) 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As I 

indicated, Golden Opportunities is presently a provincially 

registered fund in our province. It began raising capital in 1998. 

And SaskWorks, which was formerly Crown Ventures Fund, it 

began raising capital in 2000. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we know that these two provincially 

registered funds have been very successful in increasing the 

amount of funds coming to our province through their work. 

And they’ve been able to raise money in our province to 

support various companies in our province and they’ve been 

able to do that much more substantially than other funds. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the argument that the fund managers have 

certainly presented is that they believe that these large national 

funds are going to create a competitive disadvantage for our 

funds. The national funds, up until recently, did not have a 

terrific track record in terms of investing in companies in our 

province. And in fact more money was being raised here than 

was being invested, even though they had a responsibility to 

invest those funds. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think one of the concerns is that, given that 

these funds have been around for at least seven or eight years, 

that we may now start seeing funds that had been invested in 

those two provincially registered funds being cashed in and 

being transferred to the nationally registered fund. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have many questions that we’ll want to pursue, 

particularly in committee, but at this time I’d like to move 

adjournment of this debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Nutana has moved 

adjournment of debate on Bill No. 84. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



April 22, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2815 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 71 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 71 — The 

Innovation Saskatchewan Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 

stand today and speak to Bill 71, The Innovation Saskatchewan 

Act before the day adjourns here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The province of Saskatchewan, the history that we have in this 

province is a very rich one and a very proud one, Mr. Speaker. 

When we look at the many examples of innovation, from the 

time that people have been here on the Prairies — whether it 

was the First Peoples, Mr. Speaker, or whether it was the 

pioneers who came and settled in this area as well — what we 

see, Mr. Speaker, is a beautiful track record of innovation as 

people here in the province have done their best to make life 

better for each generation, have done their best to seek out new 

ways, different ways of doing things in order to ensure that this 

province is as strong and as prosperous as it can and as it truly 

should be, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s why it is indeed a pleasure to speak on The 

Innovation Saskatchewan Act, Mr. Speaker, because it is on the 

topic of innovation and it is about what is the best path forward 

for our province when we look at an agenda of innovation. Mr. 

Speaker, I’m happy to speak to this. Not because, Mr. Speaker, 

I agree with so much of what is in this Bill but because of the 

subject because it allows us to pause for a moment and think of 

the track record that is here in Saskatchewan when it comes to 

doing innovative things. 

 

There are many proud examples that we have in the province of 

inventions of actual items, of materials that people have put 

together through their ingenuity and their hard work, but also 

innovation that we’ve seen in our system of government and 

what the province of Saskatchewan, what the Government of 

Saskatchewan has been able to do in co-operation with the 

people that live here and work here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We can think of some of the most obvious examples, Mr. 

Speaker, are examples of our health care system. How the 

innovation that occurred here in the province through the 

leadership of past governments with the co-operation and the 

hard work of Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, that we were 

able to see the advent of medicare here in the province, the 

introduction of medicare which of course, Mr. Speaker, was 

what many view in the country as a gift to the rest of the 

country and as a proud heritage that we have here in the 

province. 

 

Of course another area, Mr. Speaker, where we’ve seen a great 

deal of innovation is in the area of Crown corporations — 

Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker, created through the 

leadership of past governments and the co-operation of 

Saskatchewan people who realized that through working 

together, through pooling our resources, through taking 

collective action, that indeed the future could be better, 

realizing that by putting our resources together, by having a 

strategic focus, through leadership by government with 

co-operation of people, that many great things could be done for 

this province. Whether it’s looking at the track record of 

SaskTel and the service that has been provided throughout the 

province from all of our four borders, whether it is the track 

record of SaskPower and the good work that it has done, Mr. 

Speaker, in rural electrification, we see many fine examples of 

innovation. 

 

Ironically, Mr. Speaker, when we see the Sask Party 

government bringing forward Bill 71, The Innovation 

Saskatchewan Act, on so many issues in the past, Mr. Speaker, 

the political predecessors of this current government, Mr. 

Speaker, they’ve been on the wrong side of so many innovation 

items that have come forward in the province. If we look at 

examples of medicare, if we look at a strong and vibrant role for 

Crown corporations here in the province, sadly the members 

opposite, their political predecessors have been on what I think 

is the wrong side of the issue on so many of these important 

topics. 

 

[16:30] 

 

And I think that’s an issue that many people do recognize in 

this province, and we can see that with many of the polling that 

does now occur in Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan people across 

the spectrum, I think, recognize the important role that Crown 

corporations have in the province and do support the good work 

that has occurred. 

 

As a member of the NDP and as the official opposition, Mr. 

Speaker, we as a party are proud of the role that we have had in 

the area of innovation over the previous years, and we’re happy 

to continue to support much of the good work that is currently 

going on in the province. There are many examples of where 

initiatives that have been supported by the NDP government, 

where we’ve seen true fruit from those investments and that 

leadership. 

 

There are many examples that we can think of: the priority that 

was placed on the synchrotron, the Petroleum Technology 

Research Centre, the Innovation and Science Fund to leverage 

funding from the federal government and other national bodies. 

Clearly, this side of the House, we’ve been in favour of 

innovative projects where the well-being of Saskatchewan has 

indeed been furthered. 

 

We can also think of focus and an emphasis on funding for the 

Saskatchewan Research Council. Realizing that in our 

post-secondary institutions here and in our business community 

there’s a great deal of knowledge, and an ability to come up 

with unique solutions, Saskatchewan solutions to problems here 

at home, but global problems as well. And clearly we’ve 

supported the Saskatchewan Research Council for some time 

and see that as a good example of where government can show 

leadership by supporting an institution that encourages 

innovation. 

 

This new entity, Innovation Saskatchewan, is in some ways the 

establishment of a new Crown corporation, Mr. Speaker. It 

takes the activities that have been occurring in many different 



2816 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2009 

departments or ministries and putting them into one group. The 

difference, Mr. Speaker, as to how this entity would be different 

from a traditional Crown corporation would be that the Chair of 

this Crown corporation would be the minister, Mr. Speaker. So 

there is not the same level of arms-length separation that would 

be traditional in a Crown corporation. Also, the representation 

of the board would vary differently as well. 

 

With this change, Mr. Speaker, we also see a change in how the 

financial reporting occurs through this Assembly. And this is 

one of the more troubling aspects of Bill 71 as I see it, Mr. 

Speaker, because we see a decrease in transparency and 

accountability — something that’s very important. I know all 

members in this House would agree that transparency and 

accountability is very important for the work that occurs 

through this Legislative Assembly. 

 

What we see now, if this legislation is put in place and the 

changes occur, what we see now is that there’ll be single-line 

item for Innovation Saskatchewan. The activities would have 

traditionally occurred in many different departments and areas 

where there’s a greater degree of accountability, a greater 

degree of transparency. What we’ll now see is single-line item. 

And, Mr. Speaker, this raises some problems. And I think this is 

going counter to what we’ve seen in many other parts of the 

country and in North America where the public has demanded a 

higher level of transparency, a higher level of accountability. 

 

So when it comes to financial reporting we see this decrease, 

and I know that’s alarming for many people. It’s a greater 

degree of control, which does not necessarily mean that 

individuals in the province will have a greater degree of 

understanding of where money is going, how it is being spent, 

and whether or not the way it’s been spent is appropriate. 

 

This tendency, Mr. Speaker, for decreased transparency, 

decreased accountability that we see with this proposed 

legislation, is quite consistent with other aspects or other events 

we’ve been seeing in a national context with the Harper 

Conservatives. And, Mr. Speaker, a few moments ago I was 

speaking about the predecessors of the Sask Party, how they 

were opposed to many of the innovation items we’ve seen in the 

province. The one example that I gave was medicare, how their 

predecessors would not be in favour of that. We also see, not 

their predecessors but current federal cousins, Mr. Speaker, 

where we’ve seen an agenda of decreased transparency and 

decreased accountability. 

 

In previous debates here in the legislature, it’s been 

well-documented the connections that the current Sask Party 

has to the current federal Conservative Party. A good number of 

the Sask Party MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] 

are card-carrying members of the federal party. And there’ll be 

few who say, oh no, hold on, I’m a Liberal, I’m not . . . I don’t 

have any connections to the federal Tories. But in truth there are 

many who do have strong connections, Mr. Speaker, and 

because of those strong connections we’ve seen many 

similarities in the approach of government, the means by which 

government carries out its agenda and what it wants to do. And 

sadly, Mr. Speaker, on this issue of transparency and 

accountability, I think most Canadians now would agree that 

the Harper Conservatives do not support this. 

 

And I’m afraid, Mr. Speaker, here in Bill 71, The Innovation 

Saskatchewan Act this too feeds into a larger example of 

behaviour that we’re seeing in the national context of decreased 

transparency. And I’m saying that’s occurring, Mr. Speaker, or 

would occur through by all the expenditures through Innovation 

Saskatchewan being reduced to a single line and not having the 

same degree of transparency that would occur normally through 

this House through the normal reporting mechanisms. 

 

This type of approach, Mr. Speaker, it’s ironic as well. In 

reading some of the previous speeches that members on this 

side and the government side have made on Innovation 

Saskatchewan, a number of examples, especially that our 

Finance critic identified, a number of cases where the current 

Sask Party government, when in opposition, was very critical of 

many of the actions by the NDP government which were 

promoting innovation and which would now in fact fall under 

or be in a similar type of action as what we would see under 

The Innovation Saskatchewan Act. And it’s an interesting 

retreat from many of the principles, Mr. Speaker, that the Sask 

Party has traditionally stood by and has traditionally supported. 

 

Actually this has a parallel to some of my earlier comments 

about the Harper Conservatives. When we talk about 

abandoning principles, when we talk about no longer standing 

for the things that you’ve always stood for, now that’s been 

very evident in the federal scene, but perhaps to a lesser degree, 

but a degree nonetheless, Mr. Speaker. In this Innovation 

Saskatchewan Act, we see the Sask Party promoting the types of 

investments by government in innovation that they have 

traditionally stood up against, that they traditionally have not 

supported. It’s just another example, Mr. Speaker, where we see 

the current Sask Party government not being consistent with the 

approach that it had took while it was in opposition, where they 

have admitted that they said anything they wanted for many 

years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

If we look at the most recent provincial budget where we saw 

an increase of spending — I believe it was 12 per cent and the 

previous increase the year before of 10 per cent — another 

example of retreating from long-held principles that they felt 

were important and now doing what is convenient in the short 

term, not necessarily staying true to the principles that they 

have always held. 

 

We also see, Mr. Speaker, through this Innovation 

Saskatchewan Act, many of the same concerns we’ve seen with 

Enterprise Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, with Enterprise 

Saskatchewan I’ve had the opportunity to speak on that bit of 

legislation as well. And the concern with Enterprise 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker — and we see a similar concern 

with this bit of legislation with Innovation Saskatchewan — is 

that it puts a structure in place that makes it convenient for the 

government to dodge accountability on certain issues and to 

pretend, or to put up a facade of arm’s-length when in fact that 

is not the case. 

 

With Enterprise Saskatchewan, you know, there was originally 

the commitment by the government that cabinet ministers 

would not be taking part; this would be removing the politics 

from the decision-making process. But just as we saw with 

some other instances that I mentioned where we see a retreat 

from long-held principles, once the Sask Party was in, what did 



April 22, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2817 

we see with Enterprise Saskatchewan? Well we actually saw 

cabinet ministers being appointed to Enterprise Saskatchewan 

— I believe it’s the Minister of Enterprise and Innovation; I 

think the Minister of First Nations Métis Relations on 

Enterprise Saskatchewan — where we now see what looks like 

arm’s-length but in reality is direct government involvement. 

And that creates a situation where it might be convenient for 

them to say that they’re not attached to these decisions, but in 

reality it’s clear that they are in fact attached. 

 

And the argument I made with Enterprise Saskatchewan was 

that elected officials are elected for a reason. They’re elected to 

make decisions and to be accountable for those decisions. So 

when the structure of the board is not set up in that way, it 

creates the potential for problems down the road. 

 

In the same way with Enterprise Saskatchewan, there is a 

concern about decisions around innovation, around science, 

around technology, around research. It’s important that this be 

done on the merit of individual decisions of the individual cases 

and the individual decisions that need to be made. And so how 

that will occur within Innovation Saskatchewan does raise some 

flags for some of us as to how arm’s-length this would be and 

how much political involvement there can be with the 

decisions. 

 

In terms of innovation, Mr. Speaker, and funding used for 

innovation, it also reminds me of what we saw I guess two 

budgets ago when the Sask Party first came in and the 

elimination of the Green Future Fund, of the $320 million to be 

used for innovation, Mr. Speaker. With the scrapping of that, 

again it’s getting back to the issue of the single-line item that is 

reviewed by this Assembly for funding. It does not provide the 

same degree of transparency and perhaps the same degree of 

focus that has been the tradition. 

 

So as I wrap up my comments, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to state 

that those of us on opposition in the New Democratic Party, 

we’re proud of our history of looking for innovative solutions 

with Saskatchewan people to the issues that matter here at home 

and to the problems on a global scale. So we’re very proud of 

that and we certainly support Innovation Saskatchewan . . . we 

certainly support innovation in Saskatchewan for the good work 

that many people and many different research bodies and 

groups have been doing for some time. 

 

And it’s been sad to see, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite on 

so many issues, when they were in opposition, oppose 

innovation and oppose many of the actions of government in 

the way it was spending and many of the actions in a historical 

context that they have not agreed with. 

 

We’re concerned with this legislation because it affects 

transparency and accountability, we think, in a negative way. It 

does not enhance transparency and accountability, but it 

decreases transparency and accountability — a pattern that 

we’ve seen in the federal context with the Harper Conservatives 

where there are well-documented connections between the 

members opposite and the federal Conservatives, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would conclude my remarks and I 

am pleased to adjourn debate on Bill 71, The Innovation 

Saskatchewan Act. 

The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Massey Place has 

moved the adjournment of debate on Bill No. 71, The 

Innovation Saskatchewan Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 80 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by Hon. Mr. Norris that Bill No. 80 — The 

Construction Industry Labour Relations Amendment Act, 

2009 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to speak against the proposed Bill 80 because it 

represents a continuation of the eroding of the rights of 

Saskatchewan citizens who have a proud and vital tradition of 

making this the best place to live for its working people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is incomprehensible why this government 

chooses to continue its assault on the human rights of unions 

and union members. Just like the former Bill 5 and Bill 6, this 

proposed legislation was not asked for by unions or union 

members. Just like the former Bill 5 and Bill 6, this government 

consulted with not one single representative of the unions and 

the union members affected prior to introducing such dramatic 

and significant intrusion to their human rights. 

 

Just like the former Bill 5 and Bill 6, this legislation reveals this 

government’s unfortunate, and in my respectful opinion, 

contemptuous disregard for the value to our province of the 

labour movement and its members. Choosing to attack labour 

and engage in a confrontational and provocative approach, 

rather than sitting down with the labour movement to identify 

what the concerns are and adopt a collective and good faith 

approach to governing, is an affront to the principles of a free 

and democratic society. 

 

[16:45] 

 

As you may know, Mr. Speaker, craft associations were granted 

legal recognition over 500 years ago. For more than 400 years, 

guilds — the precursor to today’s trade unions — had 

jurisdiction over the designation of master craftsmen and 

apprentices. Craft unions in North America have been involved 

with skills development and apprenticeship training from their 

inception over 100 years ago. 

 

While on-the-job training comprises approximately 85 per cent 

of an apprentice’s indentureship to an employer, formal 

classroom training has always complemented skills 

development. Each craft sets limits on the number of 

apprentices to each journeyman, usually about three or four. 

Adherence to apprenticeship ratios is a quality measure and 

legacy that dates back to the guilds. 

 

Mr. Speaker, across Canada and the USA [United States of 



2818 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2009 

America], statistics show that over 80 per cent of the 

construction industry apprentices who successfully complete 

their requirements for trades qualification certificates are 

sponsored by joint apprenticeship training boards. In 

Saskatchewan the construction unions are the keepers of this 

quality control and have been since they first came here in the 

beginning of the last century. 

 

Mr. Speaker, did you know that some of the trades provide over 

90 training courses over and above the courses offered through 

SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 

Technology]? Did you know that these courses are designed to 

ensure that the highest level of skill is brought to every 

construction site, to every construction project, and to every 

workplace in this province? Did you know that these courses 

ensure the highest level of workplace health and safety for 

every young person who seeks to enter the proud and 

centuries-old tradition of becoming a skilled journeyman? 

 

Did you know that the work in this industry is some of the most 

dangerous work in our society and that young people get killed 

on these jobs each and every year because of its intrinsic 

danger? Did you know that the construction trade unions in this 

province provide the highest level of training to protect the lives 

of our young people offered anywhere in this province? Mr. 

Speaker, did you know these training programs are offered as 

the result of collective bargaining arrangements negotiated with 

the employer councils in the construction industry? That’s right, 

Mr. Speaker, they and the employers recognize the value and 

importance of this additional training and have worked out 

co-operative joint training programs. 

 

The jobs in the trades require extensive and ongoing skill and 

safety training to be able to build and maintain the massive 

projects we come to rely upon to provide our citizens with such 

necessities as heat, electricity, power, and water. As 

technologies advance, as new and more advanced processes are 

developed, new and more advanced skills are required. And the 

construction unions have been there to provide such skills. 

 

Bill 80 would move this historical and necessary apprenticeship 

and skills training backwards, Mr. Speaker. Why would any 

government do anything which could lead to the lowering of 

skills and the lowering of safety standards which the 

construction trades offer? 

 

Does this government’s ideological opposition to the labour 

movement reach so deep that it will not or perhaps cannot see 

the value in at least examining the impact of such legislation 

before introducing it in this legislature? As we have seen from 

its approach to the former Bill 5 and Bill 6, this government, 

Mr. Speaker, seems to be unwilling to changes its laws to 

address the concerns of the labour movement once it has 

introduced them. 

 

And we know, Mr. Speaker, that the government did not consult 

with the unions and its members affected because the assistant 

deputy minister admitted such. In fact the assistant deputy 

minister admitted that the only group that asked for this 

legislation was a group called CLAC [Christian Labour 

Association of Canada], which stands for the Christian Labour 

Association. Did you know, Mr. Speaker, that CLAC was also a 

supporter of the Saskatchewan Party and told its members to 

vote for them in anticipation of getting a law that would support 

them? Mr. Speaker, that should concern this legislature and the 

citizens of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, can this government demonstrate that allowing 

CLAC and the employers who support them to enter our 

economy will enhance the safety training and protection of our 

young people who choose the trades and their profession by 

offering more extensive and more thorough training than that 

historically provided by our construction trade unions? Can this 

government demonstrate that allowing CLAC and the 

employers who support them to enter our economy will increase 

the training levels and skill development now provided through 

our construction trade unions in Saskatchewan? 

 

Mr. Speaker, can this government demonstrate that allowing 

CLAC and the employers who support them to enter our 

economy will actually increase the level of wages and benefits 

that our young people are insured, that our journeymen are 

insured through the collective agreements negotiated by the 

trade unions in Saskatchewan? Mr. Speaker, doesn’t the Sask 

Party government believe that the people in this province are 

entitled to improve their wages and benefits and to improve 

their working conditions? 

 

Mr. Speaker, did you know that the building trades unions 

contribute to the improvement of society for many citizens who 

suffer from poverty or illness or disease, and citizens who need 

their help? Mr. Speaker, one could go on and on about the 

contributions of the construction trades to our society over the 

past several decades. One could go into almost every 

community in this province and see an example of the work and 

contribution of the construction trades. It concerns me deeply 

that this government never had the respect to spend a single 

second of time to meet with the representatives of these unions, 

to ask them how these proposed changes to a law which has 

worked so well would impact them. It’s shameful, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And given that the Sask Party government is getting quite upset 

by what I’ve said so far, I’m going to provide another 

contribution which the construction trades industry provides 

that most people wouldn’t even realize. And I quite frankly 

didn’t either, until I did some research, and it’s a contribution of 

poetry. 

 

And I’d like to read one such poem to exhibit the sentimentality 

of some of these wonderful people that are in the construction 

trades and the services they provide to us. This poem is called 

“Slab on Grade” and it reads as such: 

 

At dawn the concrete trucks are already there revving their 

engines 

Rumbling and throbbing one by one manoeuvring into 

position 

Enormous insects on command 

They ooze from their huge revolving abdomens a thick 

grey slime 

Insects attending to insects 

The crew fusses over them, nursing wet concrete into the 

forms 

Someone to handle the chute, a couple labourers mucking 

One pulling mesh and two finishers working the screed 

rod 



April 22, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2819 

This is called pouring slab on grade 

What could be flatter or more nondescript than a concrete 

slab 

For years people will walk on it 

Hardly considering that it was put there on purpose 

On a Thursday in August by men on their knees. 

 

This poem was written by Clem Starck. He’s a journeyman 

carpenter for more than 20 years and is a member of the 

Carpenters Local 1065. And I found that to be quite moving for 

me when I was doing the research for this Bill, and it brought to 

light to me the contributions that these construction workers and 

these trades workers provide to our society that go far beyond 

the concrete buildings and the maintenance of such as well. 

 

There was a very powerful, powerful letter that was written by a 

member of the United Brotherhood of Carpenters and Joiners, 

Local 1985. He is an organizer for this union. His name is 

Kerry Westcott, and with his permission I’d now like to read 

into the record some of the items that he has . . . Let’s put it this 

way, the overview that he sees with respect to Bill 80. And 

quite frankly he has first-hand knowledge of this because he is 

in the trade, and he certainly knows about how this Bill 80 came 

about with respect to the processes that were undertaken by the 

Sask Party: 

 

The Construction Industry Labour Relations Act (1992) 

sets out a system of collective bargaining in the 

construction industry on a province-wide basis between 

employers’ organizations and trade unions. 

 

Unionized contractors elect leaders to bargain 

province-wide collective agreements with the elected 

leaders of building trades unions, trade by trade. Six 

employers’ organizations bargain collective agreements 

with 12 construction trade unions covering 24 of 

Saskatchewan’s apprenticeable trades. 

 

Construction projects have been organized on a trade basis 

since craft guilds built gothic cathedrals. There are several 

good reasons why Saskatchewan, and nearly all of the 

industrialized nations, bargain provincial construction 

agreements this way. 

 

Prior to the . . . [construction industrial labour relations 

Act] every contractor had a different agreement with a 

different expiry date. It was very chaotic and de-stabilizing 

for the industry. Contractors crave certainty and in fact 

petitioned for the system originally. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we can see that the reason that the 

construction industrial labour relations Act came about 

originally was that the contractors themselves were petitioning 

for it for the reason of stabilization.  

 

It’s interesting now that we have a minister who, when was 

introducing this Bill in the House — and I’d like to quote from 

Hansard from March 16, 2009 — the minister responsible said, 

“Last week, Mr. Speaker, I was pleased to announce the 

government is moving to ensure Saskatchewan’s construction 

industry operates under fair, flexible, and effective labour 

laws.” 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Morin: — Well this Bill 80 is anything but fair. It is 

clearly not fair. It doesn’t take into account at all the opinions of 

the front-line workers. It doesn’t take into account at all the 

organizations that represent those front-line workers, and the 

assistant deputy minister has admitted as much by saying that 

they were not consulted in this process. So clearly, Mr. Speaker, 

it is clearly not fair. 

 

Now let’s go to flexible. Sure there is a whole bunch of 

flexibility. There’s a whole bunch of flexibility to make sure 

that the wages aren’t going to be as good as they were, Mr. 

Speaker, that there may not be any contributions for instance to 

benefit plans or for instance to pension plans. Those are all 

things that came to fruition under the protection of The 

Construction Industry Labour Relations Act. So we have it, Mr. 

Speaker, so there is definitely going to be flexibility, but it will 

not be to the advantage of the workers, that’s for sure. 

 

And as far as effective labour laws, well one has to wonder as 

to who . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Being the hour of adjournment, the Assembly 

stands adjourned until tomorrow morning at 10 a.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2787 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2787 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2787 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2788 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2788 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 2788 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2788 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2799 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2814 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2788 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2788 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2789 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2789 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2789 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2789 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2789 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2790 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Earth Day 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2790 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2791 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2792 

 Support Our Troops 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2790 

 Administrative Professionals Day 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2790 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2791 

 Prince Albert Team Wins Girls’ Provincial Hockey Championship 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2791 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Women’s Issues 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2792 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2792 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2793 

 Federal Transfer Payments 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2793 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2793 

 Storage of Nuclear Waste 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2795 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2795 

 Consultation Regarding Nuclear Power 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2796 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2796 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2796 

 Consultation Regarding Energy Sources 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2796 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2797 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2797 

 Standing Committee on House Services 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2798 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 87 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2009 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2797 

 Bill No. 88 — The Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 2009 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2798 

 Bill No. 59 — The Election Amendment Act, 2008 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2798 

 



 

 Bill No. 60 — The Senate Nominee Election Act 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2799 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

  The Deputy Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................... 2799 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2799 

POINT OF ORDER 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2799 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2800 

  The Deputy Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................... 2800 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 73 — The University of Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 2008 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2800 

  Gantefoer (referral to committee) ......................................................................................................................................... 2801 

 Bill No. 68 — The Arts Professions Act/Loi sur les professions artistiques 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2801 

  Gantefoer (referral to committee) ......................................................................................................................................... 2805 

 Bill No. 85 — The Municipal Grants Act 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2805 

  Gantefoer (referral to committee) ......................................................................................................................................... 2809 

 Bill No. 89 — The Education Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 3)/ 

 Loi n
o
 3 de 2009 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2809 

  Gantefoer (referral to committee) ......................................................................................................................................... 2812 

 Bill No. 90 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Education Property Tax) Repeal and Amendment Act, 2009 

  Wotherspoon ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2812 

  Gantefoer (referral to committee) ......................................................................................................................................... 2813 

 Bill No. 84 — The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Amendment Act, 2009 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2813 

 Bill No. 71 — The Innovation Saskatchewan Act 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2815 

 Bill No. 80 — The Construction Industry Labour Relations Amendment Act, 2009 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2817 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 


