
















































October 22, 2009 Hansard


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 2A  THURSDAY, OCTOBER 22, 2009, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3131 

 October 22, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Humboldt. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

it is my great pleasure today to introduce to you and through 

you to all the members of the Assembly some great people that 

are in your gallery. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is Foster Family Week in Saskatchewan. It‟s a 

week where we recognize and express our thank you and 

appreciation to those exceptional individuals and families who 

quietly go about taking care of and nurturing the children who 

are unable to live at home. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to the House the 

following individuals and families from Regina and area who 

have opened up their homes and their hearts to children by 

becoming foster families. With us today we have Alan and 

Lydia Schiffner, Diane Thomas, Debra Pele, Liz Pelletier, Larry 

and Kim Skidmore, Farhad and Colleen Nikbakht, Lisa 

Peterson, Lisa Deans, Sarah LeClaire, and Amy Roberts. 

 

As well, joining them from the Saskatchewan Foster Families 

Association is the executive director, Deb Davies, and the 

SFFA family support worker, Paul Bunz. Could everyone 

please join me in welcoming them to their Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟d like to 

join in with the minister in welcoming her special guests to the 

House. This is, as she mentioned, Foster Family Awareness 

Week, and it‟s a very important week. Throughout the year, 

these folks provide such an important service to the vulnerable 

families and children in our communities, and their work is so 

important to having healthy, strong communities. And I too 

would like to make special note of all the families and of the 

executive director, Deb Davies, and the good work that they‟ve 

been doing. So on behalf of the opposition, I too would like to 

would like to welcome you to the House. Thank you. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — All right. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Today I‟d like to raise a petition calling for wage equity for 

CBO [community-based organization] workers. This is an 

important issue that we need to address. We know that workers 

in community-based organizations in Saskatchewan have 

traditionally been underpaid, and many continue to work and 

receive poverty level wages. 

 

And these folks that signed this petition are from Moose Jaw, 

Caronport, and even from the city of Swift Current. Thank you 

very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

in support of a new long-term care facility in La Ronge. The 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately invest in the planning and 

construction of long-term care beds in La Ronge. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good people of La 

Ronge and area. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Another session and 

grad students are still left out in the cold. I‟d like to present the 

petition. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately expand the graduate 

retention program to include master‟s and Ph.D. 

graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are 

students from here in Saskatchewan. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, another 

session and here we are rising today again to present yet another 

petition on behalf of rural residents of Saskatchewan who 

question why the Sask Party government is leaving them behind 

with respect to providing safe and affordable water and who 

have yet no commitment of assistance. And the prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to financially assist the town of Duck 

Lake residents for the good of their health and safety due 

to the exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency and that this government fulfills its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — Before I recognize the next member, I would 

ask members to allow individual members to be able to present 

their petitions without a lot of interference. I know it impacts on 



3132 Saskatchewan Hansard October 22, 2009 

your ability to hear and to make your own statement, so if 

members could accommodate that and we‟d appreciate it. I 

recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m pleased to rise to 

present a petition in support of affordable rents and housing for 

The Battlefords, Mr. Speaker. The petitioners note that residents 

of some Battlefords area apartments have been given notice of 

rent increases of 40 per cent and that the vacancy rate for rental 

accommodation in The Battlefords is very low. Mr. Speaker, 

the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to call 

upon the Government of Saskatchewan to develop an 

affordable housing program that will result in a greater 

number of quality and affordable rental units to be made 

available to a greater number of people throughout The 

Battlefords and that will implement a process of rent 

review or rent control to better protect tenants in a 

non-competitive housing environment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petitioners are all from streets in various parts 

of North Battleford. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present petitions 

on behalf of concerned residents of Saskatchewan as it relates to 

the unprecedented financial mismanagement of this 

government. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to start managing our 

provincial finances responsibly and prudently to ensure 

that it does not continue its trend of massive budgetary 

shortfalls, runaway and unsustainable spending, equity 

stripping from our Crowns, and irresponsible revenue 

setting. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by good folks of Regina and 

Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Good Times in Saskatchewan 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Despite what the 

opposition members may have you believe, times are good in 

Saskatchewan. We have the lowest unemployment rate in the 

country. Saskatoon and Regina have the lowest unemployment 

among major Canadian cities. Our government has lowered 

property and income taxes to make life more affordable here in 

Saskatchewan. And last but not least, we have made a 2.7 

billion payment to reduce the provincial debt by 40 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are proud of our record. However we still have 

work to do, and we‟re going to continue to move forward. 

Speaking of moving forward, did you know that 

Saskatchewan‟s population jumped by 16,509 people between 

July 1, 2008, and July 1, 2009? That‟s the largest population 

increase in any 12-month period for a very long time. Now 

there are 16,509 new residents that think times are good here 

too. 

 

We know that there are challenges that come with growth. Our 

government created the task force on housing affordability. We 

created this task force to ensure that housing affordability keeps 

pace with our growing economy. In today‟s reality, many 

seniors are on a fixed income. When prices go up, their incomes 

do not follow suit. We also doubled the number of seniors that 

qualified for the seniors‟ income plan. 

 

The Speaker: — The member‟s time has elapsed. I recognize 

the member from Regina Dewdney. 

 

The People’s Verdict 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, just over a month ago, 

Saskatchewan people went to the polls in Regina Douglas Park 

and Saskatoon Riversdale. The government said they would run 

on their record, while the opposition said we would run on the 

government‟s record as well. And the people‟s verdict in both 

by-elections was clear, Mr. Speaker — two NDP candidates 

elected with an absolute majority of the popular vote. 

 

People told us they were concerned with the rising cost of 

living: rent, utilities, car insurance, camping fees, and 

prescription drugs. They told us they wanted the government to 

focus on making life more affordable, on providing a better 

quality of life for our seniors, on building the future by 

investing in renewable energy. They asked us how the 

government could have blown the biggest surplus in history and 

how families could get so little for it. They told us they wanted 

strong voices for families like theirs, for people like themselves. 

And, Mr. Speaker, they chose MLAs [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly] who they knew would be those strong 

voices for them in this Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is my great pleasure to invite all members to 

join me in welcoming the Leader of the Opposition and the new 

member for Saskatoon Riversdale to this Assembly. Thank you 

very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu‟Appelle Valley. 

 

Foster Family Week 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I‟m pleased to bring to the attention of this House that this is 

Foster Family Week in Saskatchewan. Every day families 

across the province open their hearts and homes to children who 

are unable to be cared for within their own families . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the member from 

Regina Qu‟Appelle Valley. 



October 22, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3133 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

our government recognizes and values the outstanding 

contribution made every day by our province‟s foster families 

both in their communities and to the children they care for. 

 

On Tuesday evening my colleague, the Minister of Social 

Services, attended the Regina Foster Parent Appreciation Night 

where she presented the Montgomery Award for Excellence in 

Fostering and had the opportunity to personally thank foster 

parents for their caring, for providing safe, nurturing homes, 

and for investing in the future of our great province. 

 

We have dedicated nearly 25 million in additional funding this 

year to improve the province‟s child welfare system. Along 

with other initiatives, this means the development of nearly 100 

new homes, new spaces . . . [inaudible] . . . It means funding for 

the Saskatchewan Foster Family Association of nearly 

$867,000, the largest annual grant ever provided by this 

province to this organization. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Autism Awareness Month 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. October is Autism 

Awareness Month. Autism spectrum disorder or ADS is a 

neurological disorder which causes developmental disability. 

Autism affects the way the brain functions, resulting in 

difficulties with communication and social interaction, and 

unusual patterns of behaviour, activities, and interest. ADS 

occurs in approximately one in 200 people. It‟s four times more 

common in boys and usually appears in the first three years of 

life. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those are some of the hard, cold facts about ADS, 

but each person with ADS is unique and has different abilities. 

The children suffering from ADS are real. Their parents and 

families supporting these children have real concerns about the 

care options for their children. They want early diagnosis, 

appropriate scientifically validated treatment, and support for 

families both financial and emotional. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Autism Awareness Month helps us learn more 

about ADS and share information with all Canadians. However 

understanding alone will not improve the lives of these children 

and families. We need to invest in their diagnosis, treatment, 

and support. I want to thank the Autism Society of Canada and 

the Sask Families for Effective Autism Treatment or 

SASKFEAT for their continued fight to help Canadians living 

with ADS reach their full potential. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 

 

A State of Mind 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The public and 

the members on this side of the House can‟t help but notice all 

the frowns from the members opposite. And it‟s undeniable that 

the member for Regina Douglas Park seems a bit edgy these 

days, a bit irritated, a little grumpy. Yes, that‟s the word — 

grumpy — Mr. Speaker. And how do we know that? Well 

according to the Snow White personality test, a grumpy tends to 

sit opposite the leader, often disagrees or says no, may sit with 

their arms crossed, Mr. Speaker, backs away from the table, 

looks annoyed, and is negatively critical and judgmental, even 

argumentative. 

 

[10:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we look into the magic mirror, you will see that 

Saskatchewan is not grumpy these days. In fact Saskatchewan, 

in fact, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — I can tell that members are looking forward to 

this session. I recognize the member from Cannington. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — In fact, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is 

one of the fairest in the land even though the member from 

Regina Douglas Park once said, nobody ever said it was going 

to be fair. Perhaps that‟s why the member opposite is not happy. 

This is not the Saskatchewan he remembers. He remembers 

driving off west in a cloud of dust. He does not remember the 

success and optimism we now have in this growing province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Throne Speech Promises 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday we heard a brand new 

batch of promises from this government. But before anyone 

gets too worked up about yesterday‟s promises, I‟d like to look 

back a year ago when they made a whole bunch of promises in 

their last Throne Speech. Let‟s see how that went. 

 

They said they would have $2 billion in the Fiscal Stabilization 

Fund and it would be “the rock” on which we build 

Saskatchewan‟s future. Today, not so much. They said that 

“Saskatchewan no longer has a job shortage.” Today, not so 

much. They said that they would have “better protection for 

renters facing a rent increase.” Today, not so much. They said 

they would increase “the supply of locally trained physicians.” 

Today, not so much. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party is beginning to remind me of an old 

water pump out at a cabin at the lake — makes an awful lot of 

noise but all it does is spit up a lot of hot air. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 

 

Youth Entrepreneurial Day 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is 

Entrepreneurial Day in Saskatchewan. The Leader-Post sums 

up the change in entrepreneurial attitudes in Saskatchewan in a 

column from October 19: “„We‟ve gone from worst to first in 

. . . about four years‟, says Marilyn Braun-Pollon,” 

vice-president of the Canadian Federation of Independent 

Business. That sums up Saskatchewan perfectly. 

 

For two years in a row, a Saskatchewan city has topped the 

CFIB‟s [Canadian Federation of Independent Business] list of 



3134 Saskatchewan Hansard October 22, 2009 

best cities for business. It is also the second year in a row that 

five cities from Saskatchewan are in the top 10 of the same list. 

And, Mr. Speaker, my hometown of Lloydminster is one of 

those five. 

 

Last year for the first time we celebrated Youth 

Entrepreneurship Day in our province. It is nice to see in 

Saskatchewan that there is a need to celebrate young people 

doing well. For far too long the former government neglected 

young people. 

 

In the ‟90s, young people left Saskatchewan in droves. They 

knew that their skills and abilities would not flourish under the 

former government. Now, Mr. Speaker, an entrepreneurial spirit 

is growing in Saskatchewan, and this is convincing more young 

people to stay right here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Our Saskatchewan Party government is proud that we can 

celebrate young people choosing to live, work, and raise their 

family right here at home. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty‟s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Support for Saskatchewan People 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, my question is 

to the Premier, the member from Swift Current. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I want to say how pleased I am to be back in the 

Assembly. And I also wanted to say that in the past year, 

travelling the province, going to many different communities, I 

want to say, Mr. Speaker, that one theme is clear. Many people 

are asking, how is it that this new government with this new 

Premier has blown the $2.3 billion they were left after the last 

election? How did that happen? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they‟re also asking and wanted me to ask the 

Premier this question — while rents are going up in this 

province by 20 or 30 per cent, the Premier has not lifted a finger 

to help them. My question to the Premier is this: when will you 

get on with the job of what you promised in the last Throne 

Speech of helping the renters in this province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before I get into 

the answers to the questions from the hon. member, let me just 

say that we want to welcome him to this Legislative Assembly. 

We especially want to welcome as well the new member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

It‟s been a while since the Hon. Leader of the Opposition and 

myself have had a chance to talk. The last time we talked for 

any length of time is when he phoned me at my home before the 

‟04 election to give me advice on how to beat the former leader 

of the NDP. That was the last time. You know, he said, here‟s 

what we did in the 1980s and here‟s what you should do to the 

current Premier, the then leader of the NDP. 

 

Now I don‟t know why he did that, Mr. Speaker. Maybe he was 

trying to be helpful. Maybe it was because he was a 

Conservative with Conservative lawn signs in Alberta, or 

maybe he was dreaming of the job of leading the NDP for a 

long time, Mr. Speaker. I want to welcome him back to this new 

Saskatchewan where you can come from Alberta and get the job 

you always dreamed of, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, new question to the 

Premier, the member from Swift Current. Mr. Speaker, it‟s 

interesting that he never mentions that for a number of years he 

worked in Ottawa for the Mulroney government and left and 

went to work for the Conservative Party in Ottawa and now 

pretends he‟s not a Conservative. And there are many others 

over there pretending that they‟re not Conservatives. 

 

But my question to you, Mr. Premier, is this. My question, Mr. 

Speaker, to the Premier is this: with utility rates going up by 

record amounts — SaskEnergy up in the double digits, 

SaskPower up by 8.9 per cent, and a promise by the Premier to 

increase rates by 100 per cent — when will you deal with the 

issue of the whole cost of living that the people of this province 

are facing? When will you deal with that, Mr. Premier? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, just to set the 

record straight, I worked right out of university for the federal 

Conservative government for nine months. Now he lived in 

Alberta and had Progressive Conservative lawn signs for I think 

about 10 years, so ironically enough, I think he‟s been a 

Conservative longer than I have, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But let me just say this, Mr. Speaker. It was this government 

that set out to make sure that everyone in Saskatchewan would 

benefit from economic growth in terms of affordability. It was 

this government that dropped 80,000 low-income people off the 

tax rolls, Mr. Speaker. It was this government that doubled the 

seniors‟ income benefit after 16 years of neglect under the 

NDP. It‟s been under this government that we have indexed 

rental supplements, that we‟ve indexed help to those who need 

it the most, Mr. Speaker. And there will be more of that as we 

continue to grow this economy and as we continue to ensure 

that everyone benefits from that prosperity. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier 

deals with another issue that was raised many times as I 

travelled the constituency of Riversdale and Douglas Park. 

Many people were saying, when it comes to health care one of 

the issues is the drug plan and the fact that many families 

cannot pay for the medications needed for their teenagers and 

students. And I want to ask the Premier if at this time he can 

make a commitment to extend the drug plan to cover all 

students in the province, or is it true that he‟s blown the $2.3 

billion and there‟s no money left for the rainy day that starts 

today now that we‟re in a deficit? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I don‟t know why the hon. 

member would assume that, just because it‟s his first day in the 



October 22, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3135 

legislature, that it‟s a rainy day in Saskatchewan. I still think it‟s 

a very sunny day in the province. There‟s much to be hopeful 

for, Mr. Speaker. Let me just say this. The Hon. Leader of the 

Opposition has been saying this for some time. He‟s been 

asking the rhetorical question, where has the money went? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, these are the investments this government 

has made: $2.5 billion record investment in infrastructure in the 

province of Saskatchewan; the largest income tax relief for 

Saskatchewan families — 80,000 fewer people on the tax rolls; 

the largest property tax relief in the history of the province of 

Saskatchewan; 500 new nurses, Mr. Speaker; infrastructure 

upgrades in schools and in hospitals, Mr. Speaker; and $800 

million in cash in the bank. That sounds pretty good to me, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — To the Premier: Mr. Premier, we know 

that families in this province are hurting — people who can‟t 

afford their rent, people who can‟t afford their utilities, people 

who can‟t afford medication for family members who are sick. 

And this Premier laughs and chuckles about that fact. 

 

I came here today from one year of campaigning, having 

listened to thousands of families who are grumpy with him. The 

people are grumpy and they told me to ask these questions and, 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m appalled at the humour and laughter these 

members show. My question is, when are you going to get 

serious, put down the pompoms, go to work, and help with 

these issues? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Since the election in 2007 when that 

member would have watched from the province of Alberta, this 

government, this government has kept over 100 of its election 

promises. You want to talk about work on behalf of the people 

of the province, Mr. Speaker. This government has introduced 

record income tax relief, record property tax relief, Mr. 

Speaker. We have supported rural Saskatchewan, supported the 

cattle industry when we needed it. We‟ve invested in crop 

insurance, Mr. Speaker. We‟ve rebuilt the highways of the 

province and we‟ve . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. There are some members that are 

taking up a lot of other members‟ time, and I‟d appreciate if the 

members would respect the right of the members asking the 

question and the ministers responding to be heard. I recognize 

the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we have paid off over $2 

billion of debt in this province, reduced the debt of this 

province by 40 per cent. Mr. Speaker, that . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it‟s interesting. The hon. 

member, the Leader of the Opposition, poses a question. He 

says that this side of the House isn‟t answering the questions. 

He might want to get control of his members over there so we 

can actually have this discussion. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I would ask the Premier to 

move to the answer, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, in terms of families who need 

the help most, we have, as you know, provided income tax 

relief, increased benefits to families who need it. A family of 

four with a $50,000 income is saving $1,945. A family of four 

at $35,000 — $2,640, Mr. Speaker. The list goes on — $2,100 

for a senior couple that‟s earning 25,000. That‟s the investment 

we‟ve given back to those people, those families who need it 

the most. 

 

There‟s more work to be done with respect to affordability. But 

I want to tell you this. In two years, this side of the House has 

achieved more than that government did in 16 years in growing 

the economy and making sure the people of the province 

benefit, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Support for Citizens and Olympic Spending 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, we just heard the Leader of the 

Opposition talk about the rising cost of living. 

 

During the Saskatoon Riversdale by-election, I had the 

opportunity to knock on thousands of doors. And rarely, rarely 

. . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. It‟s been a long-standing tradition to 

respect the right of especially new members to be able to pose a 

question or respond without interference. So I‟d ask members to 

respect that right. The member from Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — I had the opportunity to knock on thousands 

of doors over several months, and rarely a day went by without 

someone telling me how the rising cost of living was making it 

harder and harder for them to make ends meet. 

 

People also told me they wondered about this government‟s 

priorities. At a time when too many families, particularly in my 

constituency, are making a choice between paying rent and 

buying groceries, this government has more than $7 million to 

spend on photo opportunities at the Olympics. 

 

To the Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport, my 

question is simply this: why don‟t you share the people‟s 

priorities? Why is it that this government has $7 million to 

spend on cheerleading and photo opportunities at the Olympics 

rather than on the real needs of people in Saskatoon Riversdale 

and in the rest of this province? 

 

[10:30] 

 



3136 Saskatchewan Hansard October 22, 2009 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I want to assure the 

member opposite that we have heard the same thing on 

doorsteps — that she has heard it and we‟ve heard it 

immediately following the election. And that is why within our 

first two years that we struck the task force on housing and we 

addressed the affordability immediately. 

 

We increased the shelter allowance, we indexed it, and we 

revisit it every six months to ensure that it is reacting to the 

market. 

 

And Saskatoon is experiencing a rising market, and it is a 

concern. That is also why we‟re investing over $8 million in 

that particular member‟s riding for new housing. That is why 

we‟re investing in a brand new school in that member‟s riding, 

because we have heard these issues and we reacted very 

quickly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to pose the same 

question to the same minister. I want to know about the photo 

opportunities and pompoms and cheerleading in Vancouver, 

rather than on the things that matter to people in Saskatoon 

Riversdale like being able to buy groceries. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s not either-or, quite 

frankly. We addressed the issues that she is speaking of very, 

very quickly. We increased the Saskatchewan employment 

supplement, of which 70 per cent of the clients are single 

parents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we increased the Saskatchewan . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, we also recognized that 

seniors have been neglected for 16 years in this province by the 

previous government, so we increased their income plan by 110 

per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we addressed housing, we addressed employment 

supplement, we addressed the low-income tax credit. We 

introduced the low-income tax credit and it is double the 

amount that the previous sales tax credit was. So yes, we are 

putting all of those issues as a priority. 

 

Should we ignore all other issues within our province? No. Mr. 

Speaker, we have a balanced approach and we‟ll continue to do 

so. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Employment Issues 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We‟ve heard from the 

Leader of the Opposition as well as the new member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. We‟ve heard about, for many families in 

Saskatchewan, how it‟s more and more difficult to make ends 

meet. While the Saskatchewan Party would like us to believe 

that the economy is still booming and everything is just peachy, 

Mr. Speaker, we know from Stats Canada that last month there 

were fewer people working in Saskatchewan than a year ago — 

700 fewer to be exact, Mr. Speaker. 

 

My question to the Minister of Employment is, how are these 

individuals who are out of work supposed to pay the bills? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for 

the opportunity to respond to that question. Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. I recognize the Minister 

Responsible for Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. You 

know, we know we‟re not immune from what‟s going on 

around us, Mr. Speaker. But, Mr. Speaker, we know that we‟re 

also making some significant progress. I appreciate the 

opportunity to talk about last month. 

 

Year over year, we have seen some declines. But what we‟ve 

seen is 2,100 new jobs month over month, Mr. Speaker, and 

that includes 6,800 full-time jobs. So, Mr. Speaker, we know 

that when we look at a city like Saskatoon, for example, year 

over year, 7,700 new jobs; month over month, up over 800. 

 

We can see that sectors like transportation and warehousing, 

we‟re making progress. Construction, we‟re making progress, 

Mr. Speaker. That speaks directly to the booster shot and the 

infrastructure investment as well as a number of other initiatives 

that we‟ve taken within this province to ensure that again. We 

know we‟re not immune from what‟s going on around us but 

we‟re doing our best to ensure that we sustain the growth and 

share the benefits of this growth with the people of the 

province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is good to be back 

in the Assembly. I‟ve missed many of my colleagues, and truth 

be told I‟ve missed some of the members opposite but, Mr. 

Speaker, the fluff answers I did not miss, no. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we see in Saskatchewan an opposite trend to what 

is happening in Canada. In Canada we‟ve seen an increase in 

full-time jobs, full-time employment, but in Saskatchewan 

we‟ve seen a decrease. Last month, Mr. Speaker, a decrease of 

10,000 full-time jobs alone. These are the jobs, Mr. Speaker, 

that provide stability to families through good wages and a 

stable living situation, Mr. Speaker. In Saskatchewan we‟ve 



October 22, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3137 

seen this huge increase in part-time employment while we‟ve 

seen the full-time jobs decrease. 

 

My question to the minister: we know that the Premier has 

provided all members with a sparkly pair of pompoms. We 

know all the members like these pompoms a great deal. But my 

question to the minister: when will he put down the pompoms 

and get in the game? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s a wonderful opportunity 

to respond to the member. I missed him as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he made reference to some of the recent numbers, 

Mr. Speaker. Again, we know we‟re not immune from what‟s 

going on around us, but let me be clear. Full-time jobs in 

Saskatchewan, up month over month — 6,800, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We know that we‟re not immune from what‟s going on around 

us. That‟s one of the reasons we put forward the rapid response 

teams, Mr. Speaker. That way we can work very closely with 

the federal government, with employers, with employees, with 

unions, and so far we‟ve been able to help over 1,000 people 

keep their jobs, Mr. Speaker. 

 

These are some of the initiatives that we have, Mr. Speaker, to 

ensure that once again that we‟re sustaining the growth in 

Saskatchewan. By the way, we need to mention 4.6 per cent 

unemployment rate, Mr. Speaker, the lowest in the county, Mr. 

Speaker. More to do, but we‟re certainly continuing on the path 

of ensuring we‟re sharing the benefits of this growth with the 

people of the province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Management of Provincial Economy 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — So, Mr. Speaker, we get more 

cheerleading from the Sask Party, we get stories of the real 

economy from the opposition. What that story is, is massive job 

losses, masses layoffs in this province, and a huge decline, 

sector after sector. Even if that minister wants to cherry-pick a 

couple, we have huge decline in retail sales, huge decline in 

consumer spending, huge decline in international trade, huge 

decline in housing starts and manufacturing. Everyone knows 

that there‟s a recession — everyone, that is, but the Minister of 

Finance, who I quote on October 14th, “We sort of largely 

bypassed the recession.” 

 

To the Minister of Finance: why is he, the Premier, the entire 

Saskatchewan Party, the only people in Saskatchewan who 

don‟t know that there‟s a recession going on? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it‟s a 

pleasure to get up in the House and answer questions posed by 

the critic, the new member that has that responsibility. And I 

would like to say is that this province has had an incredible, an 

incredible two years under this government. 

Mr. Speaker, while the rest of the country was facing a very, 

very serious recession, Saskatchewan was largely exempted 

from that, and you see that every day as you go around this 

province and you talk to people in the retail trade; you talk to 

people that are building houses; you talk to people that are 

buying sales. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, you compare the numbers in 

Saskatchewan to virtually any jurisdiction, not only in Canada 

but in North America and perhaps the world, and we are doing 

very, very well in comparison. Mr. Speaker, we‟ve had a 

significant problem with the potash industry and we are coping 

with that change and our reality very, very well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are going to continue to provide the support 

and the leadership for this economy and the Saskatchewan 

people who do believe in the economy much more than the 

members opposite do. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — The Finance minister, Mr. Speaker, 

points to housing and to retail sales. Both of these are down 

hugely — plummeting housing starts. And I‟ll remind him that 

a recession, the definition of a recession is two quarters, 

consecutive quarters without growth. The statistics back this up. 

 

But it‟s not just recessions that this minister gets wrong. After 

filing and putting on the table one of the most error-filled 

budgets this province has ever seen in March, from the 

Leader-Post on August 15th, I quote, “. . . the province can‟t 

afford another miscalculation like potash.” 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people of this province are paying for 

this minister‟s incompetence. From the Leader-Post on August 

26th, I quote, “This happens to be the biggest miscalculation 

since PC finance minister Gary Lane‟s 1986 budget.” 

 

To the Minister of Finance: honestly, how could he have gotten 

it so wrong? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, when we 

prepared our budget in the spring of this year, we took the 

advice of the people in the industry and the people in the 

Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Energy and Resources. We 

took all of these things into account and we came up what we 

believed at the time was a very prudent and measured response 

to potash revenues. We had believed, given the fact that the 

industry was quoting potash prices at $1,000 a tonne at the time 

— there were actually Canpotex sales at the $750 level — that 

$550 was prudent. 

 

We believed that 10.3 million . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — We believed that 10.3 million tonnes 

of potash was a reasonable number given that those were the 



3138 Saskatchewan Hansard October 22, 2009 

numbers that had happened over the past four years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we used the best advice we could get. And the 

forecasts that we put together, the forecasts that we were given 

were subsequently proven — and I acknowledge — are wrong. 

There is no doubt about it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, so it leaves us to ask the simple question: what 

number would the opposition have used? Would you use one 

and a half billion dollars? One billion dollars? Five hundred 

million dollars? There is virtually no one in the world that 

would have predicted what has happened in the potash industry. 

 

An Hon. Member: — We did. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — And particularly the members 

opposite, despite what they‟re saying. We are doing very well. 

We are having a challenge, but we‟re going to meet it going 

forward. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I listened to interest to the 

Finance minister explain or try to explain how they made a 

mistake of $1.3 billion on one line in the budget. I think that‟s a 

Canadian record and one that I think the Premier is not likely 

proud of. 

 

But my question is to the Premier. You said about those 

numbers, and I quote, “I think it‟s prudent to budget at a modest 

price projection which I believe we will,” referring to the 

estimate on potash. Now my question is this. At the time we did 

the budget and they introduced the number, there was a 

recession on worldwide. Potash was going to China and India, 

and everyone exporting to those countries — whether it was oil 

or steel or potash — knew that the prices in commodities were 

going down. Why did the Premier think this was a modest 

approach to the budget? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — I want to thank the member for the 

question. There was a number of areas of caution built into the 

budget, including a surplus, a forecast surplus, including the 

fact that we had forecast the price for oil at, well getting to be 

nearly half of where it is even today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would also say this. When we set the price of the forecast of 

potash in the budget on the advice of Finance, we did so at 

about $550 a tonne. The spot price at the time was over $700 a 

tonne. Our price we put in the budget was less than what potash 

was selling for at the time. And you know what, Mr. Speaker? 

The price we had in the budget for potash is about what the spot 

price is today. What was absolutely unforeseen — including by 

the industry — was volume, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now if only the hon. member opposite and all of them opposite 

had been on hand to advise Bill Doyle and the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan or Mosaic or Agrium or 

Canpotex, the marketing arm for the companies. If only they 

would have been available for them with their crystal ball and 

magic wand to predict near zero sales when no one in the 

industry was predicting that, Mr. Speaker. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my final question to the 

Premier. Mr. Speaker, we know and the world knew that we 

were going into a recession. The world was already well into a 

recession. I think that many people have blamed the Minister of 

Finance for the big mistake and the Premier is now trying to 

blame the process and the Finance and the people in Finance. 

But there‟s a quote that I want to repeat and a idea that the 

Premier had one Saturday afternoon when he got on the phone 

and phoned his minister — and he admitted this — asked him 

to transfer $600 million on the spur of the moment. You 

remember that quote, Mr. Premier. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the Premier this. How often have 

you phoned the Finance minister and, against the will of the 

specialists and professionals in the department and against the 

will of the Finance minister, forced him to move money, use 

estimates that are wrong? And isn‟t this why the budget is off is 

because of your continual meddling on Saturday afternoons? 

Why don‟t you leave your phone off and continue to watch your 

football game? 

 

[10:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I don‟t think I caught the last 

part. Is he still grumpy about the whole football thing? I can‟t 

believe that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think what the hon. member is referring to, I 

think what he‟s referring to is the discussion we had just before 

we introduced the largest income tax relief for Saskatchewan 

families where we dropped 80,000 people off the tax rolls, and 

we were contemplating actually paying more off on the debt 

than we did. That‟s what we were contemplating. 

 

I talked to the Minister of Finance on the weekend and said, you 

know, we would like to pay off even more than the 40 per cent 

of debt but maybe it‟s prudent that we keep some in a fund . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Members. I ask the members to allow the 

Premier to respond. Final warning. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the decision was made that we 

would hold some money in cash and now we have $800 million 

in that fund in addition to the 40 per cent debt . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — So, Mr. Speaker, in terms of where 

Saskatchewan is today, I think these are the healthiest financial 

books in . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The member from Regina Rosemont 

has been continually attempting to enter the debate when 



October 22, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3139 

another member‟s on his feet. I asked earlier for members to be 

mindful of the right of members to ask the questions and 

respond. The Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Compared to almost every other jurisdiction 

in North America, we are the envy in terms of the financial 

health of the province, in terms of the cash on hand, in terms of 

the debt reduction. And moreover, Mr. Speaker, our 

population‟s growing like never before, Mr. Speaker. We‟ve got 

the lowest unemployment rate in all of the country. 

 

And I would also offer this to hon. members so that they can be 

just a little bit less grumpy. They can have blessed assurance of 

this: notwithstanding what happens with potash forecast, we 

will not do what the NDP did when they made mistakes in 

budgeting. Their first choice was to increase taxes, Mr. Speaker. 

The people of the province deserve better; they have better; and 

they will get better in the future. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Before orders of the day, I request leave of 

the Assembly to make the following motion: 

 

That the hon. member for Cypress Hills, the member 

Wayne Elhard, be appointed to preside as the Deputy 

Chair of committees of this Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has asked for leave. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the Premier. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Appointment of Deputy Chair of Committees 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I would now formally move 

that, by leave of this Assembly: 

 

That the member of the constituency of Cypress Hills be 

appointed to preside Deputy Chair of committees of this 

Assembly. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has moved, by leave: 

 

That the member, Wayne Elhard, the member of the 

constituency of Cypress Hills, be appointed to preside as 

Deputy Chair of committees of this Assembly. 

 

Is the Assembly agreed with the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. And having that motion just 

to officially recognize the resignation of the former deputy 

Chair, I want to inform the members that the member of 

Lloydminster resigned from the position of Deputy Chair of 

Committee of the Whole on June 15, 2009, which necessitated 

an election of another member to fill the position in accordance 

with rule 113(2). 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

Membership of the Board of Internal Economy 

 

The Speaker: — Also before orders of the day, pursuant to 

section 67 of The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council 

Act, 2007, I hereby inform the Assembly of the membership of 

the Board of Internal Economy, effective May 29, 2009. The 

Hon. Don Toth, Chair, Speaker; Hon. Don Morgan; Hon. 

Jeremy Harrison; the member from Cannington, Dan 

D‟Autremont; the member from Estevan, Ms. Doreen Eagles; 

the member from The Battlefords, Mr. Len Taylor; and the 

member from Regina Dewdney, Mr. Kevin Yates. 

 

TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — As well, pursuant to rules 23 and 22, I will be 

tabling the audited statements of both caucuses as well as the 

audited statements of the members. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s a true honour to rise in the House today and to 

start the debate for the Speech from the Throne, a very good 

Speech from the Throne. 

 

Before I get into the major comments that I want to deliver 

regarding the Speech from the Throne, I do want to welcome 

the new member into this Legislative Assembly. I hope her time 

here is productive. I think she‟ll have many years on the 

opposition benches to certainly carry the message for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

I‟d also like to welcome the Leader of the Opposition, certainly 

not a new member here, been here for many years before, quite 

a long time ago. As a matter of fact, I was elected in 1999, and I 

believe he served for about one session, and then he decided 

that this place wasn‟t for him, decided to pack his car and go 

west and seemed to fit in quite comfortably in conservative 

Alberta, fit in very comfortably. 

 

But I certainly welcome him back to the Assembly today, and I 

think that he‟ll have an opportunity to spend two years for sure 

as the Opposition Leader. And this is my prediction, my 

prediction — two years in opposition and then maybe six 

months more as the leader of the NDP. But I‟m predicting no 

more than two and a half years that he‟ll be spending in 

Saskatchewan and then he‟ll be moving back to Alberta, is my 

prediction. 

 

I want to also, before I get into the text of most of the remarks 

regarding the Speech from the Throne, I do want to say how 

honoured I am to stand in my place and speak on behalf of 



3140 Saskatchewan Hansard October 22, 2009 

constituents in the great constituency of Indian Head-Milestone 

that I‟ve had the honour of representing for the last ten years. 

 

They are hard-working, sincere people, very caring people, 

whether it‟s from the Qu‟Appelle Valley — the beautiful 

Qu‟Appelle Valley that is really developed around tourism 

around the lakes, the Fishing Lakes, in the summertime, ice 

fishing in the wintertime, the ski hill in the wintertime — to the 

rest of the constituency which is really focussed on agriculture. 

 

And I know there‟s a lot of people watching the skies these 

days. There‟s a lot of crop out in my constituency. It‟s 

extremely good crop, a very good crop, one of the better crops 

we‟ve had. But unfortunately it‟s been two weeks ago 

yesterday, I believe, since a combine has really turned a wheel 

in the constituency of Indian Head-Milestone. There‟s a little 

bit starting up now, but there‟s an awful lot of crop left out 

there. It‟s a valuable crop, and so we‟re sure hoping that the 

weather turns around and lets the farmers get at it and get the 

crop off. 

 

The other thing I just wanted to bring to the Assembly‟s 

attention is the growth that has been happening in the 

constituency of Indian Head-Milestone. So many of the 

communities have seen record amount of housing starts. You 

know, when I go past Kronau for example out to my farm, I‟m 

amazed at the new houses being built at Kronau. I know in 

Milestone, I think there was more houses built in the last year 

than there had been in the last 15 years combined. 

 

So certainly growth is prevalent throughout the constituency, 

perhaps no place greater than the community of Balgonie is 

expanding. There‟s pressures on schooling there because of the 

extra families moving to the area. It is really a good time for the 

constituents and the constituency of Indian Head-Milestone to 

experience the growth, growth like it‟s never seen for many, 

many, many years. So, Mr. Speaker, it is, as I said, a privilege 

to stand and represent the people of Indian Head-Milestone. 

 

This is the first opportunity that I‟ve had to move the motion for 

the Speech from the Throne. Of course quite a few years, I was 

on the opposition side, so I could have — what? — maybe 

moved an amendment. But now on the government side, this is 

the first opportunity that I‟ve had to. And it really sets out the 

direction — for the next year and even longer, the next two, 

three, and even four years — the direction that our government 

wants to move. 

 

Certainly health care is a major focus, probably the number one 

priority in the Speech from the Throne. And I want to say that I 

find it passingly curious that last session, the last session I think 

there was about 600 questions asked. I had 16 questions asked 

of me on health care. Forty-three per cent of the budget, only 16 

questions asked of health care. I found it very interesting today 

that, just after the Speech from the Throne where the major 

focus is health care, that there wouldn‟t be one question out of 

25 minutes regarding health care. They didn‟t question once, 

not one question regarding health care, and I find that really, 

really quite curious. But I kind of think, I certainly have some 

reasons why I think they didn‟t go into the whole issue of health 

care. Perhaps that will happen later on in the session, but I find 

it very curious. 

 

One of the . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well I heard the 

member say something about a miserable record as Minister of 

Health, as the Minister of Health. I would like to talk a little bit 

about the past two years before I want to go on to the future, of 

what we are going to be tackling in the future, because over the 

last two years, we have accomplished a great deal within the 

Ministry of Health and throughout the health regions. And it‟s 

all started with something called a target. We have set targets in 

many different areas, and some of them have been in health 

care. 

 

Now I know the opposition members are immune to targets. 

They don‟t want to talk about targets. In fact I remember the 

former minister of Health, the member from North Battleford, 

talked about whether we should set targets. And his exact words 

were, we wouldn‟t want to set a target because we probably 

couldn‟t meet it. Quite a defeatist attitude. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this government, the Saskatchewan Party 

government is not afraid of setting targets, is not afraid of 

setting bold targets and . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well the 

member from Prince Albert says, are you any good at meeting 

them? Let‟s review the record in two years. In the four-year 

period, we said we were going to increase the number of nurses 

working in our health care systems by 800. As of today, there 

are 582, I believe, 582 more nurses working in the health care 

system today than what were working in the system two years 

ago. That‟s 75 per cent of the way to the goal in the first year 

and a half. Mr. Speaker, we‟ve got two and a half more years, 

two more years to go to reach the other 25 per cent, and I‟m 

quite positive we are going to do it. 

 

Now of course the opposition would not know anything about 

setting a target because they just were scared of it. Other targets 

that we‟ve set were issues around the number of medical seats 

within the College of Medicine in Saskatoon, around the 

residency seats out of the College of Medicine. We went from 

60 medical seats, we‟re up to about 84, well on our way to 100 

medical seats. 

 

Can you imagine, Mr. Speaker . . . Certainly the physician issue 

in Saskatchewan is a major issue. We don‟t have enough 

doctors. We don‟t have enough specialists. We are short of 

physicians in our province. Can you imagine if the former 

government had the foresight to increase the number of medical 

seats from 60 to even 80? Over the last 10 years, that would 

have been 200 more Canadian-trained doctors, 

Saskatchewan-trained doctors working in our system. But they 

kept the number at 60. They had no plan on increasing the 

number of medical seats. They kept it at 60, and as a result, our 

province is suffering significantly from a physician shortage. 

 

And we‟re starting to address that. But how you start to address 

it is by setting targets, setting bold goals like increasing the 

number of medical seats up to 100, the number of residency 

positions up to 120. And we‟re well on our way of meeting 

those goals, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some of the other issues that we have accomplished . . . Now 

you know, this is, I guess, not only for all the members‟ sake on 

the opposition side but for the Leader of the Opposition who 

hasn‟t been here for the last two years. So I would like to get 

him up to speed on what we have done over the last two years 



October 22, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3141 

in health care. 

 

We have put $154 million into long-term care facilities 

throughout the province, 13 new long-term care facilities that 

were badly needed. And, Mr. Speaker, these facilities are being 

scoped right now. They‟re being designed right now, and 

construction will certainly start in the very near future on a 

number of them, Mr. Speaker. It‟s an issue that had gone 

unaddressed for many, many years under the former 

government. 

 

[11:00] 

 

Another area that I was very proud of — and you know, there‟s 

not a lot of media quotes or pictures regarding it — but it was 

$100 million that we put into repairing a number of our 

facilities that were in bad need of repair. 

 

I remember just before the ‟07 election, back in the summer of 

‟07 — very hot, humid summer — where our tertiary care 

centres, our hospitals in Regina and Saskatoon literally had to 

stop the operating rooms, close down the operating rooms 

because the chillers weren‟t able to keep up. They hadn‟t 

repaired the facilities in order to carry on with the normal 

course of business that these facilities do. It was certainly a 

great day when we put $100 million into repairing so many of 

these facilities that had gone badly abused, badly neglected for 

many, many years under the opposition . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Well the member from Prince Albert has got an 

awful lot to say already. He‟s talking about the children‟s 

hospital, a $200 million commitment to the children‟s hospital 

that that government, that former government would never have 

followed through on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the children‟s hospital is being planned as we 

speak, Mr. Speaker. Five million dollars is going into the 

planning right now. And, Mr. Speaker, the rest of the money — 

when it‟s being built — will be there absolutely. It‟s a 

commitment our government made. 

 

And if there is one thing that the people of Saskatchewan have 

learned about this government — things that we say that we‟re 

going to do, we actually do, Mr. Speaker, unlike the opposition, 

Mr. Speaker, in their many years of governing where people 

really had a lot of self doubt. I can remember the example of 

whether it was Humboldt hospital where they had seven 

consecutive years of announcing a new hospital. Preeceville is 

another one, Mr. Speaker. When we‟ve announced that we‟re 

going to put money towards the facility, Mr. Speaker, that 

money will be there, and that facility will be built. And the 

children‟s hospital is definitely one of them. 

 

So there are many different accomplishments over the last two 

years. Absolutely. I could spend my 20 minutes or 25 minutes 

talking about the accomplishments over the last two years, but 

what I am most proud of is when we set targets, when our 

government sets a target — which a lot of governments won‟t 

do and that government never did — when our government sets 

a target, Mr. Speaker, we follow through and we meet that 

target, Mr. Speaker. And I think you heard yesterday in the 

Speech from the Throne a very bold target. 

 

Before I talk about the wait time, I do want to touch on a report 

that was just completed last week, the patient-first report done 

by Tony Dagnone, the commissioner who really . . . I want to 

thank Tony for the excellent work that he‟s done. Tony is a very 

intelligent, classy man that has put together an excellent report 

after hearing from thousands of people around the province, 

after talking to the most important person within the system. 

And it wasn‟t the doctor and it wasn‟t the nurses and it isn‟t 

other service providers. It‟s the people that the system is 

supposed to supply service to — the patients themselves. 

 

This is a very unique . . . It‟s never been done before in Canada 

where the system is looked at through the patient‟s eyes. I can 

tell you that when I first became the Minister of Health, I had a 

number of professional organizations talk to me. And whether it 

was the nurses or whether it would be the doctors, they‟d 

always say we speak for the patient, and they do. They have a 

lot of, you know, certainly a close connection with the patient, 

but they aren‟t the patient themselves. And that‟s why this 

report is different than any other because it comes from the 

most important person, the patient themselves. 

 

I also not only want to thank Tony, but I also want to thank the 

Ministry of Health for the work that they‟ve done in helping 

support Tony, Pauline Rousseau, and all the others in the 

Ministry of Health, for the excellent job that they have done 

over the past year putting together this patient-first review or as 

it‟s entitled For Patients’ Sake. 

 

And it really is a bit of a blueprint, a bit of a guide for where the 

health care system needs to go. There are a number of 

recommendations. We plan on following through with all the 

recommendations over time as we can get to each 

recommendation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I was presented with the . . . I was the 

second person to receive this report. The report was presented 

to of course a patient, an advocate for patient safety, and it was 

very appropriate that they would receive the first report. When I 

received my report, I received it on a stick, and I think the 

whole point was the whole issue around e-health and how 

important getting up to speed with the electronic health records, 

and to think that, you know, this report would be on something 

this small and how important it would be to have all of our 

health records on a stick or electronically kept, Mr. Speaker. So 

it was very, very fitting. 

 

The interesting part regarding the Patient First Review are a 

number of the recommendations. But the one that I certainly 

heard when I was in opposition, I‟ve heard lots since I‟ve been 

the minister, is the whole issue around wait times. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I think it will be a very interesting debate as we move 

forward, around the issue on wait times, because it is definitely 

the issue that I think most people talk about when they talk 

about health care. There are many other issues of course. There 

is, you know, long-term care and there are a number of issues 

that we need to deal with certainly regarding health care. But 

generally I would think, and it was certainly borne out in the 

Patient First Review, For Patients’ Sake, is the issue around the 

waiting time. 

 

We have about 27,000 people waiting on lists right now, Mr. 

Speaker. We‟ve taken the long waits from about 9,000 under 

the NDP down to 4,000. That‟s still not acceptable. We have, 



3142 Saskatchewan Hansard October 22, 2009 

some people would call it a bulge in the system, that people are 

coming in and then they have to wait anywhere up to two years 

before they get their surgery. And that just is unacceptable. 

 

What we‟re finding is the capacity in the system right now is 

meeting the intake. So as many people are coming in for 

example for a surgical procedure, we‟re putting through. It‟s 

that bulge in the middle, that wait list in the middle that we 

really have to focus our attention. And that‟s certainly what we 

will be doing over the next four years. 

 

It‟s a bold goal, absolutely. It‟s a bold goal that over the next 

four years nobody should wait longer than three months for 

their surgical procedure. And I‟ve had some people say to me, 

oh man, that‟s an awfully aggressive target; do you think you 

can meet it? I‟ve had other people that have questioned me and 

said, we have to wait four years till you get to that point? So I 

think we‟re positioned pretty well. Some people think it‟s too 

aggressive. Some people think we‟re going to take too long. 

 

I haven‟t heard the opposition yet as to whether they think it‟s 

too long or whether it‟s too bold, Mr. Speaker. I really haven‟t 

heard, and I‟ll be looking forward to their responses as to 

whether they think the target can be met. I guess it‟ll be 

interesting because, as I said before, they‟re immune to setting 

targets. We‟ve set the target, and we believe that through a 

focused, hugely focused attention that we‟ll be able to meet this 

target. 

 

We believe that there is capacity within the system right now, 

within the public system. We have the three tertiary care 

hospitals in Saskatchewan, three in Saskatoon, two in Regina, 

that we‟re going to have to look at seeing if we can get more 

capacity out of those. There are regional hospitals throughout 

the province that we know that there is more capacity within 

those facilities, whether it‟s in Swift Current, whether it‟s in 

Yorkton — any of the regional hospitals — North Battleford, 

whether there‟s more capacity certainly in those facilities, 

whether the district hospitals such as Melfort can do more 

procedures within its facilities, within the operating rooms that 

are provided there. We think there is capacity within the system 

that we have, Mr. Speaker, but we are not immune to looking at 

every possible option. 

 

Other countries have tackled the same issue. I know in Great 

Britain they had extremely long wait-lists and they focused their 

attention, and they looked at best practices from around the 

world, and they‟ve brought their waiting lists down to an 

acceptable level, Mr. Speaker. That‟s what we‟re planning to do 

right here in Saskatchewan because quite frankly, the people, 

that‟s their biggest issue. That‟s what they want to have us 

address. 

 

So we need to look at all possible options within a publicly 

funded system, one payer — that‟s the Government of 

Saskatchewan — within a publicly funded system, Mr. Speaker. 

There is no queue jumping; there‟s none of that. It will be done 

within a publicly funded system with one payer, and that‟s the 

Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the delivery model is where people will start 

to question. And I heard the opposition go there a little bit 

yesterday. They start to question the delivery model. And 

they‟ll start saying, oh here we go down the privatization road. 

And I always find it very interesting when they start talking 

about the privatization road because, Mr. Speaker, private 

delivery within a public system is not a new concept. Private 

delivery within a public system is here, alive and well right here 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

There‟s many different examples. And I‟ve used the example 

many times, and I could use it for Regina, Saskatoon. Or in my 

constituency, I could use it for the communities of Fort 

Qu‟Appelle and Indian Head, that if I‟m in an accident and I 

need the services of an ambulance, I want to make sure it gets 

there quick. What I want is the staff to be professional and well 

trained and get me to the hospital as quickly as possible if that‟s 

what needs to happen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when that ambulance drives up to the accident 

scene, my first question isn‟t, is it privately owned or is it 

publicly owned. I don‟t really care at that point. I want service. 

In Indian Head it would be publicly owned. In Fort Qu‟Appelle 

it would be privately owned. In Saskatoon it would be privately 

owned, and in Regina it would be publicly owned. It doesn‟t 

matter to me who the owner is as much as the service is there; 

the delivery is there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I was looking at some of the different clippings from people 

that responded to the Speech from the Throne and what they 

had to say. And I think one of the most fitting comments I heard 

was from the president of the Canadian Medical Association 

who happens to be from Saskatchewan. It‟s a real honour. Dr. 

Anne Doig from Saskatoon is now the president of the 

Canadian Medical Association. And I thought her words were 

very fitting. She says that “the philosophical argument over 

public/private health care is hollow.” Is absolutely hollow. And 

I know that‟s going to be the area that I think the opposition‟s 

going to go down, is that it‟s private delivery and we can‟t have 

it. But quite frankly, that argument is hollow. 

 

I couldn‟t agree more with the president of the Canadian 

Medical Association from Saskatchewan here. She goes on to 

say that: 

 

[It‟s] hollow since more than 90 per cent of doctors are 

already “private” practitioners paying their own staff, 

office and equipment costs. Many other services, 

including . . . [lab testing], are also provided by the 

private sector. 

 

And even the former NDP government had no problem 

with the Saskatchewan Workers‟ Compensation Board 

sending injured clients to private clinics in Alberta for 

diagnostic tests because the . . . [waits] were too long 

here. 

 

According to Anne Doig. I mean, it couldn‟t be said better. 

 

So it‟s not so much whether private delivery within a public 

system is here or not, because I think there wouldn‟t be a person 

that would say it isn‟t if they have any idea of a health care 

system. We have lab tests. We have ultrasounds. We have 

X-rays. We have physicians. We have ambulances. And there 

are others that are all private delivery within a single-payer 

system through the medicare system, Mr. Speaker. 



October 22, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3143 

So the delivery model, I don‟t think the general public are as 

worried about. They want to make sure that they get timely 

care. So if we have looked at all the capacity and tried to get as 

much capacity out of the system that we have, out of the 

facilities that we have, and we have to top that up with a private 

provider within a public system, Mr. Speaker, that‟s what we‟ll 

be doing. 

 

This is a full-court press on surgical wait times because that is 

an issue that is by far, is by far the most important issue, I think, 

facing our citizens in Saskatchewan, are some of the long waits, 

so however we have to do it. We‟ll look at other jurisdictions. 

We‟ll look at other countries and what they‟ve done. We‟ll look 

at our neighbouring provinces to see if there‟s capacity there. 

 

Our first solution, our first initiative is to get capacity out of the 

system that we have and then top it up if we need to top it up. 

And I will be looking forward to hearing — while the member 

from Dewdney is hollering from the seat — I‟ll be looking 

forward to seeing the time where if it was a surgery that he 

needed, whether he would say no to a private clinic. Would he 

say absolutely no to a private deliverer within a public system? 

I don‟t think they would, Mr. Speaker, because what we need is 

services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, also the president-elect from the Saskatchewan 

Medical Association, Dr. Sridhar, who is as I said 

president-elect from the medical association, also had some 

pretty good words to say. He said that patients, he says patients 

should get proper care as soon as possible even if they needed 

to be sent out of province if that had to happen. Now our 

preference absolutely is to care for them in the province. But, 

Mr. Speaker, what we have to do is focus on the patient first 

and ensure they get the timely health care that they can. And if 

that‟s surgical procedure, then that‟s what it is, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one other comment from the president of the 

Saskatchewan Medical Association, this is what Dr. Miller said, 

from Moose Jaw who is the president of the medical 

association. He called the wait time targets “ambitious and 

laudable”: 

 

“We‟re dissatisfied by the fact that we don‟t think there is 

a total good use of the system overall. I think we can [do 

more] get more bang for our buck in many different 

ways.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, so far what I have heard is all positive comments 

regarding the target, regarding the wait times. The only negative 

that we‟ve heard is from the opposition. Mr. Speaker, I was 

surprised they didn‟t ask questions about it today, but certainly I 

guess maybe what they‟re trying to do is determine their 

position because their position yesterday was that they wouldn‟t 

ever allow for private delivery within the health care system 

when, under their government and under their watch, they‟ve 

already done it. 

 

[11:15] 

 

One of the classic examples of private delivery within a 

publicly funded system started in about 2000, so under the NDP 

watch. We had a shortage and we still have to do more work on 

the shortage of health care professionals. But in Saskatoon in 

the emergency room, they had a specific need for more 

personnel. They didn‟t have enough personnel to properly 

manage the emergency room procedures, and so what they 

ended up doing and one of the solutions was to bring in 

paramedics from MD Ambulance. These paramedics are paid 

by MD Ambulance. The health region contracted MD 

Ambulance to use some of their personnel. So you‟ve got a 

private company, MD Ambulance, employees of MD 

Ambulance working in an acute care centre. 

 

Now I would think that they could probably point to that as 

private delivery within a public system, but they can‟t because 

they‟re the ones that initiated it. So it will be very interesting as 

we go through the debate as to what their comments are 

regarding especially the wait times. 

 

Other areas of the Fyke report and areas of the Speech from the 

Throne especially were issues around doctor position 

recruitment and retention. That is by far one of the biggest 

subjects facing rural Saskatchewan — not only rural, in some of 

the larger centres too. The new city of Meadow Lake has issues 

around the physician recruitment and retention. Certainly 

smaller communities and even in the cities of Regina and 

Saskatoon, it is an issue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have started down the road of a physician 

recruitment strategy, and there will be more announcements as 

we move on, Mr. Speaker. But this is an area that we absolutely 

have to do more work on. We‟ve increased the number of 

medical seats in Saskatoon. We‟ve increased the number of 

residency seats, Mr. Speaker. What we need to do now is do a 

better job of retaining those graduates. 

 

We at one point had the worst retention record in Canada for 

our nurses. We had the worst retention record of any province 

in Canada regarding our graduating nurses. Mr. Speaker, under 

our government, we‟ve been able to turn that around, and we 

have one of the best retention rates now of our nurses, around 

95 per cent of the graduating class. Nurses stay in 

Saskatchewan and work in Saskatchewan. 

 

We need those numbers to reflect that regarding physician 

recruitment because we‟re nowhere close to that 95 per cent. 

We need to do a lot more work on, number one, retaining our 

own graduates, whether they‟re from the College of Medicine, 

and through the residency to keep them here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Other areas that we‟ve certainly relied heavily on — IMG 

[International Medical Graduate Institute], international medical 

grads who have done a great service for our province, they have 

been excellent in our province. We need to work on what would 

retain them. 

 

We often attract physicians, but they don‟t stay, and it kind of 

becomes a revolving door. So we‟re working with the 

Saskatchewan Medical Association. We‟re working with the 

College of Physicians and Surgeons, the medical association, 

and a number of other organizations to look at how we can 

better retain the physicians that we do recruit in from other 

countries. 

 

One other area we need to look at is the number of countries 

that we accept credentials from. There‟s a number of things, 



3144 Saskatchewan Hansard October 22, 2009 

initiatives that we can move forward on, that you‟re going to be 

hearing over the next couple of months as to what we can do to 

create a better complement of physicians throughout 

Saskatchewan because certainly that is an issue that we have 

been struggling with. 

 

My time is almost up here. The other area I do want to talk 

about though, and I briefly mentioned it, was the electronic 

health record and how important that was. I was kind of 

wondering, through the work that Commissioner Dagnone did, 

through the Patient First Review, whether that would come to 

the forefront. Do people realize, do patients or the general 

public realize where we‟re at as far as our electronic record and 

how important that is? 

 

But it was interesting how many people commented on the fact 

that they have to give all their information here, and then later 

on in the day, they have to give their information again — 

whether it‟s their name and address and all of that — when it 

could be on one record, one electronic health record. 

 

And it did come out. It did certainly come out in the Patient 

First Review. It certainly talked about it, and it‟s an area that we 

need to continue moving on. There‟s been a lot of work done 

over the last number of years but there is still more work to do. 

And it‟s an area that I think would bring great efficiency within 

the system. 

 

You know, it certainly is a lot of money to put out for electronic 

health records, but I believe the saving is there just in human 

. . . in time, the time that it takes to do it all manually. 

 

There are some real leaders in Saskatchewan regarding 

electronic health records. And I talked about Dr. Sridhar 

already, as the president or the president-elect of the 

Saskatchewan Medical Association; Milo Fink here in Regina 

as well, are really leading on this front. And we need to 

continue on; we have to continue on through the Ministry of 

Health to keep supporting the electronic health record because it 

really is the way that . . . 

 

You know, it‟s also a bit of a retention and recruitment issue. 

Physicians that are coming out of, doctors that are coming out 

of med school and out of residencies expect to have that type of 

technology, so we need to keep up with that type of technology, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

As I said, the Speech from the Throne highlighted a number of 

areas and a number of issues in a number of areas, but I believe 

the priority certainly is on the health care file which is certainly 

good for, I think, the citizens of our province. The targets that 

we‟ve set, that we‟re going to be working on over the next four 

years, for example wait times, over the next year or two as far 

as physician recruitment is, Mr. Speaker, I think being received 

very, very well by the general public. So it certainly is a 

privilege to be voting for the Speech from the Throne. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move the motion, seconded by the member from 

Regina Qu‟Appelle Valley: 

 

That a humble address be presented to His Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor: 

 

To His Honour the Honourable Gordon L. Barnhart, 

Lieutenant Governor of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

May it please Your Honour: 

 

We, Her Majesty‟s dutiful and loyal subjects, the 

Legislative Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan in 

session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the 

gracious speech which Your Honour has been pleased to 

address us with at the opening of the session. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health, 

seconded by the member from Regina Qu‟Appelle Valley: 

 

That a humble address be presented to His Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor: 

 

To His Honour the Honourable Gordon L. Barnhart, 

Lieutenant Governor of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

May it please Your Honour: 

 

We, Her Majesty‟s dutiful and loyal subjects, the 

Legislative Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan in 

session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the 

gracious speech which Your Honour has been pleased to 

address to us at the opening of the present session. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

from Regina Qu‟Appelle Valley. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

it‟s an honour and a great opportunity for me to reply to our 

government‟s Throne Speech. I‟m also honoured to be able to 

second this motion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech lays out the government‟s 

plans to move forward. This province is moving forward. Our 

government has spent considerable effort in the past year 

maintaining and enhancing Saskatchewan‟s economic 

advantage through lower property taxes, income tax, and a 

massive reduction in the provincial debt, plus a record 

investment in infrastructure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the one area I would like to discuss is our seniors. 

Mr. Speaker, our government is so proud and honoured with the 

role that seniors have played in building our great province. As 

Winston Churchill said, and I quote, “We make a living by what 

we get, but we make a life by what we give.” Our 

grandmothers, our grandfathers, our mothers and our fathers 

have given so much as builders of this great province. 

 

While the previous government talked about a plan for seniors, 

our government is actually developing a plan for our seniors. 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier provided the Minister of Health with a 

mandate letter outlining a number of priorities, and one of those 

priorities was the creation of the seniors‟ care strategy. The 

seniors‟ care strategy will identify and address gaps in the 

current continuum of care provided through home care, 

community care, and long-term care. This strategy will focus on 

developing an intermediate- and long-term care plan that 



October 22, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3145 

addresses the care needs of our aging population, improving the 

coordination of long-term care beds to allow seniors and senior 

couples to stay together, supporting non-profit agencies that 

provide long-term care. 

 

We are also working with the federal government to increase 

long-term care capacity on First Nations reserves, undertaking a 

pilot project to provide the government funding for level 3 and 

level 4 beds in personal care homes to reduce the waiting times 

for long-term care beds. And we‟re also introducing legislation 

to protect whistle-blowers who report abuse and require the 

minister to investigate reported cases of abuse and take 

disciplinary action when warranted. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is working with regional health 

authorities, community-based agencies, and senior 

organizations to create the seniors‟ care strategy for 

Saskatchewan. 

 

As part of the government strategy, Mr. Speaker, I was 

appointed Legislative Secretary for long-term care initiatives. I 

have been asked to lead the development of this initiative to 

inform the development of this province‟s seniors‟ care 

strategy. Now this strategy will ensure that Saskatchewan 

seniors have the necessary access to health care programs and 

services, today and in the years to come. Our mothers, our 

fathers, our grandmothers, and our grandfathers — they deserve 

the best care that we can provide. 

 

Now my work relates to the long-term care initiative and it 

includes research and consultations to identify the needs of our 

seniors. Mr. Speaker, in order to be able to meet and listen to as 

many seniors and interested individuals and organizations, we 

conducted consultations across this whole province. During the 

months of September and October, consultations were held in 

12 communities with a few further two more consultations to be 

conducted. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as Legislative Secretary to the Minister of Health, 

I‟ve had the privilege to travel across this wonderful province. 

Now we‟ve travelled from Weyburn in the south to Pinehouse 

Lake in the north, from North Battleford on the west side of the 

province to Yorkton on the east. This truly is an amazing and 

beautiful province, and we should all consider ourselves blessed 

to be able to live in this wonderful place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has 49.1 per cent of our seniors 

living outside of urban settings, so it was imperative that we 

went out and met with seniors, interested individuals, and 

organizations throughout Saskatchewan, establishing a 

meaningful dialogue in their own hometowns, in their senior 

centres, in their community halls, and in the hospital meeting 

rooms. Mr. Speaker, seniors travelled a fair distance — many of 

them drove one and a half hours to two hours — to be able to 

come and share with us their ideas and their concerns. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to share with you some of my 

experiences in this consultation. In the northern community of 

Pinehouse Lake, with a population of approximately 1,400 

people, we had 45 elders and the mayor, Mike Natomagan, and 

many other community leaders attend our consultation. With 

the help of three Cree interpreters we were able to capture the 

elders‟ suggestions and concerns. 

Mr. Speaker, the elders thanked us for coming to listen. They 

told us no one had ever come to listen. Others had come to talk, 

but no one had ever come to listen to what they had to say, Mr. 

Speaker. This has been such a rewarding experience. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also attended a consultation in Rosetown. And 

I would like to read from the Rosetown Eagle, dated October 

the fifth. “The session impressed [Ms.] Storey.” She was a 

participant. 

 

“The people that were there shared [their ideas,] their 

personal experiences . . . [they came up with] some very 

good ideas, I thought.” 

 

She said they‟d given more rural-based ideas, compared to 

what Ross might hear in the larger centres she‟s visiting. 

They expressed a desire that when they have to . . . [be 

able to come and talk about] long-term care, they want to 

do so in their own home communities, rather than [say 

example] Saskatoon . . . 

 

A gap exists here in rural areas for people who need some 

support but not so much they should [have to] go into a 

nursing home, Storey . . . [concluded.] 

 

That was in the Rosetown Eagle, their local paper. 

 

[11:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, in my mandate letter from the Minister of Health, 

I‟ve been asked to examine five key issues: elder abuse, fall 

prevention, accessibility to personal care homes, home care 

support, and then the feasibility of establishing a seniors 

secretariat. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the first issue that was discussed is elder abuse or 

abuse of older adults. Mr. Speaker, according to the 

Government of Canada, one in five Canadians believe they 

know of a senior who might be experiencing some form of 

abuse. Seniors from all walks of life are vulnerable to elder 

abuse. It is happening in our communities across Canada and 

across Saskatchewan. 

 

Elder abuse is an action taken by someone in a relationship of 

trust that results in harm or distress to an older person. Mr. 

Speaker, commonly recognized types of elder abuse include 

physical, psychological, and financial abuse. Often more than 

one type of abuse occurs at the same time. Abuse can be a 

single incident or a repeated pattern of behaviour. 

 

How many seniors feel ashamed or embarrassed to tell anyone 

that they are being abused by someone that they trust, Mr. 

Speaker? I thought this would be a very hard issue to talk about, 

and I was pleased to hear an open and honest discussion that 

took place in the consultations. Now many may fear retaliation 

or punishment; that they may have concerns about having to 

move from within their communities. Raising awareness among 

seniors about their right to live safely and securely is an 

important issue for our government. 

 

Another issue we discussed was fall preventions. Mr. Speaker, 

falls by seniors are one of the most frequently cause of injury. 

This is a growing problem and the number of falls and 



3146 Saskatchewan Hansard October 22, 2009 

fall-related injuries will increase as our population gets older. 

 

I also have a quote from the Rosetown newspaper. And Crystal 

Storey is a Heartland Health Region employee, and she: 

 

. . . told the gathering what staff had learned regarding 

falls and preventing them, she said. She works with the 

region‟s health promotion division. The Health Ministry 

spends $56 million a year dealing with the after-effects of 

falls, she said. 

 

People fall for a variety of reasons, including poor 

balance, not wearing proper footwear or from the side 

effects of their medications . . . 

 

“Sometimes it‟s due to the mobility and flexibility of the 

individual,” Storey said. “We try to promote being active 

. . .” 

 

And that means having to be able to do exercises every day. We 

are going to walk. We‟re going for stretches. We‟re doing all 

sorts of things to build up their mobility. 

 

“She said that one in three seniors is likely to fall once per year 

. . .” And as I stated before, $56 million a year is spent on 

requiring health care for people who have undergone a fall. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, most falls occur in seniors‟ homes while 

doing daily activity. Falls usually happen because of the 

combined effects of a number of factors such as the loss of 

balance, side effects of medication, impaired mobility or vision, 

or environmental hazards. Seniors may develop a fear of falling, 

causing them to restrict their activities, which can increase their 

risk of falling due to weakness of muscles and stiff joints. 

 

There are several ways to help prevent falls. If we prevent falls, 

we will ensure that our seniors continue to live healthy lives in 

their own homes. Mr. Speaker, most of the seniors who 

attended the consultation told us they would like to be able to 

stay in their own homes, maintaining a degree of independence. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another issue that the minister has asked me to 

examine was the accessibility of personal care homes. Personal 

care homes are not nursing homes. If an occupant needs 

specialized care such as insulin injections, the occupant has to 

arrange for someone to come in and help them with that, and 

that‟s home care. While personal care homes usually 

accommodate individuals with lighter care needs, some homes 

do provide care to persons with heavier care needs such as 

palliative care. Mr. Speaker, personal care homes are an 

important part of the continuum of health care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another issue that I was asked to examine was 

home care supports. Mr. Speaker, care encompasses a wide 

range of health services at home — to recovery, disability, 

chronically terminally ill persons in need of specific care. Its 

purpose is to ensure persons who need care receive high-quality 

treatment at home in their own community, in supportive 

housing or in long-term care facilities. 

 

In Saskatchewan the service is provided on a basis of assessed 

needs and is intended to help people who need acute, palliative, 

and supportive care remain independent in their homes. Mr. 

Speaker, on numerous occasions throughout the consultation, 

residents in Saskatchewan told us they would like to stay within 

their own communities, within a safe environment, within their 

own homes. Mr. Speaker, our government believes home care 

for seniors is important, and we‟ll help them maintain a more 

independent lifestyle. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the fifth issue that we were to examine was the 

feasibility of establishing a seniors‟ secretariat. Mr. Speaker, 

many jurisdictions across Canada have a seniors‟ secretariat or 

a separate government organization devoted specifically to 

seniors. Some secretariats deliver a range of programs and 

services that are specific to seniors, while others deal with the 

broad policy issues such as health, aging, and elder abuse. 

 

In my consultation, I have been asking seniors three very 

important questions. The first, would a seniors‟ secretariat be 

something useful to have in Saskatchewan? The second, if so, 

what type of function do you see a seniors‟ secretariat 

performing? And the third, if Saskatchewan were to have a 

seniors‟ secretariat, which ministry or organization would it 

best fit in? Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, our government is 

listening to seniors through these consultations. Seniors‟ voices 

are being heard, and for many of them, it is the first time their 

voice has been heard. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is looking forward to building a 

better life for everyone in Saskatchewan. We are working to 

reduce wait times, recruit more health care providers, retain 

more graduates, and improve long-term care facilities. As our 

province moves forward, Mr. Deputy Speaker, our seniors are 

going to enjoy a better life. 

 

Our government recognizes that low-income seniors are facing 

challenges of higher cost of living. To help them meet these 

challenges, we expanded our senior income plan to include over 

double the amount of our seniors who were previously able to 

receive this assistance. The number of eligible seniors is now 

over 18,000. Prior to this change, $14,993.64 was the maximum 

income for a single senior to be eligible to receive benefits. 

Now the new maximum under our government is $16,313.64. 

For a couple, the previous maximum was $24,356.64. Now the 

new maximum is $26,468.64. This is a significant difference. 

 

We have also doubled the amount that seniors can now receive 

in financial benefits from the plan to the maximum of $190 per 

month for a single senior and $155 per month for a couple. 

 

Seniors who qualify for the seniors‟ income plan also now 

receive one free eye exam per year, free chiropractic services, 

reduced deductibility on prescription drugs, home care subsidy, 

supplementary health benefits for those in special care homes, 

and loans on some low-cost devices through Sask Abilities. 

And we were told over and over again in our consultation 

process that this was so important for them to be able to have 

the ability to access these much needed aids. We‟re glad to 

assist those who have done so much to help build our province. 

 

The previous government did not increase seniors‟ income plan 

program benefit for 16 years. And as a result, a number of 

seniors receiving the benefit declined nearly by 10,000. 

 

Our government is ensuring that our seniors have access to safe 



October 22, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3147 

and secure long-term care facilities. Now in many cases, the 

condition of our long-term care facilities is not up to the 

standards that our seniors deserve. In order to bring the seniors 

care they deserve, last winter our minister announced the 

construction of 13 new long-term care facilities. Now these 

facilities will be up-to-date and meet today‟s building standards. 

And it‟s incredibly important to ensure the safety and the 

comfort of the residents of these long-term care facilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we look at affordable housing, we see an 

area where the previous government ignored the problem for 

years and we had to act. Mr. Speaker, we created the task force 

on housing affordability to ensure housing affordability keeps 

pace with our economy. When the government came out, our 

. . . When the report came out, our government responded by 

providing 12.4 million to adjust shelter rates in the income 

assistance program and to index shelter allowances and 

supplements. 

 

This enhancements immediately benefitted over 6,000 

households across our wonderful province. Our government has 

provided funding to a number of affordable housing complexes 

across the province — including right here in Regina. Our 

government is expanding Maple Leaf Estates to create an 

additional 53 units. Our government has invested 12 million to 

renovate the 140-unit Milton Heights apartment building in the 

south central area of Regina. And our government has invested 

10 million in new funding for affordable housing for seniors, 

low-income families, and those most vulnerable within our 

province. This funding will be used to deliver a total of 20 

quality, affordable home ownership units in Saskatoon, Regina, 

Prince Albert, Moose Jaw, Yorkton, and in Lloydminster. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government has invested 3.8 million to 

develop new 40-unit affordable housing units. This project is 

going to be very beneficial for low-income persons. Thirty-two 

units will serve people with serious mental illness, with the 

remaining eight units serving people with intellectual 

challenges. The project is sponsored by Ranch Ehrlo 

community services in collaboration with the Phoenix 

Residential Society. These projects, especially here in Regina, 

are an excellent opportunity for our government to join with 

community partnership in delivering quality, affordable rental 

housing to those most in need. 

 

Two point nine million through the Saskatchewan Housing 

Corporation to help fund Juniper Manor in Saskatoon, this 

three-storey, senior residential building features 43 new rental 

units. Over 1.7 million through the Saskatchewan Housing 

Corp. to help fund Columbia manor in Saskatoon, a 51-unit 

residential unit for low-income seniors. And 34.1 million last 

year through the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation to help 

fund safe, affordable rental accommodations for 36 low-income 

families, many of them Aboriginal who have members 

attending SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 

and Technology] Woodland Campus in Prince Albert. Support 

for a new home in Wynyard for people with intellectual 

disabilities with an annual commitment by our government of a 

further 300,000 in funding. Our government is committed to 

ensuring that life in Saskatchewan remains affordable for 

everyone. 

 

Here in Regina our government provided 225,000 in capital 

funding for the YWCA [Young Women‟s Christian 

Association] of Regina. Now this money will be used to 

develop new child care centre, and this centre will have 75 new 

spaces for families in need of child care and preschool children. 

Mr. Speaker, this funding will help licensed child care facilities 

with the cost of new construction or renovations when they are 

developing these new spaces. The YMCA new facility will be 

located in my riding on Rochdale Boulevard. Mr. Speaker, the 

Rochdale Y is an excellent facility. It‟s a great place for kids to 

learn, but it‟s also a great place for them to have fun. 

 

[11:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, shelter allowances have been increased across 

Saskatchewan as our government continues to help those most 

affected by the escalating housing costs. And these increases 

will take effect on February the first. To keep shelter 

allowances current, our government now indexes twice a year, 

based on rental market data compiled available from CMHC 

[Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation]. And this is on 

our Saskatchewan communities. Indexing of shelter allowance 

is essential in a growing economy to help low-income people 

meet the rising cost of affordable housing. 

 

Now our government remains committed to ensuring that all 

Saskatchewan residents benefit from the opportunities and 

prosperity that we all are experiencing. This will increase with 

low-income student housing and rising costs, enable them to 

focus their attention on their studies and achieving their 

educational goal. Shelter rate indexing was one of the 

recommendations put forward by the provincial task force on 

housing authority. 

 

Maximum supplements for families under the SRHS 

[Saskatchewan rental housing supplement] will increase by as 

much as $18 per month in Regina, Saskatoon, and 

Lloydminster. Maximum supplements for people with 

disabilities in those communities will also increase by $24 per 

month. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since 2007 our government has taken significant 

steps to move our province forward and will continue to do so. 

Mr. Speaker, we are focused on the future. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

I am honoured to be seconding this motion. Thank you very 

much. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to say how 

very, very pleased I am to rise in the Assembly for the first time 

in almost 10 years, and I beg the indulgence of the House to be 

patient because I‟m rusty. And I would like to apologize if I 

don‟t get everything quite straight today. So be patient with me 

and a little bit tolerant. 

 

I do want to congratulate the new member from Riversdale. I 

was amazed to watch her campaign, and not only the member 

campaign but her family. And it‟s an interesting family. And if 

the member doesn‟t mind, I just want to say a couple of words 

of congratulation to them — to her mom and dad and most of 

all to Blair, her husband, who had the great opportunity to 

spend a couple of months at home with Ophelia and the 



3148 Saskatchewan Hansard October 22, 2009 

children to look after and allow for the member to go out and 

campaign. And I thought it was a very, very well-run operation. 

Congratulations to the team, to the executive. And I say this. 

For the member to achieve virtually the same percentage as 

Lorne Calvert, who was a brilliant politician and had a great 

career in politics, absolutely amazing. And I say again, 

congratulations to you. Absolutely. 

 

I want to talk too and thank my executive in Douglas Park who 

did, I thought, an excellent job with a candidate who was new 

to the constituency. I had been back in Saskatchewan for about 

a year, but I was new in Douglas Park. But in order to make that 

happen, one Harry Van Mulligen, who many of you know as a 

colleague and a friend, not only made the sacrifice to open the 

seat up so the Leader of the New Democratic Party could take a 

seat in the Assembly. Harry was with me every day of the week 

except Saturday and Sunday to campaign. And he came out and 

knocked on doors, and he talked to people who had difficulty in 

the Broders Annex and in other parts of the constituency. And 

there too I want to say a big thanks to Harry and Judy and his 

family for the work they did for the people of Saskatchewan 

and for the residents of the constituency. And I think the House 

should give Harry a big round of applause for the work that he 

did. 

 

A thank you to my executive. I mentioned earlier we have a 

very strong executive. To the member from Moose Jaw, my 

desk mate, her membership may be a bit higher than mine at the 

moment, but that‟s not going to be for long because we‟re 

working very hard to build the strongest organization in the 

province. And I just want to thank my very strong executive 

and the hundreds of members in the riding for all the work that 

they did. 

 

I think we met new heights in things like sign locations. The 

member from Elphinstone will know that we had about 650 

signs up. It was a great campaign and I think it bodes well for 

the kind of campaign that we will run in 2011. It will be strong. 

The campaign will be province-wide. We will run strong 

candidates in every riding. I‟m very curious about my 

hometown, farming hometown where I grew up in Cypress 

Hills — and I know the member represents that area very well, 

but we‟re going to build a strong organization there and we will 

see how that goes. 

 

But we‟re targeting all the ridings in the province. And when I 

came to the province a year ago and I was asked by many 

people in the NDP caucus and the party to come and run, I 

believed there were three things the party had to do to renew 

itself. And I made the commitment that I had three goals. 

 

One was to reorganize and restructure the party, especially at 

the constituent level, to rebuild the membership. 

 

Secondly, to mentor and work with new, exciting young 

candidates and MLAs. And we‟re doing that, and people saw it 

today in question period. Not that those who have experience 

aren‟t important. They are, and they‟ll be a big part of it. But I 

want to make sure that new young women and men learn and 

understand the structure of politics within the New Democratic 

Party, formerly the CCF [Co-operative Commonwealth 

Federation], with great leaders. 

 

And I‟m humbled to stand in this seat where Allan Blakeney 

used to be my desk mate when we were in opposition, and even 

to have an opportunity to talk like this and talk about rebuilding 

the party and having the opportunity to lead such a great 

political movement. Because it is an honour, and I respect the 

values that all of my members have brought. Those who worked 

for the leadership, the member from Moose Jaw who worked 

hard and should be congratulated for her effort, but is a proud 

member of the New Democratic Party and brings strong 

strength. But we need to develop young, new workers, 

constituency presidents, MLAs, candidates. And that is our 

second strategy. 

 

So the first, to reorganize; secondly to mentor and train new 

people; and third, be in a position by 2011, November 7th, to 

run the most credible campaign we‟ve seen in the party in a 

long time. And if we do the first two right, have the opportunity 

— if we have the right policy and talk to people in the right 

tone and the right language — win back government for the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to thank my family — first, my 

extended family. Obviously I grew up in a large family, with six 

sisters and two brothers, and they‟ve been with me through 

thick and thin. I want to thank them. My dad who‟s 92 

November 10th, in a few days. So those of you who think I‟m 

leaving soon, I‟ve got some good genetics and I plan to be 

around for quite a while, God willing, inshallah. I plan to work 

with the New Democratic Party for as long as I am capable and 

as long as you‟ll tolerate me. 

 

So I want to thank my father, my family. But I also want to talk 

for a moment about my wonderful daughter Sacha who is an 

addiction counsellor here, in Regina with one of the school 

divisions, doing a great job. She got her master‟s degree a 

couple of years ago, but works hard helping families. 

 

My son Matthew, who was here for the leadership and for the 

by-election night. Matthew went to school at Luther College. 

Matthew has had an interesting life experience because he 

became involved in what many people, young people, do which 

is an addiction. 

 

And together we went on an interesting journey while we were 

in Calgary because Matthew came to me one day and told me 

that he was addicted to cocaine. And it came as a great surprise 

to me because, as fathers and mothers all over the place, it‟s 

something you dread all your life. And we had talked a lot 

about it, and I assumed that he was doing very well. His marks 

were relatively good in school. But there were signs that he was 

depressed, and one of the tell-tale signs, of course, of this 

disease — especially with teens — is depression. 

 

And we went to a rigorous program. And some of you will 

know the AARC [Alberta Adolescent Recovery Centre] 

program in Calgary. Controversial. It‟s run by a good friend, 

Dr. Dean Vause, from Swift Current. His father, Clarence 

Vause, a very popular lawyer in that area. Dean himself was a 

junior hockey player, and he knows and understands how to do 

it. 

Matthew has been fully recovered for about five or six years. 

He‟s a top student at Mount Royal University in Calgary, and 

gives back to other teens in the city of Calgary, and works as a 



October 22, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3149 

senior counsellor at the addiction centre in Calgary. And truly 

I‟m very, very proud of Matthew. And the journey we went on 

was something to be believed, because only families who have 

been through this understand the disappointment, the shame. 

 

If your child gets cancer, everybody rallies around and gives 

you . . . When you have a family member who is addicted, you 

don‟t tell anybody. You pretend that it isn‟t happening for a 

while. But there‟s a great joy that comes with recovery, and it‟s 

one day at a time. But I wanted to say and put on the record that 

I‟m extremely proud of my son Matthew, and he is doing very 

well. 

 

Travis, our middle son, is at university in Saskatoon and will 

graduate — touch wood — after the next semester. And Travis 

is a brilliant political strategist. And the member from Meadow 

Lake will know that while . . . He‟s tested various political 

parties, but while he was living in northern Saskatchewan, he 

worked with and for the member from Meadow Lake when he 

campaigned for the Member of Parliament. And together, with a 

much larger team of course, they won that election. I think both 

of them were the youngest people to be elected and Travis was 

one of the youngest people to work and help a young Member 

of Parliament get elected. 

 

And to that member‟s credit, when he was elected, he hired 

Travis to work on the Hill in Ottawa. And I believe at that 

moment in time Travis was 17. And he would send notes to me 

about going to the home of the Leader of the Opposition, who is 

now Prime Minister Harper. And I couldn‟t believe that, first of 

all, that my son wasn‟t NDP. That was difficult to believe, but 

secondly, that a 17-year-old could achieve that kind of 

credibility in politics at that young age. 

 

But soon he became disillusioned — not with the member, but 

with the Conservative Party. And I thought, well okay, now is 

my chance as a father to get him back into the fold. But he came 

back to Saskatchewan and joined the Liberal Party and worked 

for David Karwacki, then leader, while he was 18 and 19. 

 

Now the end of the story is, to his credibility he tested the other 

political parties and has now chosen to come and work in the 

NDP to get his father elected as premier. 

 

[12:00] 

 

I want to say as well our youngest son, Sahid, he‟s 14. He‟s at 

Massey School. Very proud of him. He needs to work a little 

harder at school, but he‟s a great guitar player. He imitates 

Johnny Cash like anybody and someday you‟ll all see him. 

 

And then my beautiful daughter, Hanna, our youngest one, is a 

brilliant skater and if you go on YouTube and watch her figure 

skate, at the age of eight she is one of the star figure skaters. 

And I don‟t say this just as a proud father but she can skate 

better than any other eight-year-old I‟ve ever seen. Now she‟s 

going to turn 13 one of these days and then we don‟t know. 

 

And finally to my beautiful wife, Rubiela, who is with us here 

today, thank you very much for coming on this journey with me 

because it‟s true, we were comfortable living in another home 

in another part of Canada. 

 

And I‟ll talk about that later. I make no apology about it. Many 

of the members on the opposite side have experienced life in 

other provinces and worked in other provinces. The Minister of 

Labour is nodding and I know he worked out of the province. 

And if you haven‟t worked out of the province . . . And I know 

the member from I believe Rosthern has worked — 

Martensville — has worked out. 

 

It‟s a great experience and I would urge my children and I 

would urge you to urge your children, not that they should leave 

the province, but they should have experience in other parts of 

the world. It doesn‟t have to be in Toronto or Calgary or 

Vancouver. Try Shanghai or try Oslo or London, but there‟s a 

true experience that comes with living and working in other 

parts of the world. 

 

And I just want to say that Rubiela has come like a soldier, like 

a princess to come and live in our hometown here in Regina. 

And while she was leery when she first moved, she now says 

that living in our condo in Douglas Park is better than living in 

Calgary. She tells me that every day. She‟s happier, she has 

many friends, and I thank you for coming with me and being 

part of our life and our community here in the New Democratic 

Party. 

 

Now just for a moment, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to talk 

about so people understand because there are . . . In fact today 

in question period the Premier was saying, well you can be a 

Conservative, you could . . . The truth of the matter is I grew up 

in a Liberal family in Shaunavon. My mom was Irish Catholic, 

so what hope did I have but to be a Liberal? And until I went to 

university here in Regina, I thought I was a Catholic Liberal 

until I got involved in the student movement and talked about 

politics and at some point in time was asked to run as a 

candidate in the Shaunavon constituency. 

 

Now when we were growing up, our title was Liberal, but really 

we shopped at the co-op and we banked at the credit union and 

we supported SaskTel and SaskPower and the Crown 

corporations. And almost like all rural people, we were social 

democrats, not because we wanted to be, but that‟s just how we 

lived. 

 

When the power company was built, it wasn‟t philosophical. 

They didn‟t say, well we like government-owned Crown 

corporations better than we like private sector. When Tommy 

built the power company and rural electrification came in, it 

was because there was nobody else to do it. And that‟s what we 

decided to do. 

 

Same with the co-op movement. After the Great Depression and 

banks foreclosed on farms, many farmers said, well we‟re not 

going to do it that way any more. We‟re going to set up our own 

lending institutions for banking. And it wasn‟t based on, well 

we don‟t like big business; it was just a practical thing to do — 

the same with SaskTel; the same with many things, including 

medicare. 

 

Tommy, who is now known . . . His birthday was on the 20th of 

this month. He would have been 105 years old. He set up 

medicare because it was a practical thing to do. And the 

member from Swift Current and Cypress will know that that 

plan for medicare, really the incubator, happened during the 



3150 Saskatchewan Hansard October 22, 2009 

1930s when Health Region No. 1 got together to hire a doctor. 

Socialized medicine. 

 

The RMs [rural municipality] levied a small fee in order to hire 

a doctor. Why? Because there was no medical service in the 

area and people couldn‟t afford to go to a doctor and pay even 

$10. So they hired a doctor. They didn‟t say, we want socialized 

medicine. They just hired a doctor. And from that grew the 

health plan under Tommy Douglas and Woodrow Lloyd, that 

then became a Canadian program that actually is the key to why 

Tommy Douglas is the most favoured and most famous 

Canadian. And our party and province should be very proud of 

him. 

 

I then went to university in Saskatoon, and luckily we had a 

community and a province that supported tuition — because 

with nine children and a half section of land, there wasn‟t a lot 

of money around. I never could‟ve afforded to go if I wouldn‟t 

have had a public school system and university that had low 

tuition fees. But because that was in place, I went to university. 

I got my degree and I‟m very thankful for that. 

 

Ran for politics in Shaunavon. Was successful twice, defeated. 

Ran in Allan Blakeney‟s riding of Elphinstone, was elected 

there a number of times. Had proud moments in government 

and in opposition. Most proud day was when I took that seat 

right at the back by the door in 1978, and Al Blakeney was 

sitting in that seat. And he was a great leader. He taught me a 

lot of things, and later he gave me the opportunity to sit in his 

cabinet as minister of Social Services. And I was very proud the 

day that he asked me to implement the home care program. 

 

And what I relish the thought of — and over the years I‟ve been 

proud of the fact that I‟ve had my name on that program — but 

the fact that my dad, who‟s 92, lives in his own little house. It‟s 

not a very pretty house. It‟s kind of run down. It‟s about 700 

square feet in Shaunavon, but it‟s his home and he can live 

there because somebody comes every day to change his catheter 

and look after him. He doesn‟t need much help, but can you 

imagine the difference between having that independence for 

your father or your mother or family member as opposed to 

having to go to a nursing home? 

 

And if I think about my career in politics, the most outstanding 

moment was the day that I was given the honour to implement 

that program and set up the 45 boards and travel the province 

and amalgamate programs that were in place into a 

province-wide home care program. 

 

There were other moments. When we stopped the privatization 

of SaskEnergy, and some of the members who are here will 

remember that day, when we stopped in the tracks the 

privatization of SaskEnergy by the Devine government. And 

after we won the election in 1991, Premier Romanow gave me 

the responsibility of setting up SaskEnergy as a Crown 

corporation because it had been stripped out of SaskPower but 

had no legislation. And writing the Bill to establish that Crown 

corporation was a great honour for me, and I remember it and I 

hope someday we can do more of that, and we‟ll talk about that 

later. 

 

In 2000 I decided to leave politics and go work in the private 

sector, and a number of companies were of interest to me, but 

Canadian Occidental Petroleum offered me a job that was 

headquartered in Calgary but was very different than living in 

Calgary. It was the vice-president of government relations 

international, and it gave me the opportunity to work with 

governments and state-owned oil companies around the world. 

 

Many people don‟t know this, but 29 of the top 50 oil 

companies in the world are not privately owned but are owned 

by government or state — 29 out of 50. They are Saudi Aramco 

which is the largest oil company in the world. They produce 

about 10 million barrels of oil a day. They have tens of 

thousands of employees. You have Petrobras which is one of 

the leading drillers in the world. They drill offshore in some of 

the deepest water in the world. Ecopetrol in Colombia. Nexen 

had a partnership with Petrobras in Colombia with their 

state-owned entity, and the list goes on and on. And what there 

is in the world of energy is a blending of independent oil 

companies and NOCs [national oil companies]. 

 

And at the World Petroleum Congress last year, where I got to 

speak in Spain and Madrid, I gave a speech on the role of . . . I 

was invited to speak on the role of NOCs and independent oil 

companies and how they fit together to create an energy 

structure for the world because, if you look around the world, 

you will find countries like Norway with StatHydro working 

with private sector companies. And the companies line up — 

the independent oil companies — line up to come in and work 

with them. They don‟t run away as some people in this 

Assembly have said would happen if you had a state-owned or a 

partially state-owned oil company. I notice the Premier‟s 

making notes. This is no secret. I‟ve given speeches about this. 

And all oil companies nationally know this. Talisman does, 

deals with state-owned oil companies. That may come as a 

surprise to the Premier, but it‟s a fact. 

 

The role of energy in the world and how you get your energy 

strategies straight will be key to the success of any jurisdiction 

in the world. The United States, that has left it totally up to the 

private sector up till now, is struggling to find out how to create 

an energy structure so they don‟t have to import 8 million 

barrels of oil a day. Can you imagine the drain on an economy 

with oil at $100 a barrel if you‟re importing 8 million — not 

800,000. But 8 million barrels of oil a day flows into the United 

States and has to be paid for. Today the price of oil, $81 a 

barrel. Do the numbers and figure out the drain on the US 

[United States] economy. 

 

Now the reason that that‟s happening . . . Because in some 

jurisdictions like Norway and Brazil, they say there‟s got to be 

a plan, a strategy, an energy strategy that we base our economy 

on for the next 5, 10, 15, and 20 years. And they combine the 

strength and effort of independent oil companies and 

state-owned oil companies to plan that strategy. 

 

In the United States they have said, we‟ll leave it up to Exxon 

and Chevron and let them plan our energy future. Well the sad 

part is the boards of directors of those companies, that‟s not 

their mandate. They‟re not bad people. They‟re good people, 

but their responsibility is to their shareholders, not to the energy 

structure of that community. The role of government is to 

manage and direct and set policy and regulation that the energy 

policy of the country is good for the people. That‟s the role of 

government. The role of a board of directors of a corporation is 



October 22, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3151 

to plan for shareholder interest and do it an environmental way. 

 

And so my job was to work with countries and governments all 

over the world. And to give you a short list of where I worked, I 

spent very little time in Calgary because when I flew back to 

Calgary, I went directly to my farm. Because the other thing 

that 10 years being out of politics allowed is for me to expand 

my farm. And many of you have been there. 

 

We had a wonderful picnic at my old home on the farm. And it 

allowed me to build the farm. I know Lorna Standingready was 

there, a couple of our friends from First Nations did prayers on 

the ranch where there still are teepee rings. And it‟s a wonderful 

place. And I refer to Cypress View as a state of mind in my life. 

I have to go there to refresh and get new. 

 

And the 10 years out of politics allowed me to do two things — 

expand my farm and build it here in Saskatchewan, and travel 

the world and gain experience in many ways. I did projects in 

Madagascar, flew to Antananarivo a number of times out of 

Paris, late at night, getting into the city, having meetings the 

next morning dealing with the President and his Minister of 

Energy — opportunities that few people will ever get. 

 

And I‟ve been very blessed to have a career in politics, to be a 

farmer, and also to have this wonderful experience in the 

private sector. We did projects in Equatorial Guinea. We 

achieved . . . Nexen got Block K. We drilled two wells. We 

drilled a couple of wells off shore Rio in Brazil. We drilled a 

number of wells in Colombia and have an office as I mentioned 

to you earlier. 

 

And my wife, Rubiela, worked at Nexen for nine years, was our 

treasurer. She‟s a lawyer. And I‟m also blessed for working at 

Nexen because if I hadn‟t worked there, I never would have met 

my wife, Rubiela. So that‟s the third reason that I‟m very proud 

to have had that. 

 

And we did many projects. Our main production was in a 

country called Yemen. We produced at the peak 220,000 barrels 

of oil a day. And at one time, Canadian Occidental and Nexen, 

that company, were about 30 per cent of the GDP [gross 

domestic product] of the country of Yemen. If you can imagine, 

the influence that a company and the responsibility that you 

have because you‟re dealing directly with the government. 

There was no partner. Our shareholder was the Government of 

Yemen. And we had, with the company and the Government of 

Yemen, meetings on a daily basis. Not that I was at any or even 

most of them, but I would travel to Yemen three or four times a 

year. 

 

[12:15] 

 

We had a scholarship program. We brought 10 students from 

Yemen every year to Calgary. I did the selection with a 

committee, and we paid for all the tuition, the living costs, the 

flights over. At any one time we had 40 students going to 

university or going to technical school in Calgary, and part of 

the mandate of government relations was to look after the 

students. And Rubiela got along with the students so well. They 

spent many hours at our home. 

 

And the other thing was, Yemen being a Muslim country, the 

initial committee didn‟t want to send young females. And we 

had very hard discussions about the fact that we had to choose 

the students who were in the top 10, whether they were female 

or male. And believe it or not, I think almost 30 per cent of the 

students in that program ended up being female because they 

were the brightest and best from the country. 

 

So I just wanted to say that because my experience away, I 

think, in some ways has — and I hope — helped me to be not 

only a better human being but also helped me to be a better 

politician and leader. 

 

And if ever given the opportunity to be premier, I think my 

experience internationally, my experience on my farm — being 

an active farmer and rancher — I think will add to my ability to 

help lead the province. And I‟m very, very proud to have such a 

wonderful team supporting me here in the Assembly and going 

into the next election. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m sure the members opposite thought I would 

never get around to talking about the Throne Speech. But I do 

want to talk for a few moments because as we have, I 

mentioned in question period, travelled the province and 

campaigned for leadership, and then as a candidate in Douglas 

Park and on our summer tour where all the MLAs went out and 

travelled the province — we have heard from people many 

different issues that they wanted us to bring to the Assembly. 

 

And questions like, are the finances okay? Are you sure the 

Premier and the members of the Sask Party know how to handle 

the affairs? Questions about, are they following in the steps of 

their predecessor where many of them worked historically. 

Some of them were members of the Devine administration. 

There‟s a worry. I can guarantee you there‟s a worry in 

Saskatchewan that things are not all well in the Government of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

It‟s true, we had a booming economy. And if I look at the main 

statistics in the province in ‟07, and I look at the statistics now, 

there‟s a story to be told. 

 

Housing starts between ‟07 and today are down by 50 per cent. 

Potash production is down by 69 per cent. Auto sales are down 

by 10 per cent. The beef herd . . . Well the members laugh when 

I mention the beef herd, but they will laugh at their own . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . yes. Yes. It‟s 69 per cent . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Yes well you would know. The 

member from Swift Current would know about potash; he 

would know. He‟s the brilliant man who came up with the 

numbers for the last budget. So yes, you did a good job. Thank 

you very much. 

 

Do you know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker? I didn‟t hear one 

Saskatchewan person tell me that the Premier was doing a good 

job in potash — that didn‟t happen — as I toured around. But 

all these indicators — hog production is down by more than 30 

per cent — all the indicators that I as a farmer or a business 

person would say, there‟s trouble on the horizon, are there. 

There‟s trouble on the horizon. 

 

And the member from Regina South says I‟m grumpy. No. The 

public‟s grumpy with you. And you can go do a jig at the next 

event you go to and jig around, but that doesn‟t impress people. 



3152 Saskatchewan Hansard October 22, 2009 

It doesn‟t. It doesn‟t impress people, not a bit. Well the member 

continues to holler from his seat, but, Mr. Speaker, the fact of 

the matter is that you need more than cheerleading and jigging. 

You‟re going to have to do more than that. You‟re going to 

have to get the numbers right. 

 

And the press are telling me, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier says 

that I had Conservative signs up on my lawn. Why would he 

say that when it‟s not true? Why would you say that? Why 

would you say that? Why would you say that? Now why would 

you do that if you‟re the Premier of the province, Premier of the 

province? Well he turns red and turns his seat. Well I don‟t 

wonder why. But I‟ll tell you this, that when you get your 

numbers wrong in all these categories, in all these categories, 

believe me, you‟re in big trouble, big trouble with the people of 

this province. Big trouble. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on the issue of health care, I said yesterday the 

Premier now has a new plan, brand new plan. Mr. Speaker, he 

says, my old plan, the one with the children‟s hospital, and we 

were going to have surgical clinics, and we were going to do 

many things on waiting lists — in two years, nothing. That plan 

is crashed on the ground, smouldering. And the Premier says, 

I‟ve got another plan. I can only cheerlead for two years on any 

one topic, and then they quit listening to me and I need a new 

plan. And now he‟s going to cheerlead this one. 

 

But you know what? This plan isn‟t for two years. He said I 

want the report card to come in after the next election, after the 

next election. Well they‟re not going to buy it. They‟re not 

going to buy it. We‟re going to make a report card on you in 

2011, November 7th. I‟m talking to you. I‟m talking to you. I‟m 

talking to you. You‟re going to get a report card. The member 

from Swift Current will get a report card before he wants it. 

And he will have to deliver the goods in health care earlier than 

2013 which is what he would like. 

 

Now I want to say as well that, on health care, there are many 

people who are saying that the following of Ed Stelmach for 

your policy, which is written up in the latest report that he‟s 

now peddling around the province, now he‟s going to follow Ed 

Stelmach and only have one board, one board . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . No, Ed wasn‟t my guy. Believe me, he wasn‟t 

my guy. You got that right. 

 

He‟s your guy. He‟s your guy. He‟s your guy. He‟s your guy. 

That‟s right. The member from Meadow Lake said Ed Stelmach 

wasn‟t my guy. He‟s right. He‟s your guy. You got that one. 

You got that one. 

 

Now do you know what‟s going to happen though, Mr. 

Speaker? Do you know what‟s going to happen, Mr. Speaker? 

They‟re going to find fault with Ed Stelmach pretty soon and 

they‟re going to run over to the alliance. You watch. Mark my 

word. Mark my word. 

 

This guy is a cheerleader and runs to whatever he thinks is the 

most popular flavour of the day. That‟s why, that‟s why the 

member from Souris-Cannington isn‟t there any more. He‟s not 

the flavour of the month. And the member from Cypress is not 

the flavour of the month. He‟s going to run somewhere else. 

 

And believe me, pretty soon they‟re going to dump old Ed 

Stelmach. That‟s what he‟s going to do. He‟s not going to be 

their best friend any more. He‟s going to say, I‟m not going to 

be like Ed Stelmach. And he‟ll be saying, I never knew him; I 

didn‟t know who he was; I never went to his meetings and I 

never met . . . And do you know what? The Premier of BC 

[British Columbia] pretty soon isn‟t going to be his friend as he 

drops in the polls and he tries to harmonize the tax. 

 

The member from Swift Current saying, I never knew the guy, 

never knew him, never knew him, didn‟t know who the heck he 

was. I don‟t know Ed Stelmach. I don‟t know . . . I‟m going to 

go and meet Mr. Selinger in Manitoba here pretty soon. That‟s 

what he‟ll do because that‟s the kind of guy he is. That‟s the 

kind of guy he is . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, but you 

wouldn‟t meet with him before. Before, you wanted to meet 

with Ed Stelmach. And yes, that‟s right. You wouldn‟t meet 

with Mr. Doer, yes. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this member, we‟ve got to watch him because 

as we go through this — health plan, privatizing, watching Ed 

Stelmach, get rid of the boards. 

 

I had an email from one of the board members in one part of the 

province this morning. He said, look we‟re working hard on our 

boards. We‟re getting our things together. We‟re doing the best 

we can. And for the Premier to come out and say that he‟s 

going to get id of all these local boards and go to one board like 

Ed Stelmach is a disgrace to the province. So I just wanted to 

pass that along to you, that that‟s what I‟m getting from the 

people of the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about energy for a moment because 

the member is now again on to another topic. For the last couple 

years, he‟s been talking about Bruce Power. When‟s the last 

time you heard him talk about that? When‟s the last time? 

Anybody remember? It‟s so long ago now, can‟t remember, but 

he was going to build two nuclear reactors and he had members 

of his caucus, former members, out doing site locations for 

them. Where are they now? Where did they go? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what the irony is in this Throne Speech, 

what is he talking about? Now he‟s talking about wind. What 

happened to your other strategy? Where‟s it at? It too is on the 

ground crashed, smouldering. Mr. Speaker, this is a government 

that every plan they had . . . When‟s the last time you heard 

about the domed stadium from the Premier? When‟s the last 

time . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . What did you say? And you 

said what? 

 

An Hon. Member: — I said you were opposed to it. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Oh, yes. No, I‟m not opposed to it. I‟m 

not opposed to it. When‟s the last time you heard the Premier 

mention a domed stadium? Oh he‟s on to another plan. This one 

too is crashed and burning on the ground but they have new 

plans, brand new plans. 

 

This Premier, other than spending the $2.3 billion that he was 

left, has nothing to talk about — nothing. He‟s like the guy that 

finds a wallet on the road. It‟s full of money, and he can‟t wait 

to spend it all. And he believes he made the money. He believes 

he made the money. 

 



October 22, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3153 

They never did anything. He didn‟t change the oil royalty 

policy. They‟re the same. I was in Calgary last week meeting 

with oil companies and I said, well what‟s it like to do business 

in Saskatchewan under the new Sask Party? They said it‟s 

exactly the same because they haven‟t changed anything that 

Lorne Calvert and Roy Romanow had in place — not one thing. 

And so I say to the member that that‟s what they said. That‟s 

what they said. 

 

And on the wells drilled in the province, does anyone know 

how they‟ve managed the number of wells drilled in the 

province between ‟07 and today? Well you took credit when it 

was good. It must be your fault now that it‟s bad. Wasn‟t that 

logic? How does that work? Must be. What‟s the deal? What‟s 

the deal? Is the deal that a government takes credit for 

everything that‟s going good and when it goes bad, you say it‟s 

somebody else‟s fault? That‟s not grown-up. That‟s childlike 

and that‟s a cheerleader. A real leader will stand up and explain 

why you make mistakes, and take the credit, Mr. Speaker. 

That‟s what would happen. This Premier will not do that, will 

not do it. 

 

Do you know how many wells are drilled this year compared to 

‟07? Does anyone know? Half, half as many as under Lorne 

Calvert. Now the speeches that the member from Swift Current 

gave going into the ‟07 election was the reason that the wells 

drilled weren‟t higher, because they didn‟t like the NDP and 

they would love the Sask Party. Well I guess the corollary is 

that they now don‟t like the member from Swift Current. They 

don‟t like him any more. Or maybe it‟s the member from 

Kindersley. But for sure, if they didn‟t like Lorne Calvert, they 

sure as heck don‟t like these guys. They don‟t like them. 

 

And I say to the member opposite, people are measuring the 

statistics. They‟re measuring all of these statistics: auto sales, 

housing starts, wells drilled, potash production. And every one 

of these indicators is down significantly. 

 

Now any economist knows that the job numbers will stay and 

stay. And in the last two months, permanent jobs have dropped 

by 4,500 per month, replaced by part-time jobs. And the 

chickens are coming home to roost. Because if you don‟t have 

housing starts and you don‟t have potash production and you 

don‟t have oil wells drilled and you don‟t have cattle production 

and you don‟t have pork production, what‟s going to happen 

with jobs? Like this is not by magic. It‟s not smoke and mirrors. 

It‟s not how many pompoms you can wave in the air at any one 

time. It‟s not if you‟ve got rose-coloured glasses. 

 

[12:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, one guy told me the other day . . . This was a press 

person from one of the constituencies they hold. I said, but the 

member from Swift Current said he checked the numbers on 

potash three and four times. The reporter said, lucky he didn‟t 

check them six times or we would have been out $2 billion. 

That‟s what they said. That‟s what they said. That‟s what they 

said. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Premier does not know how to run business. 

That‟s the problem. Now he can laugh at me for getting 

business experience in Calgary and learning how to run 

corporations, but I would urge him to get some training in how 

to run the economy of the province. His expiry date in 

cheerleading is about two years on any projects he‟s ever done, 

about two years. And we‟re at the two-year anniversary just 

about now. 

 

And when he hires people to get him good press about going to 

Ottawa to be leader of the Conservative Party, hires people to 

do that, that‟s because his two years is up and he‟d like to 

change the channel. He‟d like to go somewhere else because it‟s 

getting tough here. He‟s got to start running the show. Yes, 

we‟ll talk about the press that, Mr. Speaker, we‟ll talk about the 

press and how he arranges it later, but it‟s not the right way to 

do it. 

 

Yes, arranges press, with press secretaries and high-paid help. 

But, Mr. Premier, pretty soon you‟re going to have to, Mr. 

Speaker, pretty soon the Premier is going to have to get his own 

line and do his own work because he‟s run out of money. 

 

It‟s like the guy who takes over a farm — beautiful farm, 

money in the bank, grain in the bin. And two years later the 

father comes back to see how this young guy is making out. 

And it‟s in shambles. Every plan he had is burning and 

smouldering on the ground. The bins are empty, the savings 

gone, and he‟s selling off land to keep the farm going. 

 

And I just say to the Speaker, through the Speaker, to the 

Premier, his record — the Premier‟s record — on fiscal 

responsibility is not that good. Not that good. 

 

The one other thing that I want to mention about fiscal 

responsibility is when he came to government, the similarity to 

what he said and his former boss, Grant Devine. Now he‟ll 

leave when I start talking about that, I‟m sure. I think he‟ll 

leave now. Doesn‟t want to talk about that. Doesn‟t want to talk 

about that. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Just to remind members that they are 

not to refer to the absence or presence of individuals on either 

side of the House. I recognize the Opposition Leader. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — The member from Swift Current doesn‟t 

want to listen to this speech, doesn‟t want to hear it. If you 

don‟t want to, you don‟t need to. That‟s the prerogative of a 

democracy. You don‟t have to listen to me speak. So if you 

don‟t want to, you don‟t need to. 

 

But the fact of the matter is that the member from Swift 

Current, Mr. Speaker, when he was working for the Devine 

government . . . And if you look back, you‟ll find that the order 

in council to hire the member from Swift Current to work in the 

government is signed by Grant Devine because that‟s who he 

worked for. 

 

But why doesn‟t he mention that in his resumé? Why doesn‟t he 

talk about that? Why wouldn‟t he be proud of the fact that he 

worked in this building? Mr. Speaker, you were there, as well. 

We were all here. But why do we pretend we weren‟t? 

 

Why do we pretend that we didn‟t work for the Mulroney 

government? Why is he not proud and standing up and saying 



3154 Saskatchewan Hansard October 22, 2009 

yes, I left the province too for a while? No, only after he got 

caught. He‟s like the kid. He‟s like the kid. Guess what? I did it 

too. Yes, right. Right. Yes, that‟ll work, all right. That‟s a good 

one. After he gets caught, yes I did too. Sure he did. 

 

He went to Ottawa to work for the Conservative Mulroney 

government. Now there‟s nothing wrong with that. But how can 

you be critical about other people who go and work somewhere 

else? How does that work? What kind of hypocrisy is that? It‟s 

terrible. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to you that whatever you do in 

life, mistakes or otherwise, be proud of them; talk about them. 

Some of your members have done that, and they should be 

proud of it. There‟s nothing wrong with having a bankrupt 

company. There‟s nothing . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, 

that‟s right. It was a mistake, and we paid for it. And we paid 

for it . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes. No. And we did too. 

And we did too. And we did too. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I would just ask members to 

allow the member who‟s speaking . . . and not get into direct 

debate with individuals who happen to be on their feet at the 

time. I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, as I say about the issue of 

who you work for and being proud of it, when you make a 

mistake, there should be consequences. And you should be 

proud of it, and you should learn from it. So there‟s nothing 

wrong with an individual on this side of the House or that side 

of the House who runs a business and goes broke. There‟s 

nothing wrong with it at all. But talk about it. Don‟t pretend it 

didn‟t happen. 

 

But it should be thought about when you hire that person to do 

the most important job in the province. Because if you didn‟t 

get the numbers right in your business and you haven‟t taken 

any training and you were learning from your scholar who was 

the premier who had the worse deficit in the history of Canada, 

maybe you will have learned the wrong habits. Maybe. And the 

key is the worst thing that could happen is what‟s happening 

here where this Premier, Mr. Speaker, on a Saturday afternoon, 

phones up his poor Finance minister and asks him and tells him 

to move $600 million. That‟s not the role of the Premier or of a 

CEO [chief executive officer], I might add. It‟s not their role. 

They shouldn‟t do it. 

 

And why they shouldn‟t do it is because you have professional 

people to do it in your departments. And they should do the 

numbers and they should report to the Minister of Finance. 

Then there should be a debate and agreement. But let me say 

this. It‟s true that the Premier said in the press that he did it that 

one time. The question is, how many other times did he make 

calls? 

 

And the more I watch the Minister of Finance, the more I‟m 

now believing this isn‟t his fault. I look at him; he‟s tired. He is 

stressed big time. And you know what? I now know why. He 

dreads waiting for those phone calls from the Premier telling 

him to move money because there‟s no more money to move. 

That‟s the problem. There‟s no more money to move. It‟s all 

been moved. It‟s all been moved. 

 

So now what are we doing? So now what are we doing? Let‟s 

change the budgetary process. Let‟s change the process because 

the process is wrong. Not my fault that we got the numbers 

wrong and spent all the money and the till is empty. It‟s not my 

fault. It‟s the process‟s fault. Even though he talks about the 

process being him phoning on a Saturday afternoon — I don‟t 

know if he‟s mowing his lawn or what he‟s doing when he 

thinks of this — and then runs in the house and phones his 

Minister of Finance and says, move another 600 million. Boy 

oh boy, if anybody, a CEO came to me and said look, this is 

how I‟m running my operation, I just phone up and move 

billions of dollars, I think the board of directors would fire him. 

And I think that‟s what‟s going to happen in the next election. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to touch on a couple of other points in the 

Throne Speech before I take my place. I want to talk about 

agriculture because there is a section in agriculture . . . And the 

minister, I know, is pushing as hard as he can for some of these 

programs to take place for beef and pork. But in the Throne 

Speech, there‟s one thing they‟ve proposed for the future of 

agriculture in the province, one thing. They talk about what 

they did in the past. Then there‟s one brand new exciting thing. 

They‟re going to move some bureaucrats from one city to 

another. That‟s it, full stop, period. That‟s the plan. That‟s the 

plan. Well I can guarantee you I have not heard one farmer, not 

one farmer has suggested to me that that is an important issue 

for them, not one. But that‟s their plan. 

 

The other thing I want to mention is, when I look at the pillars 

of the economy . . . My belief is you need three pillars to make 

a modern, 21st-century economy. One is you need strong 

business, public and private and, in this province, co-operatives. 

You need strong unions and labour organizations to look after 

the families who work in the strong businesses, and you need 

strong government to oversee the environment, the policy that 

labour and business work by. That‟s a modern economy. 

 

Those who believe that you can get rid of government . . . It‟s 

just an impediment. If we just had no government, everything 

would be good and . . . 19th century, that‟s what you think. The 

Minister of Labour says to his neighbour, that‟s 19th-century 

thinking. That‟s the 19th . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Where‟s the innovation agenda? 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Oh my God. Oh my God, you got to clip 

that one. Clip that one. Mr. Speaker . . . Brilliant. Brilliant. The 

idea that labour doesn‟t play an important role in any economy, 

any economy . . . Let me tell you a little story about the 

company I worked for, Mr. Speaker, in Calgary. 

 

We worked in many countries in the world. But you know 

where we chose most to work were two countries, Norway and 

the United Kingdom. Do you know why we chose to work 

there? Because they had the balance of government. They had 

strong government in Norway and in the UK [United 

Kingdom]. They had strong unions and they have strong 

companies. And these, of all the countries we worked in — 

Nigeria, Colombia, Yemen — the two that were the most 

pleasant to work in and you could make a profit and go to sleep 

at night believing all of the citizens were taken care of were the 

countries of Norway and the United Kingdom, that have strong 

labour laws, strong companies, mixed private and public oil 



October 22, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3155 

companies, and strong labour unions. That‟s a modern 

economy. 

 

It‟s not 19th century. It‟s not. It is not 19th century to believe 

labour is a big part of a successful province or economy. 

 

Now I did the statistics on the economy in 2007. That was with 

good labour law, good involvement of the public and private 

sector, and good oversight from the government. We hit the 

peak. And since then, as we weaken labour law and don‟t pay 

attention and weaken the role of oversight by government, our 

economy is into free fall. 

 

Now the worst thing of all is the insult that this government 

gives to working people, to working people. Working people 

are hurt by this government. Bill 5, Bill 6, now Bill 80. Not 

even just what‟s in the Bills . . . What‟s in the Bills is important; 

don‟t get me wrong. But the signal that it sends is that working 

people are unimportant to this government. There‟s not one 

word, not one word in the Throne Speech about that pillar of the 

economy. And that‟s sad. And it will come back to haunt us 

because, when you ignore your workers — whether it‟s on your 

farm, whether it‟s in this building, whether it‟s in government, 

whether it‟s the steelworker, whether it‟s CUPE [Canadian 

Union of Public Employees] — they‟re important. 

 

They‟re as important as the business people. They‟re as 

important as government employees. And as leader, I would 

take a very different approach, and I would treat them equally 

and with respect. That‟s my commitment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I travelled the province. I heard many requests. In 

Canora, they talked to me about spot loss hail. In Douglas Park 

they talked about high rents. In Broders Annex they were 

talking about utility rates, and in Shaunavon they talked about 

some assistance for livestock. In Kindersley they talked about 

support for their airport, and in Outlook they were talking about 

government funding for dental assistance. And in Estevan and 

Weyburn, they want their highway four-laned, and in Moose 

Jaw there were questions about the government commitment to 

the Union Hospital. In Prince Albert and the North, they want to 

know what the forestry strategy is for the province. And they 

wanted to know, working people, wanted to know what is the 

strategy for working people. 

 

And when we went through the Throne Speech, we waited for 

the Throne Speech to see if these issues were dealt with because 

if they‟re talking to the same people we are, these are what 

people are talking about. 

 

Is there any mention of spot loss hail in this document? No. Is 

there any mention of an airport support for Kindersley? Not a 

thing, and I can go through the list. But I want to say to you, 

Mr. Speaker, and through you to the members of government, 

we cannot support this Throne Speech, and I want to move the 

following amendment, seconded by the member from Moose 

Jaw Wakamow that the following words be added to the 

motion: 

 

This government no longer enjoys the support of the 

Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan because of this 

government‟s lack of vision for the future and because of 

this government‟s woeful mismanagement of the 

province‟s fiscal and finances and because the 

government has failed policies on health care, the 

Crowns, energy, housing, the environment, and the 

economy and because of this government‟s refusal to 

listen to the people‟s priorities. 

 

I so move. 

 

[12:45] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The amendment presented by 

the Leader of the Opposition, seconded by the member from 

Moose Jaw Wakamow reads as follows that the following 

words be added to the motion: 

 

This government no longer enjoys the support of the 

Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan because of this 

government‟s lack of vision for the future and because of 

this government‟s woeful mismanagement of the 

province‟s finances and because of this government‟s 

failed policies on health care, the Crowns, energy, 

housing, the environment, and the economy and because 

of this government‟s refusal to listen to the people‟s 

priorities. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

for Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, I have to say it is nice to be back in the House. It is 

always good to be back with my colleagues and be able to 

address many, many of the issues that we have heard over the 

summer not only in our constituencies but as we travelled 

around the province doing a summer tour, meeting with other 

communities, rural municipalities, and organizations across the 

province. So it‟s time to be back in the House and be able to 

discuss issues and put forward our ideas and suggestions for the 

government to improve programming and initiatives that they 

are proposing. 

 

But before I get into any of the initiatives in the Speech from 

the Throne presented in this House yesterday, I really want to 

offer my congratulations to the member from Regina Douglas 

Park — congratulations. And I look forward to serving with 

him for many, many years and moving over to the other side of 

the House also, Mr. Speaker, after the next election. 

 

But I also want to say a congratulations to the new member 

from Saskatoon Riversdale. She ran a very good campaign. And 

it‟s young women such as herself that we need more of in this 

House to make sure that women across this province, when we 

are 52 per cent of the population, are more aptly represented 

and that concerns are brought forward. So congratulations to the 

member from Riversdale. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while many have said that it wasn‟t that great of a 

summer, I have to say while I agree in many ways it may not 

have been the greatest season that we have had, but really was 

more of a state of mind and a bit of an attitude, but it was great 

to be at home in Moose Jaw Wakamow and be able to attend 

many, many community events. And while there‟s a number of 

things that take place right in Moose Jaw, I want to name or just 

talk quickly about a couple of events that I had an opportunity 



3156 Saskatchewan Hansard October 22, 2009 

to attend. 

 

One was about 12, 13 miles south of Moose Jaw. The Red Lake 

School celebrated their 100th anniversary so we were out at the 

school for the day. We had a great time. We had a parade. We 

had a wonderful meal that was put on by the community and of 

course had the prerequisite softball game which took a little bit 

of effort and I felt the effects of for a couple of days. But it was 

a great deal of fun, and it was a great celebration to see the 

support that the community has put into the Red Lake School to 

maintain it as a landmark in their community and an active part 

of their community just south of Moose Jaw. 

 

And also I want to offer a congratulations to all of the 

volunteers at the Sukanen museum just south of Moose Jaw 

also. Every time you go out to the museum and have an 

opportunity, whether it‟s a threshing bee or one of their annual 

events, it‟s absolutely fabulous. The work that they have put 

into the community at the Sukanen museum, the improvements 

they make year in and year out, and it absolutely is a fabulous 

part of our history that‟s being maintained by this group of 

volunteers through many, many hours of hard work. But I just 

want to let them know that we do appreciate it because it‟s a 

part of Saskatchewan‟s history that needs to be maintained and 

needs to be treasured for future generations. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when we listened to the Throne Speech 

yesterday, I didn‟t of course have a lot of pens, papers, or we 

don‟t have a copy of the Speech from the Throne when it‟s 

being presented. But what I did, I had a scrap of paper, and I 

started doing a bit of a check-off list. And I did it in two 

categories, new and old. And I have to tell you that there was 

considerably more old initiatives that were talked about in the 

Throne Speech than what there were new. 

 

And in my rough list that I did yesterday, it worked out to just 

over 50 old initiatives that were highlighted in the Speech from 

the Throne yesterday. And I was thinking, well this isn‟t a 

particularly strong vision for the future from this government 

after their two years. Now maybe the two years seems a lot 

longer to them than what it does to us, but I find that hard to 

believe. But the new initiatives in the Speech from the Throne, I 

figured on rough count yesterday listening to the speech, there 

was just around 10, maybe 11. 

 

So I went home last night. I got a copy of the Speech from the 

Throne when I was leaving the legislature yesterday, sat down 

with a highlighter, and I went through and marked what were 

former initiatives that they were again highlighting — not over 

just last year but over the previous two years — and my final 

count came to 53 old initiatives that were highlighted again in 

the Speech from the Throne. And I was being generous, Mr. 

Speaker, in what I considered a new initiative, and I think 

there‟s around 15. Now I counted some of them that I have 

heard being announced before, but I thought, well I‟ll be 

generous; maybe there is more to come as we get into session 

and we start looking at this. 

 

So when I look at the front and the cover of the speech and it 

was titled “Moving Forward,” it‟s pretty hard to move forward 

when you‟re spending so many pages in your vision for the 

future looking back and patting yourself on the back. Over 50 

previous initiatives highlighted, and that was the bulk of the 

speech. It truly raises a number of concerns and is a concern, I 

know, for us. This government that claims to be moving 

forward in the Speech from the Throne, but they spent a 

majority of the time reminiscing about the last two years and 

how much money has been spent over the last two years. And 

really it was prosperity that had been left behind by the previous 

government, and really was due to no initiatives from the 

current government. Money that they enjoyed. 

 

But what they‟ve done is . . . That money‟s gone. And when we 

look at the mid-term financial, which should be being presented 

within this session probably within a month — two weeks to a 

month — and we look back to the first quarter financial when it 

was released. And there‟s obviously been some devastating 

consequences for this government in some inaccurate 

projections and inaccurate . . . I shouldn‟t say inaccurate. Well 

they are inaccurate, Mr. Speaker, but the revenue projections 

that were put forward in the budget obviously the Premier has 

admitted, the Minister of Finance has said, they used best 

numbers that they had but were considerably out in their 

projections. And we‟re now feeling this. 

 

And the Premier in fact stood and said, we were wrong. And in 

the Speech from the Throne it says, we were wrong. Well it‟s 

one thing to admit you were wrong, but what happens is that we 

will pay for that for years to come. Because after only three 

months into the budget, already we were seeing adjustments to 

spending, we were seeing cutbacks being put in place. And as 

we come closer to the mid-term financial report being released, 

the concerns are even higher that there will be more, and that 

we will truly be in a deficit before too long. So that‟s a number 

of concerns. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the Speech from the 

Throne, you also see a number of areas . . . Well it just 

reinforces the concerns that the financial situation that we find 

ourselves in currently has had an effect on the Speech from the 

Throne, and it will have an effect on what happens over the next 

year, maybe longer. So a number of concerns. 

 

And while that rainy day fund, the Premier stood a couple of 

times today and said, well we‟ve got $800. Well excuse me, 

you had 2.3 billion not that long ago. So over this last very short 

period of time we have seen billions — absolutely billions — of 

dollars spent. And that just adds to the financial crunch that 

may be hitting this province. So it is a problem and it is a 

concern. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I know the Leader of the Opposition, in his 

comments, he stood and spoke about door knocking during the 

by-elections, and listening to people that they had talked to on 

the doorstep, what their issues were. 

 

And that‟s the same as being at home in Moose Jaw Wakamow, 

in my constituency. What are the issues I‟m dealing with in my 

constituency office? What kind of phone calls am I receiving at 

the constituency office? And it‟s very hard to try to speak over 

the member from Canora, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When I look at this Speech from the Throne and when I think of 

my constituency in Moose Jaw, what kind of phone calls am I 

receiving? What kind of issues are we dealing with in my 

constituency, and what kind of issues are going to be addressed 



October 22, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3157 

by this government? And truly, many of these issues that I‟m 

hearing have not even been mentioned or touched on in this 

Speech from the Throne. So that raises a number of concerns. 

 

I know that the member from Regina Qu‟Appelle, when she has 

been travelling around the province talking about seniors and 

the issues of seniors . . . I have a fair number of seniors‟ high 

rises and residences in Moose Jaw Wakamow. So when the 

member was in Moose Jaw, I went out to listen to the 

discussion and the comments that were made. And we had a 

very good turnout in Moose Jaw. And I‟m pleased to see that 

my community felt this was important, and made the effort to 

come out and speak to the MLA when she was there. 

 

But then to look in the Speech from the Throne, and all they 

talk about is there will be changes made to long-term care. Well 

the meeting in Moose Jaw — and I‟m not sure about the rest of 

them around the province, but I would assume they are fairly 

similar — in Moose Jaw there were a number of issues. And 

there is no senior or no middle-aged person in the province of 

Saskatchewan that their long-term goal is to have a nice 

long-term care facility to live in. Mr. Speaker, they want to live 

now. They want to enjoy their life now, and they want to have 

the supports that are needed now. 

 

There‟s concerns about home care. There‟s concerns about 

safety when you‟re living on your own. And home care has 

many opportunities to be expanded and to look after many of 

the seniors‟ issues that are out there and that were brought up at 

these consultations. Private care homes and that gap that seniors 

have between the time they have the ability to live on their own 

and when there is a need, a physical need, to live in a long-term 

care facility, but there are no other options for them and when 

they have been assessed at that level, to move into long-term 

care. But there can be many, many years between living on your 

own and long-term care. What supports are there for seniors? 

Private care homes — many seniors are struggling with the 

issue of accessibility to private care homes, whether it‟s 

affordability, whatever the issue. These are areas that need to be 

addressed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was disappointed that the Throne Speech totally 

missed the mark. Now I‟m ever hopeful and I‟m ever an 

optimist, so I‟m hoping this will be expanded so that not only 

long-term care . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Being the time of adjournment, this Assembly 

stands adjourned until 1:30 Monday afternoon. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 13:00.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3131 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3131 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3131 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3131 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3131 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3131 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3132 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3132 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Good Times in Saskatchewan 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3132 

 The People’s Verdict 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3132 

 Foster Family Week 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3132 

 Autism Awareness Month 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3133 

 A State of Mind 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3133 

 Throne Speech Promises 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3133 

 Youth Entrepreneurial Day 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3133 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Support for Saskatchewan People 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3134 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3134 

 Support for Citizens and Olympic Spending 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3135 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3136 

 Employment Issues 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3136 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3136 

 Management of Provincial Economy 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3137 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3137 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3138 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3138 

MOTIONS 

 Appointment of Deputy Chair of Committees 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3139 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 Membership of the Board of Internal Economy 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3139 

TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3139 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3139 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3144 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3147 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3155 

 

 

 


