




















































Hansard: March 26, 2009


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 40A  THURSDAY, MARCH 26, 2009, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2563 

 March 26, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you, and 

seated in your gallery is a group of students and chaperones 

from Senator Myles Venne School. There‟s 10 students, grade 8 

and 9. They‟re accompanied by their teacher, Devin 

Bernatchez; Kenny Ratt, La Ronge band councillor; and also by 

another chaperone and, I think, a parent, Agnes Charles. 

 

I just want to take this opportunity. It‟s nice to have . . . When 

we have community members come in from so far and from the 

North, and to learn the process that‟s going on. And as a 

teacher, Devin has been working with these young students in 

his class making sure they understand the, I guess, the role that 

the provincial government plays, the federal government plays. 

And he‟s spending a lot of time making sure they‟re getting 

involved in the political process to understand it as best they 

can. And I commend what he‟s doing and that he did a lot of 

fundraising to get these students here and show them. 

 

He‟s committed to education for First Nations, and I commend. 

He‟s a NORTEP [northern teacher education program] grad, 

one of our programs up North we‟re very proud of, and he is a 

graduate. And he is truly a leader. So at this point I would just 

like to ask all members of the Assembly to welcome to their 

Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you and 

to you, I would like to introduce Terry-Lynn Quadri. She‟s the 

vice-president of strategy and business development for 

Ag-West Bio, which is a non-profit group on Research Drive 

and Innovation Place. There‟s a lot of movement in this 

industry right now, and she would like to thank us for the 

support and looks forward to what‟s happening in the industry 

in the future. 

 

Welcome to her Assembly. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you in your gallery, I‟d like to introduce a friend of mine, Fred 

Wesolowski, a retired police officer from Corman Park. I‟ve 

always had in my lifetime as you know, Mr. Speaker, a yin and 

yang relationship with police. Thankfully this day and era, it‟s 

the yang. 

Fred is also on the Catholic School Board; he‟s been there for 

21 years. He‟s down here for the conference and a member of 

my constituency and a good friend. And I‟d like to welcome 

him to his Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition that speaks to the housing market and changes 

that have translated into challenges for many renters, including 

senior citizens, and that more affordable housing options would 

significantly help Saskatchewan seniors cope with the cost of 

living increases, and especially for those that live on fixed 

incomes. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to act as quickly as possible to expand 

affordable housing options for Saskatchewan‟s senior 

citizens. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of residents of Moose Jaw, I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition on behalf of the fine community of 

Pelican Narrows — the First Nations and the residents of 

Pelican Narrows. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to pave the 7 kilometres of Highway 135 that 

runs through the community of Pelican Narrows, as 

committed on August 24, 2007. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the petition has been signed by many 

community members of Pelican Narrows who have been 

waiting for the approval of their road for many, many months. 

And I so present, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for wage equity for CBO 

[community-based organization] workers. And we know these 

workers and community-based organizations in Saskatchewan 

have traditionally been underpaid and many continue to earn 



2564 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2009 

poverty level wages. I‟ll read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the development and 

implementation of a multi-year funding plan to ensure that 

CBO workers achieve wage equity with employees who 

perform work of equal value in government departments. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And these petitioners come from the following communities: 

Moosomin, Maryfield, Regina, Yorkton, and Saskatoon. Thank 

you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition on 

behalf of rural residents of Saskatchewan who question why the 

Sask Party government is leaving them behind when it comes to 

providing safe and affordable water. Mr. Speaker, the prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to financially assist the town of Duck Lake 

residents for the good of their health and safety due to the 

exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency, and that this government fulfills its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

These petitions are signed, Mr. Speaker, by the good residents 

of Duck Lake and Rosthern. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m 

pleased today to rise to present a petition in support of 

affordable housing for The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petitioners note that the cost of rental 

accommodation in The Battlefords is increasing while the 

number of apartment units available for rent is decreasing. The 

petitioners ask that: 

 

. . . the Legislative Assembly call upon the Government of 

Saskatchewan to invest in an affordable housing program 

that will result in a greater number of quality and 

affordable rental units to be made available to a greater 

number of people throughout The Battlefords and across 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petitioners all come from The Battlefords and 

surrounding area. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition in support of fairness for students in 

Saskatchewan through the expansion of the graduate retention 

program. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately expand the graduate retention 

program to include master‟s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are 

students from the University of Regina as well as students from 

the University of Saskatchewan as well as a number of health 

care providers who hold graduate degrees, who are working 

here in the province. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

to repair Highway No. 123 that goes through the community of 

Cumberland House, Saskatchewan. This petition is signed by 

the leadership and community members of the Village of 

Cumberland House and the Cumberland House First Nations. 

The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the Sask 

Party government to stop denying the money that was 

allocated to this highway and commit to immediately 

providing the repairs to this highway that the people of 

northeast Saskatchewan were promised. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by the good people of the entire area of Cumberland 

House. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Remembering Doris Sitter 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Mr. Speaker, today many people are 

mourning the loss of one of Moose Jaw‟s most distinguished 

citizens. I‟d like to offer sincere condolences to the family and 

friends of Doris Sitter. I hope they may find solace in the 

pleasant memories of this truly special person. 

 

As many citizens of Moose Jaw could tell you, Doris Sitter led 

a full and rich life. To most in our community she might be 

remembered for her passion and dedication to the art of dance. 

The Doris Sitter School of Dance literally taught generations of 

students throughout her career. It was only very recently, at the 

age of 88, that Ms. Sitter decided to retire. 

 



March 26, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2565 

Doris Sitter was also an avid painter and had her work on 

display at the Moose Jaw Cultural Centre. She was the recipient 

of many awards, including the American Biographical 

Institute‟s American Hall of Fame honour, an award 

recognizing individuals with diverse experiences. Her list of 

awards and honours is far too many to name in this limited 

time. However, her contributions to Moose Jaw didn‟t go 

unnoticed by the members of the community and in 2007, Doris 

Sitter was named Moose Jaw‟s Citizen of the Year. 

 

The people of Moose Jaw will fondly recall Doris Sitter‟s 

accomplishments over the many years. Once again, Mr. 

Speaker, I offer condolences to the family, the friends, the 

students, and the colleagues of Doris Sitter. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Earth Hour 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, on Saturday, March 28, people 

around the world will be participating in Earth Hour, an 

initiative organized by the World Wildlife federation to turn off 

all unnecessary lights for one hour starting at 8:30 p.m. Mr. 

Speaker, Earth Hour is a symbolic event. Turning off our lights 

for an hour won‟t stop climate change, but it does demonstrate 

that our individual action is important and collectivity makes a 

big difference. 

 

The intent of this event is to send a very powerful message to 

government that people want policies and regulations put in 

place that can achieve meaningful emission reduction to help 

fight climate change. 

 

Mr. Speaker, globally there are more than 2,700 cities from 83 

countries participating in Earth Hour activities. The 

communities in Saskatchewan that have signed up to participate 

are Kamsack, Weyburn, Regina, Frontier, Beechy, Conquest, 

Saskatoon, and Prince Albert. 

 

Climate change is a global problem and requires global 

co-operation to solve. However, Earth Hour is an important 

statement about changing behaviours to help our planet — 

thinking globally, but acting locally. We can participate with 

the rest of the world in Earth Hour and prove that we can make 

life better with simple everyday actions to minimize our 

footprint. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank all Saskatchewan residents 

who have committed to participating in Earth Hour and 

encourage everyone else to do the same. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu‟Appelle Valley. 

 

Epilepsy Month 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, March is 

Epilepsy Month in Canada. Every day throughout our country 

about 42 people discover they have epilepsy. That‟s over 

15,000 a year. Epilepsy is a physical condition that often 

suddenly and dramatically changes the way the brain functions. 

It‟s a neurological disorder rather than a disease and is evident 

in the form of seizures. 

 

Throughout history, those with epilepsy have often been 

stigmatized by their peers due to a misunderstanding of both its 

cause and effect. Although we are better able to understand 

epilepsy today, this does not mean that we have been able to 

fully put aside these prejudices. Epilepsy touches people across 

all age groups and income level. My dad had epilepsy, so I do 

have first-hand knowledge and experience of this condition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today, on March 26, we mark Purple Day, 

founded in 2008 by a little girl from Nova Scotia named 

Cassidy Megan. This special young person began Purple Day to 

raise awareness throughout the world about epilepsy and chose 

the colour purple because lavender is an international colour of 

epilepsy. Cassidy Megan understood and undertook this 

initiative to help us all know that over 50 million people 

worldwide are affected by this disorder. 

 

It‟s important that we work towards more understanding of this 

disorder and hopefully see that, one day soon, epilepsy will be a 

thing of the past. I would encourage all to wear purple on 

March 26. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Junior Achievement Business Hall of Fame Awards 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday evening I, along with 

the members from Saskatoon Southeast and Lloydminster, had 

the pleasure of attending the Junior Achievement 2009 Business 

Hall of Fame in Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, our province is at its 

best when we recognize, grow, and celebrate the potential of 

our youth. No one knows this better than JA [Junior 

Achievement]. 

 

I‟ve seen first-hand its important role through volunteering at 

Bedford Road Collegiate and leading the Economics of Staying 

in School program with students. And last night‟s award supper 

was another reminder of JA‟s success. 

 

While this brief statement does not allow me to recognize every 

accomplished Junior Achiever, I would like to announce to this 

Assembly the most prestigious award of the evening — 

Company of the Year sponsored by Deloitte. This year‟s 

winning company was Diamond Rush sponsored by Freedom 

55. 

 

Diamond Rush company members are: Bianca Banh, Brendon 

Barr, Katie Bleakney, Morgan Boutin, Dean Dangas, Christy 

Dangas, Cody Diedrichs, Emily Fillo, Jasmine Godoy, Sunjita 

Kapoor, Aljun Lagria, Chelsea Laprairie, Spencer Schaan, 

Linda Shen, Addison Voldeng, Bryan Wan, and Anna Young. 

The company‟s advisors are CJ Freer, Cory Kinchen, Ryan 

Smith, and Nick Sorba. 

 



2566 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2009 

In addition to the Junior Achievers, two adults were recognized 

last evening. Tom McClocklin, president of Colliers 

McClocklin, was inducted into the Business Hall of Fame, and 

Charlene Hudym, a constituent of Saskatoon Massey Place, was 

awarded volunteer of the year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join me in thanking 

the board and staff of JA in hosting such a successful evening 

and extend our congratulations to all the 2009 Junior Achievers. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Saskatchewan Population Increase 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

in the House today with another good news story. Statistics 

Canada is reporting that in 2008 Saskatchewan‟s population 

increased by more than 15,000 people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[10:15] 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — As of January 1, 2009, there were 1,023,810 

living in Saskatchewan, the highest level since 1988. 

 

Interprovincial migration plays a major role in population 

change in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Our net interprovincial 

gain in 2008 was more than 5,500 people, with over 85 per cent 

of that gain coming from just two provinces — Alberta and 

Ontario. This shows, Mr. Speaker, our government was on the 

right track when a delegation from this province, including our 

Premier and Saskatchewan employers, travelled to Toronto 

National Job Fair last year to tell the Saskatchewan story. 

 

Next week, Mr. Speaker, the Premier, along with the mayors of 

Saskatoon and Regina and many Saskatchewan employers, are 

returning to that national job fair. They will once again tell the 

Saskatchewan story. Mr. Speaker, more and more people are 

looking to Saskatchewan as a great place to build a career and 

build a life. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Learning Disabilities Association Tea 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — On Sunday, March 15, over 350 people 

attended a tea and fashion show for the Learning Disabilities 

Association of Saskatchewan at TCU Place in Saskatoon. 

During the event I, along with a number of colleagues, were 

pleased to act as celebrity tea pourer for the attending guests. 

 

A non-profit association, the association has been active in our 

province since 1971 to advance education, employment 

opportunities, social growth, legal rights, and the general 

well-being of people with learning disabilities and ADHD 

[attention deficit hyperactivity disorder]. The association has 

three branches in the province: the provincial office in 

Saskatoon, a Regina branch, and a P.A. [Prince Albert] branch. 

 

People living with learning disabilities have a lifelong 

neurological disability. A person with a learning disability will 

have strengths in some areas but may experience difficulty in 

language and communication or math skills. With assessment 

and intervention strategies, people can enrich their potential and 

achieve their goals. 

 

A few notable people who have lived with learning disabilities 

include Hans Christian Anderson, Beethoven, John Lennon, 

John F. Kennedy, Abraham Lincoln, Winston Churchill, 

Mozart, Stevie Wonder, and Walt Disney. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my colleagues and I were pleased to be part of this 

event to show support for this organization and the valuable 

work it does to promote greater understanding of people living 

with learning disabilities and to provide services to people who 

have ADHD and learning disabilities. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 

 

Junior Achievement Business Hall of Fame Awards 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟d like to join 

with the member from Massey Place in congratulating the 

winners of last night‟s Junior Achievement Business Awards. 

Mr. Speaker, last night we had the pleasure of attending the 

32nd Annual Junior Achievement Business Hall of Fame 

Awards. The ceremony was held at TCU Place in Saskatoon 

and was also attended by the Minister of Justice. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the awards were a great night and honoured the 

entrepreneurial spirit in Saskatchewan. They are a time to 

encourage the next generation of business leaders and 

innovators that will lead our economy. I would like to thank the 

executive director Darren Hill and the entire board of directors 

for their work in organizing this event to honour the 

enterprising youth of Saskatchewan. 

 

As our provincial economy continues to lead the nation, it‟s 

important that our young entrepreneurs are given the support 

they need to help them build the future for this province. Since 

the election, our government has taken several steps to 

encourage and support this innovation, including implementing 

the most aggressive graduate retention program in Canada, the 

largest single-year income tax cut in Saskatchewan‟s history, 

and reducing the education property tax burden on business as 

well as residents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like all members to join me in 

congratulating all the winners and nominees from last night‟s 

event, and may we continue to encourage our young 

entrepreneurs. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



March 26, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2567 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Effect of Budget on Education 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party promised in 

the last election that they would, I quote, “. . . work with school 

boards and consult with Saskatchewan people . . .” to ensure 

that K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] education is properly 

funded. But it‟s clear that the Sask Party didn‟t consult with 

school boards before taking away their historic access to the 

property tax base. This minister shamefully legislates first and 

consults later. 

 

To the minister: why were school boards taken by surprise? 

Why are secrecy and spin more important to the Sask Party than 

transparency and due process? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, as I‟ve indicated in this 

Assembly before, and I‟ve indicated it to boards of education 

when I‟ve been at their various meetings, there‟s been a 

consultation procedure in this province for decades. 

 

The grant system that was introduced in 1974 is now 35 years 

old. I‟m hearing from boards of education that it does not meet 

the current needs. There was a consultation procedure that was 

developed by the member from Rosetown as he went across the 

province to ensure that there was input into his report. There 

was opportunity for all boards. The member made it clear that 

any board member, any individual board member, any board 

that wanted to meet with him, he made himself available, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if the member opposite does not think that 

that is consultation . . . I know what he‟s asking, Mr. Speaker. 

He‟s asking that to ensure that the plan that would be put 

forward had to have unanimous support of 1 million people in 

the province. That‟s the procedure that the NDP [New 

Democratic Party] followed and they did nothing for 35 years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I think that that member 

right there, that minister can explain this to the school boards at 

their spring assembly that starts here today. He has some 

explaining to do there. This minister can spin this any way he 

wants, but boards made it clear in meetings with that member 

and that minister that they expected and had importance for 

continued access to the property tax base. No one on that side of 

the House, not the minister or anyone else, gave any indication 

that school boards would lose the financial flexibility to respond 

to local needs. 

 

To the minister: why did he assure boards that their access to 

the property tax base was not on the table? Why wasn‟t that 

minister clear with the education sector? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — You know, Mr. Speaker, in the last 

Saskatchewan School Boards Association newsletter I saw a 

picture of the member standing with the members of the SSBA 

[Saskatchewan School Boards Association] and I‟m wondering 

what he told them, Mr. Speaker. I‟m wondering what he told 

them. 

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, I made it very clear at a meeting with the 

Saskatchewan School Boards Association and I said, the current 

level of funding is about 51 per cent. And we‟re going to 

change that. And maybe the goal will be 100 per cent. Now, 

Mr. Speaker, 100 per cent funding by the province of 

Saskatchewan means that the school boards don‟t have access 

to the property tax. That‟s the conclusion, Mr. Speaker. And I 

know the member has not been able to draw that conclusion, 

but I‟ll explain it to him again. 

 

If the province funds 100 per cent of school boards‟ costs, the 

taxpayer at the board level does not have any commitment to 

that. That is the explanation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, that minister can be as 

patronizing as he wants to this member, but you know what? 

He‟ll have to explain why school boards are shocked, at today‟s 

assembly. Mr. Speaker, we need to work towards common 

goals such as higher levels of literacy and academic 

achievement in our schools. We need to ensure that all students 

have equal access to opportunities. And we won‟t get there by 

treating all students or all schools the same. 

 

At this time, local boards have lost the financial flexibility to 

respond to local needs. To the minister: will he commit here 

today to funding all those important local programs with 

provincial dollars? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, over the last 

number of weeks the Minister of Finance and I have made a 

number of commitments. The first commitment that I made, I 

think about a month ago, that I would be attending the spring 

council tomorrow afternoon, here in Regina. I made that 

commitment a month ago, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So for the member to stand and say oh gee, did I know that 

there was a spring council — of course, Mr. Speaker, and I‟m 

going to be speaking to them. That‟s the first commitment. The 

second commitment, Mr. Speaker, the second commitment is 

that we have added $241 million to funding education. 

 



2568 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2009 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, members opposite in their 

last two budgets had a capital budget of 18 million and 21 

million respectively, Mr. Speaker. This government — with the 

announcement that I made yesterday of two different schools 

here in the province of Saskatchewan — indicated that our 61 

million that we‟re committing to capital this year, added to the 

141 million that we announced in our booster shot, added to 

117 million that we announced a year ago, is $320 million for 

capital infrastructure. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, Catholic schools are 

constitutionally protected under The Saskatchewan Act. The 

Saskatchewan Party‟s plan does not give Catholic school boards 

an independent ability to set mill rates since boards that levy 

higher property taxes will have their provincial grants clawed 

back. We know that there have been court . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — I can understand why this is a touchy 

subject for the members . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I just ask the member to move 

forward with his question. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — We know that there have been court 

challenges in other provinces that have made changes to this 

system. To the minister: was there an independent, third party 

analysis of the changes conducted to ensure that the 

constitutional rights of Catholic education have been honoured? 

If so, will he table it here today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the opposition asked a 

written question that says was there a Justice opinion on this 

position. The answer was yes. He knows that. He‟s already 

received that answer. Mr. Speaker, we‟ve also looked at the 

situation with Alberta because Alberta, Alberta and 

Saskatchewan are very similar, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The legislative changes that were made in Alberta versus the 

ones in Saskatchewan are different because we recognize that 

there is a constitutional right for minority boards to have access 

to the tax base. So, Mr. Speaker, to avoid court challenges, we 

have in fact placed that in legislation to ensure that the minority 

faith board has the access to the property tax base. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

Support for Westside Clinic 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There is an HIV 

[human immunodeficiency virus] crisis in the province and that 

minister has known about it since last fall when the Saskatoon 

Community Clinic submitted their proposal for funding 

expansion for west side services. 

 

Patrick Lapointe, the community clinic administrator, says, 

„“We‟re just hopeful that with this new information about the 

tremendous pressures of health that the inner city is 

experiencing around HIV-AIDS, that they [meaning the 

government] relook at their decision-making.‟” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the clinic is currently treating more than 85 

HIV-positive patients. To the minister: will he give the 

Westside Clinic the 3.5 million they need to expand their 

services? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, in last year‟s budget we increased the budget for 

the Westside Clinic by $313,000. Yes, the Westside Clinic put a 

proposal in as we get proposals in from a number of 

organizations to increase their funding, and not everyone has 

their funding increased. 

 

I find it very hypocritical however, Mr. Speaker, that that 

member opposite would be questioning our government now 

about increasing funding to the Westside Clinic when they had 

two separate proposals to increase funding, one in 1997 and one 

as recently as 2006. After meeting with all Saskatoon MLAs 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly], they were rejected by 

that former government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Dr. Stephen Helliar, a 

Saskatoon physician and front-line worker who practises at the 

Westside Clinic, says there are more HIV cases out there that 

are currently not being treated. He said, „“We‟re trying to get 

some more resources into the inner city because we‟re really 

struggling. This is really scary stuff that‟s going on out there.‟” 

 

To the minister: why is he sending the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland to Quebec to research the problem, when he has 

front-line workers right in Saskatoon inner city telling him 

what‟s happening? Why is he not listening to the front-line 

workers and providing immediate funding to the Westside 

community clinic? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we‟re very aware of the 

situation, not only in Saskatoon, but in any of our major centres, 



March 26, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2569 

with the influx of HIV or the increase of HIV. And it‟s a serious 

problem and that‟s why I have asked the ministry — through 

the chief medical officer, Dr. Moira McKinnon — to strike a 

committee to start dealing with this situation as soon as 

possible. And they will be dealing with the problem. 

 

The problem didn‟t start in the last six months or the last year. 

The problem has been there for many years. It has been 

increasing in numbers. Yes, we have to start taking steps. That‟s 

why we funded, on a permanent position now, $350,000 to go 

to a mobile bus. Many of these clients do not present in whether 

it‟s the City Hospital, St. Paul‟s Hospital, or even Westside 

Clinic but they are presenting in a mobile bus which is located 

in their community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‟re acting. There‟s more to do, but we‟re acting 

already. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, the minister likes to talk about the 

quick action he took in setting up a review process in response 

to the HIV crisis. I‟ll tell him what a quick response would be. 

He could write a cheque for the $3.5 million and have it in the 

mail to the Westside community clinic today — before question 

period‟s over. That would be a quick response. 

 

To the minister: will he commit today to providing the 3.5 

million to the Westside community clinic that they need for 

their expansion services right now? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s interesting that that 

member wants me to write a cheque at the end of question 

period. For 16 years that government didn‟t write a big enough 

cheque to the Westside Clinic. When asked for more money, 

they were flatly rejected. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we increased funding last year to the Westside 

Clinic. We put $350,000 into a primary mobile bus who . . . The 

only criticism from that side was it was run through MD 

Ambulance, Mr. Speaker. So I would ask the member opposite: 

is she in favour of the mobile bus that‟s dealing with people on 

the street, in the community, Mr. Speaker, or should we cut the 

funding on that like they cut, that they reduced funding on the 

Westside Clinic? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Selection of Auction Contractors 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the minister told us that 

using a private company to do an online auction was somehow 

better than using a government website to do an online auction. 

Mr. Speaker, the government auction process was advertised to 

newspapers across the province and has been used to sell 

literally hundreds of government vehicles. 

 

To the minister: was Hodgins auctions selected because Grant 

Hodgins is a former Devine Conservative cabinet minister and a 

friend of the Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services. 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, an RFP [request for proposal] was put out by 

Government Services asking for submissions to do some 

different things than was previously done, to do online auctions 

and to do live auctions. There was seven respondents, Mr. 

Speaker, to that RFP. There was clear criteria in place. And 

while the member from Moose Jaw may not be interested, I 

hope the other members are, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this was 

conducted as every other government service RFP is conducted, 

Mr. Speaker. It was a fair, open, and accountable process. And 

the two best submissions — Hodgins auctions from Melfort and 

Adesa auctions from Saskatoon — were awarded the pilot 

projects, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, when asked yesterday, the minister 

said, and I quote, “. . . you want to use the best people 

possible.” Mr. Speaker, the principal figure in this company is a 

Devine Conservative cabinet minister who was convicted of 

crimes against Saskatchewan people. This company has had 

trading of their shares suspended from the TSX [Toronto Stock 

Exchange] because of the actions of Grant Hodgins. 

 

To the minister: with dozens of other auction firms in 

Saskatchewan to choose from, why did he select this firm for 

his private project? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services. 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, that may have been the way that the previous 

administration, the NDP, did government projects, Mr. Speaker. 

The way we‟re doing it is an open RFP. Seven different 

companies responded to that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Government Services made the decision as to 

which companies met the criteria. They chose the two best 

companies, Mr. Speaker, one for the online auction, one for a 

live auction, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Government Services 

chose the best people for the job regardless of their political 

affiliations. Perhaps that‟s different from the NDP. 



2570 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2009 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, we have a new theme — back to 

the ‟80s. Mr. Speaker, it is clear there is only one reason why 

Grant Hodgins‟s company was chosen to run this project . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I can take away from the opposition, 

but if the government continues, we‟ll have extra questions. I 

recognize the member from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, it is clear there is only one reason 

why Grant Hodgins‟s company was chosen to run this project. 

He is a friend of the Sask Party. The member from Batoche 

worked for this company for nine years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, will the minister just admit that this was payback 

for being a Sask Party campaign donor and party insider? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services. 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I would invite the member opposite — because 

Hodgins auctions is not able to defend themselves on the floor 

of this Assembly — I would invite him to make those 

accusations outside of the floor of this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, Government Services . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Minister Responsible for Government 

Services. 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the process used for the RFP was exactly the process 

that was in place when we formed government on November 7, 

2007 — not in September 2007. Mr. Speaker, the very same 

process in fact is, it‟s the same people working in that 

department, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this was an open and accountable process with 

seven companies making submissions and the two best 

responses were chosen, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, this is the way this government 

operates. They close the tender, but they don‟t post the . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I ask the government members 

to come to order . . . Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, this is the way this government 

operates. They close the tender, but they don‟t post the results 

— which is the normal way governments conduct business. 

What were they hiding? Were they hiding giving a lucrative 

contract to a convicted Conservative cabinet minister and Sask 

Party insider? Mr. Speaker, to the minister: what were you 

hiding? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services. 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the member opposite is describing perhaps how they 

used to do things when they were in government for 16 years, 

giving the contracts to their friends, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, that‟s not how it works today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we use an open and accountable RFP process that 

was in place while they were government, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the two best . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Government 

Services. 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The two 

best companies were awarded the contracts. The member 

opposite talked about going back to the ‟80s. Mr. Speaker, 

that‟s the party that wants to go back to the 1970s, with Mr. 

Lingenfelter. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — We know that the Government of Saskatchewan 

has successfully been doing online auctions for years. Now we 

have a company run by a Sask Party insider that gets to profit 

from the sale of taxpayer-purchased vehicles. We know that Mr. 

Hodgins had trouble with the Toronto Stock Exchange. We 

know that the member for Batoche worked for this company for 

nine years. We know that Grant Hodgins and the Premier are 

friends. 

 

To the minister: will he act in the interest of Saskatchewan 

people and cancel this contract today, or will he continue with 

his political cronyism? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services. 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the accusations made by the member opposite are 

absolutely ludicrous. There were two winners, Mr. Speaker, in 

this RFP. Hodgins was one and Adesa auctioneers from 

Saskatoon was the other. To cast the aspersions, Mr. Speaker, 

that that member opposite is casting, is to cast those aspersions 

on all of the people and the companies that submitted to the 

RFP, and to the people that were selected: Adesa auctions from 

Saskatoon and the Hodgins auctions from Melfort, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is absolutely wrong. That 

may be the way they did things, but it‟s not the way we do 

things. 



March 26, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2571 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Government’s Performance 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I know the Premier likes to talk 

about keeping promises. I want to refer to the Sask Party 

platform document in which the Sask Party and the Premier 

made the following promise from the platform of the Sask 

Party: “A Saskatchewan Party Government will provide 

Saskatchewan people with more transparency and 

accountability than any other previous government . . .” 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Well today, Mr. Speaker, in this question 

period we have seen how a review of the property tax and 

education funding relationship was conducted, but not made 

public before the budget. We have discussed this morning how 

decisions were made that have neutered the duly elected school 

trustees of Saskatchewan from their ability to tax. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, would not a transparent, accountable 

government have at least shared that discussion with the duly 

elected trustees before they made it a budget announcement in 

this legislature? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the reason that the NDP only 

ever promised action on education property tax relief, and never 

actually delivered, Mr. Speaker, is perhaps, perhaps we‟re 

seeing it today, is that they maybe sought unanimity on the part 

of all partners involved in the delivery of education and the 

funding of education. The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, 

when you provide, when a government moves to provide 

sustainable and meaningful education property tax relief, Mr. 

Speaker, there are a number of stakeholders involved and some 

will be in favour of the changes and some will maybe have 

concerns. 

 

This process allowed all those stakeholders to provide input to 

this government through the member for Rosetown. This 

minister has been meeting with all the stakeholders in terms of 

the decision the government made. And most importantly, Mr. 

Speaker, is this: when it came down to a decision, a challenging 

decision, this government made it, made it in the interest of 

students and education tax payers. And we‟ll take their side 

every single time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, there will be much opportunity in 

this legislature to debate the decision. The question has to do 

with transparency and accountability. I remind the Premier 

again, he and his party promised the people of Saskatchewan 

“. . . transparency and [more] accountability than any other 

previous government . . .” 

Well they fundamentally changed the role of the school trustee 

in this province. They don‟t bother being accountable to those 

very trustees. We‟ve learned today and over the course of this 

week, they have fundamentally changed how we will dispose of 

government property, whether we take this property to a fair 

process or we give it, the property, to one of their friends to 

auction. Mr. Speaker, the question is transparency and 

accountability. 

 

They issue a news release on everything going. Why was there 

no news release issued on the question of how we‟re now going 

to dispose of government property? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I hope the member opposite, a individual for whom I have a 

high degree of respect and regard, I hope that he will talk to the 

member for Dewdney, or perhaps consider himself later this 

day, outside in the rotunda when media typically ask members 

questions, I hope he will think very carefully on the line of 

questioning that the NDP pursued today. Because they cast 

aspersions, Mr. Speaker, on companies operating in the 

province, including Adesa, the other successful bidder in the 

this very open RFP process, a process that was inherited from 

the previous administration, a process that was followed 

meticulously by the same officials that worked for them when 

they were in office. The same kind of a process that identified 

two winners — one was Hodgins; the other is Adesa. 

 

Will he apologize to Adesa because . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier may complete his response. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, apparently when they cast 

aspersions on the Hodgins auction people, they are also casting 

aspersions on Adesa, who are also successful. 

 

What are the reasons that they received a tender from the 

government, Mr. Speaker? Is it that member‟s assertion and that 

member‟s assertion that all the auction companies in the 

province are best friends of the Government of Saskatchewan? 

It wouldn‟t surprise me, Mr. Speaker. This government has 

friends all across the province. It is the people of the province, 

the businesses of the province who are enjoying a growing 

Saskatchewan for . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier‟s time has elapsed. I recognize 

the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I‟ve put together a short list — 

not an inclusive list, but a short list. This government put in 

place essential services legislation — that‟s now creating grief 

in the health care sector — without consultation of workers. 

They‟ve put together a P3 [public-private partnership] 

secretariat without informing the public. They didn‟t talk to the 

Privacy Commissioner before this ill-fated attempt to provide 

the enhanced driver‟s licence. They signed a labour mobility 

agreement in Ottawa without displaying the agreement to the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 



2572 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2009 

They will not, they will not reveal what they expect to be the 

increase in power rates for SaskPower customers. They‟ve 

outsourced services in SaskTel without telling the people of 

Saskatchewan. They have fundamentally taken away the right 

of our duly elected trustees to manage the education system. 

They refused yesterday to disclose a report on forestry. The list 

goes on and on. When will the Premier, when will this 

government keep its promise to the people of Saskatchewan for 

a more open and accountable and transparent government? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[10:45] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the premise of my hon. 

friend‟s question is simply wrong. In fact, he points to the 

national labour mobility agreement. He started negotiating that 

when he was the premier of the province, number one. Number 

two, Mr. Speaker, the P3 office that we have, they had a P3 

office in the Crown Investments Corporation — told absolutely 

nobody about. Mr. Speaker, and with respect to outsourcing, 

we‟re continuing a practice started by his government when 

they were in office over here. 

 

But here‟s some other things that should be on that member‟s 

list on the day that we will vote on the budget. What should be 

on that list, Mr. Speaker, are the 100 campaign promises we‟ve 

already kept in 16 months. What should be on that member‟s 

list, Mr. Speaker, are historic income tax cuts last fall that 

dropped 80,000 Saskatchewan people from the rolls. What 

should be on that list is historic property tax relief for the 

province, a reduction in the debt by 40 per cent in our first year. 

And what should be at the top of his list today, Mr. Speaker, 

15,000 new residents in the province of Saskatchewan — a 

growing population in Canada‟s hottest economy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Expanded Coverage for Cancer Drugs 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, fellow members of the Assembly, I am very pleased to 

call your attention to more good news regarding cancer 

treatment in Saskatchewan. The Saskatchewan Cancer Agency 

has proved the coverage of aromatase inhibitor for 

post-menopausal women who have early stages of breast 

cancer. Aromatase inhibitor includes three drugs that are 

capable of slowing or stopping the growth of cancer cells. They 

significantly decrease the chances of a reoccurrence of breast 

cancer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency already covers 

the use of these drugs for advanced breast cancer, but now will 

fully cover them for early stages of breast cancer as well. 

 

This expansion of coverage for cancer drugs supports our 

government‟s commitment to improving cancer care for 

Saskatchewan people. It will help to ensure that 

post-menopausal women have another viable treatment option 

in their battle against breast cancer and a better chance of 

avoiding reoccurrence. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan already has one of the most 

comprehensive drug coverage plans in Canada for cancer 

patients. We will continue to build on that reputation. The 

2009-2010 provincial budget provides the agency with $42.4 

million for cancer drugs alone, an increase of 19 per cent or 

$6.7 million. We will continue to provide the necessary 

resources to ensure that cancer patients receive the high-quality 

care they need and deserve. 

 

I am pleased that the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency is actively 

identifying and championing new cancer treatments that offer 

patients a better quality of life and a better chance of survival. I 

congratulate the agency and its many dedicated staff for their 

efforts in meeting the needs of their patients and providing the 

best cancer care in Canada. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And thank you to the 

minister for providing me a copy of his announcement. I am, 

too, pleased to hear that the post-menopausal women will have 

— in early-stage breast cancer — will have more options for 

complete recovery with the addition of aromatase inhibitors. 

 

I too congratulate the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency and its 

staff for its dedication and care to all people in Saskatchewan 

who have cancer. And we welcome this addition for more 

options for post-menopausal women in their struggle with 

breast cancer. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Gantefoer that the Assembly approves 

in general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 

proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. Van 

Mulligen.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I ask you 

just to bear with me because I do have somewhat of a cold 

today. But before I make my comments regarding the budget, 

Mr. Speaker, there are some acknowledgements I would like to 

make. 

 



March 26, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2573 

First of all, I‟d like to thank my family — my son Terry and his 

wife Marnell, my daughter Trisha and her partner Terry, and 

also my five grandchildren, Beau, Brooke, Bailee, Shelby, and 

Tristan, and in fact my entire family, Mr. Speaker — for the 

love and support that they have shown me. 

 

To the people of the Estevan constituency, I thank them for the 

honour of representing them. And to my constituency assistant, 

Rosalie Story, and my casual assistant, Donita Bjorndalen, for 

their dedication and loyalty. And also, Mr. Speaker, to my 

colleagues, who during this past year have filled in for me and 

attended meetings, I say thank you to you all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do want to specifically mention one of my 

colleagues. That is my colleague and my friend, the member 

from Weyburn-Big Muddy. Mr. Speaker, as that member stated 

in his speech when he replied to the budget, the town of 

Radville will be getting a new health care facility to replace the 

aging Marian health care centre. And, Mr. Speaker, I did lobby 

for that facility but I cannot take full credit for it. I must share 

that with the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy, as he lobbied 

right alongside with me; and when I couldn‟t be there, he was. 

So thank you to him. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased today to speak in favour of this 

budget. As members know, Mr. Speaker, this budget is a 

balanced budget, a surplus budget. And it follows the historical 

initiatives announced last fall, namely raising the basic personal 

tax exemption, putting one and one-half billion dollars into 

infrastructure, and paying down the debt. Since this government 

has been in power, Mr. Speaker, the debt of this province has 

been reduced by 40 per cent. That‟s 40 per cent in 16 months. 

 

This budget represents the largest education property tax cut in 

a single year in this province‟s history, something that has been 

talked about for years, yet nothing was ever done. In fact the 

members opposite, their idol Tommy spoke about the unfairness 

of that education property tax. And when the members opposite 

sat on the government benches, they talked about it. 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, it was just talk. They 

commissioned the Boughen report, then they cherry-picked. 

They raised the PST by one point but failed to institute the 

reduction of the education portion of property tax. They said 

once school district amalgamations took place, they would be 

able to do something. Well again it never happened. 

 

I remember, Mr. Speaker, in 2004 when RM [rural 

municipality] councillors and farmers came to the legislature 

protesting the treatment they received from their government. I 

will refresh memories on the above issues, and I‟m taking this 

from Hansard, Mr. Speaker, June 10, 2004. And it was during 

oral questions when the then leader of the opposition, the 

member from Swift Current, was questioning the then premier. 

And I will quote: 

 

Mr. Speaker, so they came here . . . from the government. 

What did they get . . . for their trip? Well they got stood up 

by the Premier, who didn‟t bother to meet with them. And 

then, Mr. Speaker, they were threatened by the minister of 

Municipal Government, who told them, keep it up, he 

said; keep it up, and the Premier isn‟t going to continue to 

talk to you about this issue any more. That‟s what that 

minister said to those people who came to this Legislative 

Assembly and talk about this property tax issue. He said, 

keep it up. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, in response the then premier, the member 

from Riversdale said: 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of Government 

Relations has already — both to the executive of SARM 

and to the public through the press — made apologies for 

some unfortunate comment that may have been made on 

the platform this morning. 

 

And I remind people, Mr. Speaker, that that minister of 

Government Relations is today the member from The 

Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Speaker, also regarding the property tax issue is another 

quote from that same day. It happened during question period. 

And this is taken from Hansard, June 10, 2004. And it was 

when the then leader of the opposition was questioning the then 

premier, and the following is a quote from the leader of the 

opposition at that time: 

 

The Premier didn‟t promise in the campaign to eventually 

get around to providing relief in rural and urban 

Saskatchewan on this issue. He made direct promises. I 

ask him again to stand in the Assembly and explain, why 

is he not keeping those promises? 

 

And the then premier, the member from Riversdale, said, and I 

quote, “Mr. Speaker, we are going to address this issue over the 

course of this mandate — mark my words.” And, Mr. Speaker, 

that was from June 10, 2004. So we just know how, you know, 

how we could take him at his word and how trustworthy he was 

in regards to that situation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there was a lot of, a lot of response to the member 

from North Battleford‟s comments. And Murray Mandryk did 

an editorial on that issue, and I‟m going to quote. It‟s from the 

Leader-Post, June 11, 2004. And here is a quote from Murray 

Mandryk‟s column: 

 

Frankly, Taylor‟s nasty shot at the SARM crowd was 

nothing short of bizarre. He was not really even being 

heckled (although perhaps there was a bit of chuckling at 

the condescending nature of his speech that spewed 

rhetoric about how fervently he believes in the right of 

democratic protest) when he, himself, raised the issue of 

the crowd not believing that the NDP was making good on 

its property tax promise. This was perhaps the politest 

protest crowd that the steps of the legislature has seen in 

years. 

 

Given the absolute contempt this NDP government has 

demonstrated for this rural Saskatchewan issue for the past 

couple of days, it‟s really hard to take Taylor or the 

government seriously. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just a reminder also that the platform of the NDP 

in the 2007 election completely left agricultural land exempt 

from any tax exemption in the property avenue. And that‟s their 

legacy when it comes to rural Saskatchewan. 

 



2574 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2009 

Mr. Speaker, last year after the budget, the member from 

Regina Douglas Park moved an amendment to the budget and 

basically . . . Well he was condemning the government for 

stockpiling a $1.3 billion surplus without addressing the most 

pressing needs of the Saskatchewan people, and in particular 

property tax relief, skills training, the environment, and the 

ongoing housing crisis. 

 

And in fact the NDP caucus office put out a press release, and 

of course the Finance critic he, you know, went on about some 

tourist T-shirts. My dad went to Florida and all I got was this 

lousy T-shirt. And you know, perhaps Saskatchewan taxpayers 

need a T-shirt that says, my Finance minister has an extra $1.3 

billion in the bank, and all I got was a measly $22 in property 

tax relief. 

 

And you know, in their amendment they made some changes 

about doubling the property tax relief and double new training 

seats so that the economy can fire on all cylinders and to get 

young people off waiting lists and into the classroom and to 

make an additional $20 million investment into affordable 

housing initiatives and invest more in green initiatives to help 

Saskatchewan meet its climate change targets. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would just like to say that I am proud that 

those changes that the member mentioned at that time have all 

been accomplished. And I find it very interesting, Mr. Speaker, 

that last year they amended the motion because they said we 

didn‟t spend enough. Now they‟re amending the motion 

because they claim we spend too much. And every day they 

petition that they want us to spend more, so you know, I really 

don‟t know what‟s going on over there, but just go figure. I 

don‟t think they know either. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I am proud to be part of this government, and 

I congratulate the Minister of Finance and all my colleagues in 

cabinet for this budget and the awesome job they have done on 

it, also to the Minister of Education and the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose for their tireless work on the property tax 

issue. 

 

You know, my other colleagues have talked about the other 

important parts of this budget: the $200 million over two years 

for the new children‟s hospital in Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, this 

is welcome news as I believe Saskatchewan and Prince Edward 

Island are the only provinces without a children‟s hospital. And 

as my colleague, the member from Yorkton said, you know, 

when you have family going through difficulties and you can 

get the care they need right in this province, no one knows how 

much that means to you until you live through it. 

 

Other highlights, Mr. Speaker, the $108.1 million in additional 

funding for the farm income stabilization program and $25.2 

million in additional funding for crop insurance. And, you 

know, no matter where I go in my constituency, people are 

telling how wonderful it is to have an Agriculture minister that 

truly understands that file. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[11:00] 

 

Ms. Eagles: — You know, for 16 years, we had a government 

that . . . Well I mean, where are their Agriculture ministers? 

They were dumped quite quickly in the next election. And, you 

know, Saskatchewan always had a leadership role when it came 

to designing agriculture programs, and it‟s time that we were 

sitting at the table when these programs are being designed 

again, Mr. Speaker. And I‟m very proud and so are my 

constituents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as well the investments in education, skills 

training, and safer communities, long overdue — 16 years of 

neglect by the members opposite. And, you know, I can‟t help 

but notice how they get up in question period and kind of with a 

righteous attitude. And you would almost swear that they were 

all new members over there and, you know, developed amnesia 

or something because they don‟t even know what their own 

history is. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the new municipal operating grants program that 

is going to replace the former revenue-sharing program has 

been welcomed by municipalities across this province. Ninety 

per cent of one point of PST [provincial sales tax] in ‟09-10 and 

in 2010 and ‟11, and subsequent years, the equivalent of 100 

per cent of one point of PST will be provided. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if I may, in the March 20 edition of 

Lifestyles newspaper — it‟s a little, local paper that is out of 

Estevan — I would just like to read the following article. Its 

headline, “St. Onge excited with new formula.” And I will just 

quote parts of that: 

 

Estevan Mayor Gary St. Onge is lauding a new system that 

distributes revenues from the provincial government to 

Saskatchewan‟s municipalities. 

 

 “It‟s great because it‟s tied with the PST,” said St. Onge. 

“As more things are sold . . . we get more money. That‟s 

what we‟ve been looking for all along, so as far as I‟m 

concerned, it‟s a great day in that regard . . .” 

 

St. Onge was also pleased that the provincial government 

has moved to reduce the education portion of property tax, 

calling it a “great step.” 

 

So that‟s been echoed by, I think, pretty well every municipal 

leader across this province, Mr. Speaker. I‟ve heard the mayor; 

I‟ve just, you know, heard so many positive remarks regarding 

that specific, that specific part of the budget. 

 

And in general, it doesn‟t matter where I go. People are just 

commenting on it. They‟re leaving text messages on my phone. 

The other day in my apartment, in the elevator, an older 

gentleman came up to me and just said what a terrific job this 

government was doing and asked me to extend my 

congratulations to my colleagues on his behalf. 

 

So it was a great day for Saskatchewan, and it continues to be a 

great day for Saskatchewan, without the doom and gloom from 

the other side of the House, Mr. Speaker, and just optimism. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I know there‟s a few more speakers to 

follow me, but before I take my place, I have to clarify 

something that was stated, I believe it was yesterday or the day 

before. It was when the member from Saskatoon Eastview was 



March 26, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2575 

up speaking, and she was praising the NDP for building St. 

Joseph‟s Hospital in Estevan. And, Mr. Speaker, nothing could 

be further from the truth. 

 

The grand opening of that hospital was November 21, 1991. 

The NDP assumed power on October 21, 1991 so if that was 

their initiative, that‟s the fastest they‟ve ever moved on 

anything good in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Eagles: — That was done by the former administration. So 

that member should get her facts straight before she gets up and 

say anything about that. But you know, it‟s ironic that they do 

like to take credit for things that other administrations have 

done. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I will in closing say that I am so proud to 

support the budget that the Minister of Finance presented the 

other day. And I will not support the amendment. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Humboldt. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just want to 

echo my colleague who just took her seat, that I too am proud to 

be part of the government that delivered an exciting, an 

innovative and a growth agenda balanced budget at a time of 

economic uncertainty, globally and across our nation. I‟m 

extremely proud of my colleagues and our government, of our 

leader. I‟m proud to be part of the Treasury Board that helped 

write the budget. I am very, very, very proud of my colleague, 

the Finance minister, who kept us all on the Treasury Board 

strong and steady. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my colleagues have already before me talked at 

length about what we‟ve accomplished in 16 months. We have 

the largest debt reduction that this province has ever seen of 40 

per cent. We have the largest personal tax cuts, removing 

80,000 people from the tax roll, the largest low-income tax 

credits, which is, those two combined, Mr. Speaker, are a direct 

attack of poverty in our province; to help reduce poverty. 

 

It‟s very interesting that the member from Nutana had stood at 

one point in the question period and referenced page no. 55 in 

the budget document, and I too want to reference that page. She 

suggested that a single individual who lives in Saskatoon would 

be paying more. What she didn‟t want to clarify and she didn‟t 

want the public to know was, the increase in Saskatoon that 

would create a higher cost for the individual in Saskatoon was 

housing. Housing, Mr. Speaker, is not government controlled. 

We do not own all the houses. We do not control the housing 

market. It was a sign of a growing housing market within 

Saskatoon. 

 

What she didn‟t want to tell the public was that the provincial 

income tax that that individual would be paying — from the 

time that the NDP were in government to the time that the Sask 

Party have formed government — was just about $500 less. The 

personal income tax for that individual went significantly down. 

But the member from Nutana didn‟t want to mention that. 

 

What the government has been able to control, Mr. Speaker, we 

have reduced, putting more money in individuals‟ pockets. 

 

My colleagues have also spent some time, they‟ve talked in 

length about the largest ever education property tax cut within a 

balanced budget. We‟ve talked about the largest ever revenue 

sharing with municipalities within a balanced budget. We‟ve 

talked about the largest ever highways budget within a balanced 

budget, the largest ever agriculture budget within a balanced 

budget, and the largest ever investment in infrastructure within 

a balanced budget. 

 

But I would like to talk further . . . is the social programs that 

we have within this budget. We have a Finance critic that has 

said we spend too much. Well I‟m interested, in all those 

members, what would they like cut within the over $100 million 

increase that is in the Social Services budget? What program 

would they like cut out of the Social Services budget if we are 

spending too much money? 

 

We‟re continuing our commitment to the Saskatchewan 

employment supplement, which is an increased amount that 

they‟ll receive, as well as we increased the income threshold for 

those that qualify. 

 

Again, the member from Nutana wanted to mention how hard 

done by single parents were, and we agree and recognize that. It 

is very difficult as a single parent. Well, Mr. Speaker, 70 per 

cent of the clients who received the Saskatchewan employment 

supplement, that we increased, are single parents. We recognize 

that they are struggling and we stepped up to the plate to help 

them out. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about shelter rates. We increased 

shelter rates so that they are now 70 per cent of the average 

market in any given community, along with rental supplements 

which are 30 per cent of the average market, which means that 

an individual and a family that is struggling will receive 100 per 

cent of the average cost of shelter within the community that 

they live in. 

 

But we didn‟t stop there, Mr. Speaker. What we did was we 

said we would index it and we would visit it every six months. 

So what have low-income families and individuals seen within 

this province? Well they have seen two very significant 

increases to the shelter rates in a very short period of time. 

What did the NDP do? Well they ignored shelter rates for 12 

consecutive years. They did absolutely nothing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let‟s talk about the disability funding that we 

announced and that is contained in this budget. The NDP talked 

a lot. They talked an awful lot about how they addressed needs 

for the most vulnerable within our society. The problem is they 

didn‟t put a lot of money or action behind their words. They had 

a lot of strategies. They had a lot of plans. They had a lot of 

ideas, but ideas die at the kitchen table if you put no action 

behind them. And the NDP allowed the waiting list for 

individuals with disabilities to grow to 440 individuals, which is 

totally unacceptable. This government recognized that when we 

put the largest increase into supports, both for living and for 

programming, for individuals with disabilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let‟s talk for a minute about CBOs and the 



2576 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2009 

hypocrisy of the NDP, and in particular the hypocrisy of the 

critic of Social Services. He stands in his seat, reads petition 

after petition of how appalling it is that CBOs have fallen 

behind in being able to pay high wages, and we agreed. But 

why did they fall behind, Mr. Speaker? Who was it that 

neglected them year over year over year over year? And he 

should stand in his place and say that it was him. While he sat at 

the cabinet table, he did not address this issue. 

 

In the last four years the NDP were government, added together 

— not just the last year but the four years added together — the 

increase that CBOs received was 8 per cent. In 16 short months, 

this government increased CBO funding 12.3 per cent — 16 

months, 12.3 per cent. The NDP in four years only increased it 

8 per cent. Who allowed the wages to go behind other sectors? 

It was the NDP, and they should stand in their place and admit 

to it. 

 

Let‟s talk about the seniors‟ income plan for a minute, Mr. 

Speaker. We have the seniors that had absolutely no increase 

for 16 years. They were ignored. And what did the 

Saskatchewan Party government did ? Well we increased the 

seniors‟ income plan by 110 per cent. Now we have the 

member opposite who said, but you didn‟t index it. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, if we would have done the calculation with indexing 

of each of the 16 years that they absolutely ignored seniors, 

they would have received a 40 per cent increase. We decided 

that was not enough and we increased the income plan for 

seniors by 110 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would love to know, of any of those programs 

that I just listed, which ones would the Finance critic like cut? If 

we‟re spending too much, which would he like cut? Student 

housing perhaps? Student housing has been absolutely ignored 

over all the entire time of the NDP government, and we 

committed $15 million for student housing alone. It was 

absolutely ignored. 

 

So the critic for Social Services is saying that‟s not true. So, 

well how many student housing units did his government build? 

And I will love to have the answer to that. How many student 

housing units at the U of S [University of Saskatchewan] did 

the NDP build while they were in government? He has a lot to 

say from his chair, and I‟d love to hear his answers. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, what I do want to point out is all of the 

initiatives that we have in this particular budget that have to do 

with caring for children. Brynn Boback-Lane, the president and 

CEO of the Children‟s Health & Hospital Foundation, said it 

very, very well. She said, and I quote: 

 

Really today is about and dedicated to the children that 

have been challenged and lost and the children that are 

challenged and winning their fight with illness and injury. 

This day is for them. 

 

Now she of course is talking about the children‟s hospital, again 

something the NDP would like to take credit for. But words and 

announcements are meaningless if you‟re not going to put 

action behind them. And this government decided to put action 

and dollars to make this dream a reality — something sadly 

neglected in our province. 

 

But the initiatives that we have for the children within our 

province go beyond the children‟s hospital, as important as it is. 

Within education, we are seeing the largest capital spending for 

the schools within this province that this province has ever seen. 

Finally, we‟re going to have schools built. Finally, we‟re going 

to have schools repaired. And we‟re going to have leaks fixed. 

And we‟re going to have a lot of work done for the schools 

across our province for our children. What else is in education 

for our children? 

 

[11:15] 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, a 27.7 per cent increase for early learning 

and child care. You know what that increase includes, Mr. 

Speaker? Well, it includes increases for early childhood 

development; it includes increases for early childhood 

education; includes increases for KidsFirst programs; and, Mr. 

Speaker, it includes increases for child care spaces by a 

thousand. 

 

So you know, when the NDP were in government, we were 

sitting at 990 spaces. Let‟s compare that for a minute of how 

sadly they neglected that file. Manitoba has 28,000 spaces. 

Alberta has 78,000 spaces. Where was Saskatchewan under the 

NDP? Well we‟re at 990. 

 

It‟s as unacceptable as the waiting list for disabilities. Have we 

been able to increase it to those levels in one year? No we 

haven‟t, Mr. Speaker, but we‟re working very hard. So at the 

end of this budget, we‟ll have 11,400 spaces thanks to the 

Education minister. 

 

Mr. Speaker, child and family services division falls within my 

ministry. And I am very proud to say, from taking government, 

we have increased the funding for child and family services 

within our province by 40 per cent — 40 per cent for the 

children in our province. We have committed to an electronic 

case-management system for the children in our province, 

something that was promised time and time again. I have quotes 

from Ms. Crofford. I hope the members remember when she 

was the Social Services minister, where she said, we‟re going to 

do it. It‟s done. It‟s done. But they never kept the promise. 

 

This is the only province in all of Canada that is managing the 

children in our province — the most vulnerable, the most 

important source in our province — in a paper system. I can‟t 

even imagine the frustration of trying to deal with paper files 

when we‟re dealing with our children. 

 

This year we have a number of initiatives to again increase our 

child welfare system. We have 9.2 million in new capital 

funding for capacity spaces. We‟re going to dedicate 15.7 

million to support child welfare programs. We‟re going to give 

a 3 per cent increase in child rates provided to foster families 

and extended family caregivers. And we also have an array of 

recruitment and retention initiatives to provide better and safer 

capacity for the kids within our province. 

 

So with that and with the time considered, Mr. Speaker, I would 

just have this one question. The NDP have said numerous times 

that we‟re spending way too much money — fair enough. What 

do they want cut? Should we cut all of those programs that we 

have expanded for low-income families? Should we cut what 



March 26, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2577 

we‟ve done for seniors, a sector in our society totally ignored 

under the NDP? How about the individuals with disabilities, 

Mr. Speaker? Should we cut that? Should we just let the waiting 

list go on and on and on, and never bother to give them the 

support or the dignity that they deserve in our province? 

 

Better yet, student housing. Let‟s just cut the student housing. I 

mean really, they want something cut. Is that what they want to 

cut? Mr. Speaker, what about the children? All of the programs 

for children that we‟ve expanded — 40 per cent increase since 

the NDP were in government — do they want that cut? I would 

love for them to answer that question. Because I have no doubt 

they will stand in this House and they will vote against a budget 

because we‟re spending too much money, according to their 

amendment. 

 

I want them to tell us all today: what do you want cut? Mr. 

Speaker, I will not be supporting the amendment, but I will be 

supporting the main motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. It is my pleasure to be able to enter into the debate on 

what is the second budget of the Sask Party government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to begin with a short quote from the 

editorial of the Saskatoon StarPhoenix, an editorial that was 

written the day after the provincial budget. And I think, Mr. 

Speaker, it is a quote that even the most partisan of Sask Party 

members opposite, it is a quote they would have to agree with. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the day after the budget the editors of the 

Saskatoon StarPhoenix said, and I quote, “This is the second 

budget of one of the luckiest new governments anywhere.” One 

of the luckiest new governments anywhere. Now, Mr. Speaker, 

the new might be a bit debatable, but surely the lucky is not. 

 

Upon coming into office, this government inherited the largest 

budgetary surplus of any new government in the history of 

Saskatchewan. This government inherited a stronger economy 

than any other new government has ever inherited. This 

government inherited a growing population. This government 

inherited a fiscal and taxation framework that encouraged 

growth. This government inherited a diversified economy and a 

host of solid social programs. 

 

Then, Mr. Speaker, they came into the extra good fortune of 

skyrocketing resource prices that have fuelled the coffers of our 

province to record levels. Surely even the most partisan of 

members opposite, Mr. Speaker, cannot deny this. This is one 

of the luckiest new governments anywhere. 

 

Now you know, Mr. Speaker, on the day of the budget, I was 

asked by one of the journalists if I had budget envy. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, maybe the answer is, just a little. I have sometimes 

wondered what we might have done in government in 1991 or 

in 2001 or, for that matter, this year had we enjoyed the good 

fortunes and good luck that this government has enjoyed. And 

you know, Mr. Speaker, perhaps some of the things we might 

have done are some of the very things that we‟re debating in 

this budget. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, envy is short-lived because the good fortune 

of this government, the good fortune that this government has 

received, is good fortune for the whole people of Saskatchewan. 

It is good fortune for a people who deserve that good fortune. 

And it is a good fortune that we worked hard to achieve. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the test of government is not whether you win 

good fortune or experience bad fortune but how you manage the 

fortunes that you are handed. And that will be the test of this 

government — how will they manage the fortunes they‟ve been 

handed? And every budget, Mr. Speaker, every budget stands 

alone as a test of the management of the good fortune. 

 

Now I‟ve concluded, Mr. Speaker, after having watched 

budgets come and go in this legislature for 20 and more years, 

that the only real difference between a provincial budget and a 

household budget — or for that matter, the budget of a small 

business or farm, the budget of a church or a college — the only 

real difference is in the number of zeros attached behind the 

numbers. The fundamentals of budgeting are the same, whether 

we deal in hundreds and thousands of dollars or whether we 

deal in millions and billions of dollars. 

 

And the fundamentals are pretty simple. A budget is a future 

plan. It is a projection. It is a projection of future expenditures, 

a projection of future revenues — trying to make the two 

balance — all toward achieving certain goals. With the task of 

setting future expenditures, comes the challenge of setting 

priorities, of determining what it is that is desired and what can 

and cannot be achieved. 

 

In the projection of revenues, the best of our judgement must be 

applied since the entire house of expenditure rests on the 

foundation of the revenues. And the best house is only as good 

as the foundation upon which it stands. If there are any cracks 

in the foundation, the entire house of expenditures is apt to 

come apart. So on these fundamentals, Mr. Speaker, let us 

objectively analyze this second budget of the luckiest new 

government anywhere. 

 

On the expenditure side, this budget is very, very generous, Mr. 

Speaker. In this budget alone, expenditures are rising at over 12 

per cent. A similar increase in spending last budget, last year, 

means an almost 24 per cent increase in spending in just two 

years. And parenthetically, Mr. Speaker, as I read the budget, I 

note there is only an increase of about 3 per cent for health 

spending this year in this budget, which is just about inflation. 

 

And I do not see, Mr. Speaker, within this budget, provision for 

contract negotiations, those being the largest operational 

expenses of government. And so there is some chance, Mr. 

Speaker, that demands will cause the 12 per cent lift in 

spending to have to grow to an even higher level, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now a 12 per cent increase or higher, a 24 per cent increase in 

two years, Mr. Speaker, is simply not sustainable. It‟s not 

sustainable for even the luckiest new government anywhere. 

The Premier has recognized this. The Premier has said very 

publicly that something is going to have to give. 

 

Well the question then for Saskatchewan taxpayers becomes 



2578 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2009 

twofold. Does this government have the political will or the 

courage to reign in their own spending? Only time will tell, Mr. 

Speaker; only time will tell. And if as the Premier says, 

something is going to have to give, Mr. Speaker, what is it that 

will give? Well, Mr. Speaker, it won‟t be the tax cuts. They 

won‟t give. More likely, Mr. Speaker, if something has to give, 

it will be programs for people. Only time will tell. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, one thing is certain. The generosity of this 

budget cannot be sustained. What is uncertain is how this 

government — who has yet really to have to make a hard 

decision — how will they get us out of the cycle of spending 

they have now created. But even, Mr. Speaker, within their 

current generosity, they have had to make choices. And they 

have clearly given priority to their own promises, and other 

things have been left aside. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the most damning review of this budget has not 

come from Her Majesty‟s Loyal Opposition. The most damning 

review of this budget has not come from the media. The most 

damning review of this budget has come from the First Nations 

and Métis peoples of Saskatchewan. They have said they‟ve 

been left out. They have said they sense they have been 

betrayed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I remember, I remember well being at a table in 

Kelowna, BC [British Columbia] with the Aboriginal leadership 

from Saskatchewan, with Aboriginal leadership from right 

across Canada, with the premiers of every province and 

territory, and the Prime Minister of Canada. And at that table, 

Mr. Speaker, we agreed and signed — each of us — what 

became known as the Kelowna accord, an agreement that would 

have provided substantial, substantial resources to the health 

and education of Aboriginal people across Canada, substantial 

resources to Aboriginal peoples in our own province. 

 

It was an historic moment. It was a once-in-a-decade‟s 

opportunity. And those of us — some of us at least — who sat 

at that table were extremely disappointed when Prime Minister 

Stephen Harper and the Conservative government in Ottawa 

tore up the Kelowna accord and have not, and have not replaced 

it with any substantive action. It was a once-in-a-decade 

opportunity, perhaps once in a century, and it is lost. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will argue with our First Nations and Métis 

leadership in this province that this government had a 

once-in-a-decade‟s — if not once-in-a-century — opportunity, 

with the resources available to them, to take a dramatic and 

substantive step in dealing with the issues facing our First 

Nations and Métis peoples in this province. 

 

They chose different priorities. They chose the priorities of their 

promises — fair enough.  

 

They chose essentially to do a major shift of property tax. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, while this property tax change will be welcomed 

in many, many quarters in our province . . . In fact virtually all 

of we middle-income — outside the city of Saskatoon, that is 

— will see substantive property tax decreases. But the fact of 

the matter is, Mr. Speaker, a property tax cut is not going to 

help the First Nation family on-reserve. A property tax cut is 

not going to solve the circle of addiction that goes on in the 

rental houses in my own constituency of Riversdale. A property 

tax cut is not going to provide a home, a fixed address, for a 

child in our province who has no fixed address. 

 

[11:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, on the expenditure side of this budget, even with 

this generosity, I believe government has missed a once, 

perhaps in a century, opportunity. And I fear, Mr. Speaker, I 

fear that their generosity may not meet the single most pressing 

social challenge for the province of Saskatchewan. And I 

equally fear, Mr. Speaker, that this spending on their priorities 

they may not now have the capacity to stop. It is not 

sustainable, Mr. Speaker. It is not sustainable. And I fear that 

this government, politically, may not have the capacity now to 

stop. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, this may be a budget where the house of 

expenditure looks quite attractive, but can we afford it in the 

long run? And secondly, Mr. Speaker, this house of 

expenditure, as attractive as it may look, is it built on a solid 

foundation? Which takes us, Mr. Speaker, to the revenue side of 

this budget. 

 

Now everyone is aware — and I note the Minister of Finance is 

travelling about the province defensing this — everyone is 

aware that 20 per cent of the revenues of this budget are based 

on potash. One-fifth of our entire budget is now based on one 

resource commodity. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, despite what government is saying, the 

verdict is still out. The verdict is still out on the Asian markets, 

Mr. Speaker. The verdict is still out among independent 

analysis about the price of potash. The verdict is still out, but 

we have a budget predicated, predicated on an assumption that 

20 per cent of our revenues will now come from that one 

resource in a volatile, a volatile international market. 

 

Mr. Speaker, everyone is well aware — who will have paid 

attention to debates in this House — that the prediction of the 

Sask Party government for the Saskatchewan economy in the 

current budget year exceeds 2 per cent. Larger than 2 per cent, 

Mr. Speaker — that is three times, three times the projections 

being made to the private sector. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we should only hope that the government is 

right, but the fact of the matter is there are troubling signs. We 

may, Mr. Speaker, yet be ahead of the pack in terms of 

Canadian provinces or jurisdictions but, Mr. Speaker, the 

SaskJobs website today is posting only half the number of jobs 

that were posted when government changed in this province a 

year and a half ago — half. 

 

We hear concerns now being raised, as recently as yesterday, 

from the Canadian Federation of Independent Business in our 

province who provide all members, I believe, with the statistics 

which point to the fact that where a year ago we were leading, 

our small-business community was leading the nation in its 

optimism. Well now we‟ve slipped to third. We hear our 

small-business community talking about the increase in product 

costs, increase in energy costs. Mr. Speaker, these are coming 

from our own small-business people. 

 

Surely we are all aware in this House of those who have been 



March 26, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2579 

laid off from their jobs in our economy, our economy as strong 

as it is. We are aware of those who are being laid off in the 

potash industry, in the oil patch, Mr. Speaker; very quiet in the 

oil patch. We hear steelworkers being laid off. We hear of the 

uranium, people working in the uranium industry being laid off. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is not some kind of doom and gloom, this is 

simply reality. And yet we have a government that is saying, the 

private sector‟s wrong, don‟t believe what you‟re reading and 

seeing, trust us that this economy is going to grow more than 

two and a half per cent. Well, Mr. Speaker, I just want to say 

this: I hope they‟re right. I hope for the people of Saskatchewan 

and this great province, I hope they‟re right. Mr. Speaker, my 

point is this: if the foundation for a house of expenditure is 

shaky, the entire budget is shaky. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this will be the last budget I debate in this House. 

And that causes me, Mr. Speaker, before I take my place, to 

reminisce on the first budget that I debated in this House. 1986, 

Mr. Speaker, and there are some parallels. That too was a 

budget with a high degree of generosity and expenditure. That 

too was a budget that was very optimistic in its assumptions. 

 

And I think we all know that when the books were closed on 

that 1986 budget, we found ourselves $1.2 billion in debt, in 

deficit on that budget alone, Mr. Speaker. And I believe a fair 

and objective reading of history will show that that was the 

budget that began to trigger the real fiscal collapse of the 

government in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the test of a government, the test of a government 

is how you manage the fortunes you are provided, whether 

those fortunes be bad or whether those fortunes be good. Mr. 

Speaker, this is the luckiest new government anywhere. They 

have been provided a good fortune that we do not envy or 

resent because it is good fortune for the people of 

Saskatchewan. How they manage this good fortune, Mr. 

Speaker, will be the test. 

 

History, history causes me to fear the ability of this 

Saskatchewan Party, springing as it does from the Conservative 

Party in this province. I fear their ability to manage their own 

expenditures. I fear their ability to accurately — and small “c” 

conservatively — estimate their revenues because I‟ve seen this 

movie before, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Again, I hope I‟m wrong. I hope for the people of 

Saskatchewan, they‟re right. Time will tell, Mr. Speaker, only 

time will tell. 

 

But I can predict this today, Mr. Speaker. I can predict this. The 

day will come — perhaps sooner rather than later — where the 

people of Saskatchewan will again turn to the New Democratic 

Party for the New Democratic Party to clean up, rebuild one 

more time. And I tell you what, Mr. Speaker, when that day 

comes — and it‟s likely will be in 2011 — the New Democratic 

Party will be ready for the challenge. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I will be voting for the 

amendment. I will not be voting for the budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well thank you 

very much, Mr. Speaker. I know I‟ll have plenty of opportunity 

to be able to pass on some comments of tribute to the previous 

speaker, to the hon. member for Riversdale and the former 

premier of the province. But as he highlighted, this day is 

occasioned by his last entry into a budget debate. 

 

And I think it should be noted by this House and by all 

members of this Assembly that the former premier has 

contributed obviously in significant ways to the province of 

Saskatchewan, has dedicated much of his life to making the 

province a better place. And while we disagree on the 

techniques to best achieve that or the ideas to best achieve that, 

there can be no disagreement with respect to his dedication and 

his commitment to the city of Moose Jaw where he originally 

began in politics, to his seat in Riversdale and to the province of 

Saskatchewan. And I pay tribute to him today, and we‟ll have a 

chance to do that in the months ahead. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — You know, Mr. Speaker, budgets are more 

than just numbers. They‟re more than just charts, although there 

are a lot of both of those things in any budget, especially a 

budget of a provincial government. Budgets also I think tell a 

story for the people who will take the time to read them. 

 

Budgets, by definition, at least on this side of the House, 

budgets now by definition have a projection, a four- to five-year 

projection about what we think is going to happen to the 

economy, to the revenues of the province. It was a practice that 

was stopped, that was broken by the previous administration at 

the very end of their government when they became a little bit 

concerned, I think, about their own fiscal responsibility, their 

own stewardship, and refused to show what the out years might 

hold for Saskatchewan under their plan. So they stopped 

providing that glimpse of the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we campaigned on a different approach. We 

campaigned on transparency. We did campaign on ensuring that 

people would know at least what the projections we believed to 

be the case for the province‟s revenues. So budgets, then, tell a 

story about the future to the extent that those projections are 

going to be accurate, obviously. They tell a story about the 

present because the budget highlights things the government‟s 

going to be doing on behalf of the people of the province, the 

initiatives that the government intends to take in this next 

budget year. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, you don‟t have to actually read between the 

lines of a budget to see they also tell a story about the past. And 

this budget, this budget, strong and steady 2009, tells that kind 

of a story — one that speaks to the past; the recent past; the 

historical past of our province; the present, Mr. Speaker, with 

all of the optimism that is in the province, notwithstanding the 

global recession; and the future. 

 

And if you‟d permit me, Mr. Speaker, that‟s the context for my 

intervention here in this budget debate, just before the Minister 



2580 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2009 

of Finance takes to his feet to wrap up what has been a spirited 

budget debate this year. 

 

In the not-too-recent history of the province of Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker, I think members in this House would be surprised 

to read the kinds of reports that were coming from 

Saskatchewan from an economic standpoint just a very, very 

short time ago. Because things are so comparatively healthy 

economically in our province today, I think we sometimes 

forget where we‟ve been. I think we sometimes forget the 

change that has occurred even with respect to the vision that the 

government holds for the future of Saskatchewan. Because it 

wasn‟t very long ago when we were on that side of the House, 

the Saskatchewan Party, and the New Democrats were on this 

side of the House. 

 

And so if you consider what was being espoused, what was 

being proclaimed by the then members of the New Democratic 

government in terms of a vision for Saskatchewan not too long 

ago, you can get a sense for the history of Saskatchewan, the 

recent history and the longer term history. 

 

It wasn‟t very long ago that the then premier of Saskatchewan 

would refer to our province as a wee province when he‟d come 

back from a First Ministers‟ Conference. That wasn‟t very long 

ago. It wasn‟t very long ago when the former premier would 

say things like this province can expect to be in and out of 

equalization, that we can expect to be have and have not, that 

we‟re going to just bounce around. And aspirants to permanent 

have status shouldn‟t really be thinking that way in terms of the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I remember those comments and they didn‟t, Mr. Speaker, to 

me reflect . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well the hon. member 

from Nutana is questioning, Mr. Speaker, whether or not this 

comparison of the two different approaches, two different 

visions for the province‟s future, has anything to do with grace. 

I will say, Mr. Speaker, that that member from Riversdale, the 

seatmate of the member who‟s chirping from her seat, has 

contributed greatly to the province of Saskatchewan. I happen 

to fundamentally disagree with the mediocre vision that he and 

his colleagues, the member from Nutana, had for the future of 

my province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — And we waged an election on it, Mr. 

Speaker. We fought an election on the question which party has 

a plan to keep the momentum of this province going. Which 

party has the vision to see Saskatchewan, with all of its 

resources, leading the country not just temporarily, not in and 

out of equalization, but permanently a have province, a North 

Star reference point for economic growth in this country. 

 

And if she‟s saying we now can‟t have this debate, if she‟s 

saying we can‟t simply disagree on that, well I disagree with 

her, Mr. Speaker, because that is, that is the vision of this 

government. You don‟t have to go very far back down the 

history of the province, you don‟t have to go very far back to 

note that duly elected members of the New Democrats in 

government, when they were faced with our vision for our 

province‟s population that would grow at least at 1 per cent . . . 

That was our objective — that our population in Saskatchewan 

should grow at least by 1 per cent. That was the national 

average. That in 10 years we should have 100,000 people added 

to our population rolls. When we made that case, members 

opposite said that we‟re statistically impossible. 

 

The former member for Regina Wascana, now replaced by the 

current member for Regina Wascana, said on the record — it‟s 

in the, I think, the Davidson newspaper — said on the record 

that it was statistically impossible for this province to grow at 

the national average of 1 per cent. That was the mindset. That 

was the vision. That‟s our recent past, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And budgets from previous governments, budgets from 

previous governments, Mr. Speaker, tell that same story. 

Because if your government believes, if the Government of 

Saskatchewan believes that this province is not going to grow, 

if the Government of Saskatchewan believes it‟s statistically 

impossible to grow, what are they going to do with respect to 

investing in education infrastructure? What will they do with 

respect to investing in any infrastructure at all? 

 

[11:45] 

 

The likelihood is, of course, they will plan for decline. They 

will hold back on infrastructure investments. They will write 

rural Saskatchewan off almost completely and stop the 

infrastructure investments that could go into the parts of the 

economy, by the way, that have all the natural resources that we 

benefit from every year in the budget. That‟s what a budget 

would look like if the government believes that the province 

really can‟t grow, that we can‟t even achieve the national 

average of growth. You‟re going to plan for decline. And that‟s 

exactly what happened, Mr. Speaker. That is exactly the history 

of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

It‟s interesting also to note what was being written not just very 

long ago, even in March 15, 2007. It‟s only two years ago, Mr. 

Speaker. Consider how far we‟ve come when the editorial of 

The StarPhoenix said: 

 

Saskatchewan and perennial basket-case Newfoundland 

were the only provinces to record a drop in population 

between . . . 2001 and 2006 . . . [according to] Statistics 

Canada.” 

 

The quote goes on from just two years ago: 

 

Saskatchewan‟s population loss simply wasn‟t a matter of 

the gravitational pull of bigger cities, higher-paying jobs 

[and] bright lights closer to the mountains. The numbers in 

this week‟s Statistics Canada report are an indictment of 

how poorly prepared . . . 

 

Now wait a minute, this is why the member from Nutana 

doesn‟t like this part: 

 

The numbers in this week‟s Statistics Canada report are an 

indictment of how poorly prepared Saskatchewan was for 

the challenges it faces and its ineptitude in adjusting even 

to years of bounty.” 

 

That‟s only two years ago, Mr. Speaker. That was, I think, the 

consensus view of punditry and others in the province who 



March 26, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2581 

watched their government, wholly unprepared for opportunity, 

unwilling to embrace the fact that this province could lead, that 

this province could grow, Mr. Speaker. Well, that has changed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — And it‟s interesting, Mr. Speaker, because 

members of the New Democratic Party, stalwarts in the New 

Democratic Party, are also worried about the look in the 

rear-view mirror that members are constantly . . . their constant 

view is the rear-view mirror. 

 

Consider, Mr. Speaker, what John Conway said not very long 

ago, just February 26 in the prairie dog. He was talking about 

the NDP leadership campaign, but more importantly he was 

talking about just the NDP today, Mr. Speaker, and here‟s what 

he said. He said, with respect to the potential, or the 

presumptive favourite for leadership and the NDP, he says, 

“How many times can you re-embalm and prettify a political 

corpse . . .” We‟re not saying this, Mr. Speaker. I didn‟t say 

that. John Conway, a New Democrat supporter said that. And it 

bears repeating: 

 

How many times can you re-embalm and prettify a 

political corpse [I‟m assuming he‟s referring to the New 

Democratic Party, Mr. Speaker] before it crumbles into 

dust and must be swept into the dumpster of political 

history? 

 

Now, as we debate the budget today, Mr. Speaker, and consider 

the future, members opposite are also considering their future 

and stalwarts within the NDP are identifying a problem. And 

the problem is that while Saskatchewan has moved on, the new 

Saskatchewan has changed, the new Saskatchewan believes in a 

bright future, leading the country in many economic categories; 

there are members of this legislature, there are people in the 

province — not very many — but there are a few people left 

who have not changed, who have not got the memo from the 

rest of Saskatchewan people, who continue to plan for decline, 

who continue to purvey gloom and doom, who continue to set 

the bar very, very low in terms of what might be possible for 

our province. 

 

And I‟ve heard it from budget speech after budget speech from 

members opposite. The foundation, the premise of all of those 

speeches was very similar. It was the premise of 2007. It was 

the premise of 1976, ‟75. It was the premise of decades ago. 

That was the premise of their speeches which was that we ought 

not to expect to lead the country permanently; that I don‟t think 

we‟re going to be able to continue to grow. I don‟t think we can 

achieve things, notwithstanding all of the evidence to the 

contrary from chartered banks, from economists, from anyone 

else that they might care to listen to, Mr. Speaker. That it was 

okay to be mediocre and, with respect to their budget speech 

entries, they would all say the same thing, including the 

member from Riversdale who just spoke, which was, we ought 

not to be aspirants to something bigger. We ought not to believe 

in what is right before our eyes today. We ought not to believe 

that Saskatchewan is leading today and we can lead tomorrow, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So that‟s the yesterday. That‟s where Saskatchewan has been. 

That‟s where Saskatchewan was, you know. And I don‟t think it 

was ever the people of the province of Saskatchewan that didn‟t 

believe in the latent potential, the amazing potential that 

remained untapped in our province. I think people in 

Saskatchewan always knew. I think intuitively they understood 

that we could be outperforming to the potential that was being 

realized at the time. I think they understood that we could lead, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the government of the day did not. And the policies we‟ve 

inherited from that government highlight that. In file after file 

the Minister of Education will report to the caucus and cabinet. 

Here was the level of infrastructure investment they were 

prepared to make, because they were planning for decline. The 

Minister of Highways will say, here were their plans for 

highways and infrastructure in rural Saskatchewan at woefully 

low levels given the growth that was going on because they 

were planning to decline. And then the Minister of Health will 

say, here is the woeful infrastructure deficit we have inherited 

in the province of Saskatchewan including the neglect of 

long-term care in rural and urban Saskatchewan because the 

previous government was planning for decline. File after file, 

that was the message, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well those days have changed, those days have changed. Our 

first budget was a “Ready for Growth” initiative, Mr. Speaker. 

That was the centrepiece of the Minister of Finance‟s budget. 

One billion dollar record infrastructure investment that was 

$400 million higher than the biggest amount ever spent by 

members opposite when they had the chance to form the 

government. 

 

We added a half a billion dollar booster shot, an injection 

earlier this year, and in the last budget year . . . or the current 

budget year, I should say, Mr. Speaker, and another $1 billion 

“Ready for Growth” initiative here because members on this 

side of the House representing people in urban Saskatchewan 

and rural Saskatchewan understand that we‟ve got work to do. 

That we intend — especially after the economy comes out of 

this malaise — we intend to continue to set records. We intend 

to continue to attract people to the province, to create jobs. And 

in order to do that, we need a budget that doesn‟t plan for 

decline, but plans to lead. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — So what‟s going on today in Saskatchewan? 

Because if you hear members opposite, man, every once in 

awhile they‟ll wedge into their speech that, you know, there‟s 

some good news happening economically. But mostly they‟re 

focusing on the negative. 

 

Let‟s consider what‟s happening in the economy that is positive 

knowing that every member in this House understands that 

there have been job losses in Saskatchewan — there have been 

layoffs; knowing that every member understands we‟re not 

immune to what‟s going on around the world. But let‟s also 

focus on some of the positive attributes, some of the positive 

facts of Saskatchewan today, Mr. Speaker, notwithstanding that 

global worldwide recession. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just this morning we learned from Statistics 

Canada, that year over year, in the last year, the province of 

Saskatchewan in the face of global recession has grown 15,000 



2582 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2009 

people, about the size of the city of Swift Current — though I 

can‟t say that any more because Swift Current‟s growing too, 

Mr. Speaker — but 15,000 people in the last year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the last quarter alone, right about the time that 

our temporarily hobbled Minister of Advanced Education was 

in Toronto, along with myself, promoting Saskatchewan as a 

place to be, in just the last quarter alone the largest source of 

growth for the province — and this might be counterintuitive 

even for members opposite; I‟m sure it surprised them — was 

the province of Ontario. That was our greatest source for 

people. In fact 920 net, about that number, came from Ontario 

alone. That was bigger than the number that came from Alberta 

on a net basis, or any other province — from Ontario. Because, 

Mr. Speaker, as this budget lays out, we not only have a vision 

for a growing province and a growing economy, we also have a 

plan. We plan to execute that, and that means going to Toronto 

to job fairs. That means investing in things like the graduate 

retention program. So we go with tools. We go well armed and 

we can say, you ought to come to Saskatchewan because it is a 

place that‟s growing and it has great potential. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think by any reasonable assessment, I 

know that it isn‟t just government obviously that has 

contributed to this population growth. But we‟re doing the right 

things. Not with perfection. There‟s mistakes that are made by 

any organization, including government. But, Mr. Speaker, the 

record shows, the numbers show, and more importantly, the 

families who are moving here and bringing vibrancy to 

Saskatchewan show that we are on the right track, Mr. Speaker, 

and we‟re going to stay there with the budget we currently 

debate in the Legislative Assembly today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — We had 2,415 people from Ontario; 2,312 

people came from the province of Alberta. Mr. Speaker, in any 

other category . . . And then we have the chartered banks 

slashing their growth forecast to be sure, but saying 

Saskatchewan‟s going to lead. The Conference Board of 

Canada says Saskatchewan‟s going to lead, Mr. Speaker. 

 

CNN.com, CNN.com couldn‟t resist telling this amazingly 

unique story of Saskatchewan within North American. I was in 

Washington at the time, and people in Washington who had 

CNN [Cable News Network] saved on their favourites were 

asking me about what was going on. Because this article 

basically highlighted the fact that there was a bit of a unique 

island, so to speak — though we know we‟re not an island; this 

was the premise of the article — there was an island in North 

America of opportunity and of job creation, where people were 

coming and finding a chance to build a future in the midst of 

what has been economic despair, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In fact, I could tell you this. We‟ve got a question from the 

opposition about, well how much money did the government 

pay to get that coverage? Did you hire a consultant, they asked, 

Mr. Speaker. Even in the question, even in the question that 

they asked of us about that CNN.com story, even in that 

question, we could see what their vision is for the province. 

They just assume that that kind of coverage can‟t just happen to 

Saskatchewan where we plan for decline, where we‟re in and 

out of equalization, where we ought not to aspire to greatness or 

to economic leadership. That article, that kind of coverage can‟t 

just happen. Well, Mr. Speaker, yes it can just happen. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — We retained nobody. We hired nobody. 

You know what? What the opposition members got to  realize is 

that Saskatchewan‟s story is telling itself. It‟s our job to help 

that out and we will, Mr. Speaker. We‟ll shout it from every 

mountaintop we can about what‟s going on here. We‟ve been 

doing that for the last 16 months. 

 

But, you know, our story, the compelling story that is our 

province, that I assume we all love, doesn‟t need any help today 

— witness what happened on the CNN.com website. And then 

the record number of hits to saskjobs.ca as Americans tuned in 

to this website and thought, where is this place that I can‟t spell 

or pronounce? I‟m going to go find out about it. And 

60,000-plus people clicked on saskjobs.ca to find out a little bit 

about Saskatchewan hope, to find out a little bit about this 

unique story that‟s been happening in our country, and I admit, 

beginning at the end of the previous government‟s term but 

really has picked up steam since the election. They clicked in to 

find, when they needed it most, a little bit of hope. A story of 

positive news that a place that was still growing, a place that 

provided some opportunity that was struggling itself, to be sure, 

with the global recession — more so than it had been the year 

before — but a place that was offering a bit of hope. And that, 

Mr. Speaker, is Saskatchewan today. Today . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, today in Saskatchewan we‟ve 

got more nurses working because we‟ve been working hard on 

nurse recruitment and retention, and that‟s been a part of the 

budget. 

 

Today in Saskatchewan, the infrastructure deficit‟s getting 

repaired. Highways are getting fixed. Today in Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker, there‟s a government that stands with cattle 

producers when they‟re in the midst of a crisis, that fixes the 

crop insurance program that‟s long needed it. Today in 

Saskatchewan, property taxes are about to be lowered in a 

historic way for everyone in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Today in Saskatchewan, income taxes are 

lower, Mr. Speaker. Today in Saskatchewan, 80,000 fewer 

people in the . . . 80,000 people are no longer paying income tax 

at all because of the measures we took this fall, Mr. Speaker. 

Today in Saskatchewan, the provincial debt is 40 per cent lower 

than it was 16 months ago when this government took office, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — And today in Saskatchewan, those families 

who have sick kids, who are tired of travelling to Stollery or to 

Toronto, have hope. It won‟t happen right away because it takes 

a long time to build a hospital. But today in Saskatchewan, the 

hope, the dream of a children‟s hospital has been realized by 

this government and this budget and the people in Saskatoon 



March 26, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2583 

and across the province who had a vision for something better 

for pediatrics care in our province, for a very long time, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — But there‟s more work to be done. We have 

things to do in this province to continue this momentum. And 

so there‟s a lot of hope about what‟s next. Because, Mr. 

Speaker, as I have said in the past, there is one thing better than 

today in Saskatchewan, and that‟s tomorrow in Saskatchewan. 

And that‟s what this budget is all about. 

 

This budget continues to lay the foundation and the framework 

for a growing province. This budget continues to lay the 

foundation — and the hon. member for Riversdale used this 

analogy — the foundation for not just a strong and steady, 

stable house but a house where you have to add some rooms, 

where you need some renovations, where you‟ve got to add a 

bedroom because more people are coming over all the time. 

They want to be in that house, Mr. Speaker. That‟s what this 

budget is about. It‟s about continuing our efforts to fix the 

infrastructure deficit we inherited. 

 

[12:00] 

 

This budget is about meaningful, sustainable property tax relief, 

Mr. Speaker. On this issue I can you tell you that there‟s two 

choices a government can make on education property tax, 

especially in this province where people like Tommy Douglas 

decades ago was saying, we‟ve got to deal with this issue. You 

can make promises about it, Mr. Speaker. You can give 

speeches about it, Mr. Speaker. You can include some 

commitment in a campaign, but none of it matters if you‟re not 

prepared to do something, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — And that‟s what this budget represents and 

sets the stage for tomorrow. Mr. Speaker, I‟ve listened carefully 

to the member from Riversdale and the member from . . . 

What‟s his seat over there? Your critic — what‟s the seat? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Regina Rosemont. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Regina Rosemont. I‟ve heard his questions. 

And you know, they‟re raising some questions about the 

consultation process. Mr. Speaker, they did so today. I want to 

tell you . . . and publicly thank the member for Rosetown for 

the work that he did to lay the foundation for the consultation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — His was a comprehensive process of 

consultation, and he was very candid with stakeholders in 

education about what was coming. You know how I know that, 

Mr. Speaker? Because I had trustees come up to me and say, 

don‟t do what Alberta did; don‟t limit our ability to be able to 

tax. There was a consultation. By the way, we just disagree on 

that point with those trustees. We disagree. And the Minister of 

Education has announced a plan that does curtail that, that 

lowers property taxes. 

 

But the fact of the matter is, we were listening and we heard. 

No, we didn‟t agree with everyone, Mr. Speaker, all the 

stakeholders that were engaged in the process that the member 

for Rosetown began. And, Mr. Speaker, maybe that‟s why no 

other government‟s been actually able to do something about 

the issue — because they‟re paralyzed by the fact that 

stakeholders are going to have a different view and so the job 

never gets done. 

 

And all SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities] ever gets are promises and all families ever get, 

who wants some relief, are promises. Well that has also 

changed today in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the members of this House 

have gone through the various third parties that have talked 

about what this budget lays out for the future. 

 

One other issue I‟ll touch on, without going over the 

endorsements that we‟ve received from the municipal sector, is 

revenue sharing, municipal revenue sharing, because it also 

speaks to tomorrow in Saskatchewan. If we‟re going to grow in 

the province, if we‟re going to ensure that we keep up with the 

challenges of growth, we have to treat our municipal partners 

with the respect that has not been accorded them, I do not 

believe, by governments in the past. 

 

We have to say to them, when we have a booster shot of about 

$100 million, take it. You don‟t have partisan politics at your 

council. You‟ve had balanced budget requirements longer than 

any provincial government in the history of the country. We 

trust you to do the right thing, go out and build Saskatchewan. 

And they welcomed that trust, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And in this budget we took another step. We said, you know, 

it‟s been promised for a long time, including from the previous 

government, that we should have revenue sharing tied, 

own-source revenue-sharing money that‟s shared with the 

municipalities, tied to revenues in the province of 

Saskatchewan. Again it‟s not an easy thing to figure out 

because even once you figure out the formula, then you‟ve got 

to apportion it between the urban sector and the towns and the 

villages. And what about SARM? 

 

It‟s not an easy thing to do, Mr. Speaker. But once again in this 

budget today, laying the groundwork for a bright future 

tomorrow, we have delivered on that municipal revenue-sharing 

plan. We‟ve taken that first step towards a permanent solution 

that was only ever talked about, that was only ever promised. 

Well that has also changed today in the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, in terms of the future, there‟s 

one other very important part of the budget. And that is the fact 

that when all is said and done — when the investments are 

made, when the tax relief has been given to the people of 

Saskatchewan — there is going to be, at the end of the day, 

about a 1.2-plus billion dollar balance in the Growth and 

Financial Security Fund. 



2584 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2009 

And now we‟ve heard members opposite say in their speeches 

that this budget drains away the fund. I remember that, 

watching the speech from the member for Wood River, when he 

made the very salient and important point that if a drained bank 

account means a balance of $1.2 billion, sign me up for that, 

Mr. Speaker. Sign me up for that. That is the balance here. It is 

the rock. It is the insurance. We‟ve heard members say, well it 

was going to be $2 billion in the third quarter projections. 

 

Remember what we said when we made that announcement, 

Mr. Speaker, on the roughly $2 billion, at that time, we believed 

the balance to be? We said, this is the balance. It is an insurance 

policy. It is a rock on which we‟ll build our future because if we 

need it to guard against recessionary pressures, if we need it to 

provide an infusion into the economy, a stimulus into the 

economy — as everyone was talking about — it would be there. 

That is precisely the point of The Growth and Financial 

Security Act, one of the first Bills that we passed as a 

government. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, not surprisingly, we said that in the fall. And 

we did that. We have been consistent with respect to 

commitments and financial planning in this province. And 

notwithstanding the concerns from members opposite, I think 

it‟s pointed out some inconsistencies in their position that I 

think are important to get on the record with respect to the 

Growth and Financial Security Fund. 

 

Here is what the members opposite said about the balance in 

that fund not too many months ago. Here‟s the member from 

The Battlefords: “„The government is now sitting on a mountain 

of money with . . . new ideas and no plans on how to invest 

it‟. . . ” July 31, 2008. 

 

Here is a quote from the Canadian Press story, and I‟m quoting, 

Mr. Speaker, “NDP Leader Lorne Calvert also said the $1.9 

billion . . . was „a very substantial amount of money‟ to hold 

when there are issues to be dealt with.” When there are issues to 

be dealt with. I think he was probably talking about housing. I 

think he was probably talking about meaningful tax relief that‟s 

sustainable. I think he was probably talking about 

infrastructure, as meaningful issues to be dealt with. 

 

So what did the government do? We dealt with it, Mr. Speaker. 

We made those investments, and when we did, then the member 

says, no you can‟t spend any of that money in the Growth and 

Financial Security Fund. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we were all in opposition for a time on this side of 

the House, and I guess if oppositions choose, if they choose, 

they can be that inconsistent just over a matter of months. 

That‟s their option. But I would say this, when they are that 

inconsistent just on something as important as the Growth and 

Financial Security Fund, just in a matter of months, I think they 

should expect one thing. I think they‟ll be expecting to hone 

their skills in opposition for a very long time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m mindful of the fact that 

the Minister of Finance has been waiting to enter this debate as 

he has talked to people across this province about the budget. 

 

But we have laid the framework for a bright and bold future for 

Saskatchewan. We believe in the strength of our economy. And 

most importantly we believe in the character and the quality of 

Saskatchewan people who have all gone through a bit of a 

change, I think, as we have since as recently as 2007, who are 

feeling pretty good about the future, mindful of the fact that 

we‟re not immune to what‟s going on, still a little bit worried, 

I‟m sure, as everybody‟s watching the markets. But overall, 

more confident perhaps than anyone else in our great country of 

Canada. 

 

They believe in this province of Saskatchewan. They believe 

that ‟09 will be, can be strong and steady, that it will pave the 

way for a future the likes of which maybe we‟ve only ever 

given ourselves the licence to dream of, Mr. Speaker. That‟s 

how people are feeling today in Saskatchewan. 

 

And if we continue to get things right, if we continue to invest 

in infrastructure, if we continue to pay down the debt of this 

province, if we continue growth-friendly policies, if we 

continue to make sure we are looking after those who are most 

vulnerable among us along this path to success and journey, Mr. 

Speaker, we are going to get it right. There will be more 

CNN.com stories on Saskatchewan. There will be more Fortune 

magazine coverage of the province. There will be more heads 

turning in central Canada as to what exactly is going on with 

that prairie tiger that‟s called Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That is an objective of this government. That‟s the goal that we 

have for the province. And even with the negativity that we see 

from members opposite, Mr. Speaker, we are going to persevere 

in this province. We‟re going to emerge from the other side of 

this economic malaise stronger than we have ever, ever been, 

Mr. Speaker — stronger than we have ever been. 

 

So it‟s my pleasure to say for the record that I‟ve carefully 

considered the amendment the members opposite put forward. I 

have given it due consideration, Mr. Speaker. And you know, 

on behalf of almost everybody in the province who just simply 

wouldn‟t agree with that amendment, I think I‟m going to vote 

against it. I will be voting, Mr. Speaker, in favour of the budget. 

 

And let me just say this. Maybe there are some members over 

there that also believe it‟s been a long time coming — this 

property tax relief. That it‟s been a long time coming — this 

children‟s hospital in the city of Saskatoon. That it‟s been a 

long time coming — this government with a forward-looking 

vision and a plan to deal with infrastructure. That it‟s been a 

long time coming that this province would turn heads in the 

nation. And this budget helps that. And so maybe there‟s just a 

few of them that are going to stand up with us and say, we‟re 

going to vote for the province of Saskatchewan, for the 

province of Saskatchewan that it is today and that it will be 

tomorrow, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Before I recognize the Minister of Finance, I 

just bring to members‟ attention that the minister is exercising 

his right to close debate, and therefore if any other member 

wishes to speak, they should stand in their place now. I 

recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 



March 26, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2585 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m sure there‟s any 

number of members in this Chamber who would gladly trade 

places with me and try to follow the presentation of the Premier 

in this House. I‟m feeling a little lonely in this endeavour, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I begin, I would like to express some thank 

yous. Certainly one of the challenges that exists when you have 

a task as formidable as presenting a budget is you don‟t get 

home to your constituency as much or as often as you‟d like to, 

and I would like to thank my constituents for their support and 

understanding and their advice as this whole budget process has 

unfolded. And in particular, I‟d like to acknowledge my 

constituency assistants, Fred Fedosoff and Laurie Hookway, 

and all the support they‟ve given me in this endeavour. 

 

As well, I‟d like to acknowledge the individuals in my office 

here in Regina — under the chief of staff leadership of Dick 

Carter — Kim Jalbert and Krista Baker who have also made the 

time required that I needed to present this budget possible. 

 

But most importantly I think — as important as any of these 

other thank yous — I want to thank the Premier, my cabinet 

colleagues, and caucus colleagues who‟ve supported the 

endeavours of putting together this budget. It is not my 

document, Mr. Speaker; it‟s our document on behalf of the 

people of Saskatchewan. I‟m very proud of it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, there have been a 

number of comments that have been raised by members 

opposite and colleagues on this side of the House. They‟ve been 

very thoughtful comments and very legitimate comments, and 

I‟m not going to rebut or discuss all of them individually. I 

would like to acknowledge the comments of the Leader of the 

Opposition in his windup speech on the budget in terms of 

talking about the general framework and the foundation on 

which budgets are created and what they exist for, and all of 

those issues in terms of looking at forecasts and estimates and 

all those related topics in regard to spending. And many 

members opposite have indicated that they feel that we‟ve been 

perhaps even irresponsible in terms of our revenue projections. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would like to touch a little bit on that area 

of the budget at this opportunity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the things that is very important in terms of 

the responsibilities of the Minister of Finance is to provide solid 

advice and solid legitimate forecasts in the presentation of a 

budget. Mr. Speaker, there is no task, given the volatility of the 

commodity markets, given the volatility of the economy, that is 

more challenging than that exact responsibility. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you know, when I think of last year and we 

predicted oil to be something in the $70 range, and we no 

sooner made the prediction and the ink was not hardly dry on 

the budget documents and oil started heading for $147. At the 

first quarter we made some projections that these prices would 

stay up above the $100 level. And we no sooner made that 

commitment or that expectation, and it started heading down to 

$30. And so how difficult is it to actually have forecasts that are 

sustainable and responsible in the kind of volatility that‟s going 

on? 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I think it is important to state that in these 

predictions we‟ve used the very best professionals that we could 

draw upon. We‟ve used the very most professional public 

servants that work for the province of Saskatchewan, most of 

whom, if not all of whom, worked for the previous 

administration and certainly were held in high regard by that 

administration, and who are doing the work today diligently on 

behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, we didn‟t just take these 

numbers out of the air without any thought or consideration as 

to the fundamental validity of the underpinning of those 

numbers. Mr. Speaker, let me talk about a few of them this 

afternoon. Mr. Speaker, we said that oil was going to likely be 

48.75 a barrel. Now that‟s a cautious, prudent estimation. You 

can get estimations out there anywhere from $25 a barrel to 

$150 a barrel. We felt that 48.75 was very prudent and very 

cautious, and we used those numbers to base our forecast going 

forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m encouraged that oil is currently trading in the 

low $50 range. That‟s good news, and it‟s a positive indication 

that perhaps the worldwide recession is beginning to slowly 

move out of recession into a positive growth rate. That‟s good 

for Saskatchewan. That‟s good for the people of Saskatchewan, 

and I don‟t apologize for using cautious and prudent numbers. 

And we certainly didn‟t use them deliberately to misrepresent 

the potential of the province, but to be cautious and to be 

prudent. 

 

[12:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, we used 85 cents as the exchange rate of the 

Canadian dollar against the American currency. Currently the 

dollar is trading in the low 80s, and so there is some possibility 

that it will actually reach the forecast number that we projected. 

And that gives us some opportunity to be cushioned against 

volatile exchange rates. Certainly when we posted the numbers, 

the rate was something under 80 cents to the dollar. And so we 

were prudent by saying we didn‟t want to under forecast the 

exchange rate. And I think that‟s responsibility. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the professionals over at the Ministry of Finance 

have put together their best estimate for GDP [gross domestic 

product] numbers at 2.1 per cent. And I know in his address, the 

opposition Finance critic took great umbrage with the fact we 

were using numbers that were significantly higher than other 

forecasters. Well, Mr. Speaker, over the course of my tenure as 

Finance minister, I‟ve come to believe that if you want five 

economic forecasts, ask four economists, because you‟re going 

to get forecasts all over the map. 

 

And I have a great deal of faith, and I would have thought that 

members opposite would have had a great deal of faith, in the 

professionalism and the knowledge of the people in the Finance 

ministry because they‟re the same people who have well served 



2586 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2009 

this administration, who served that administration. And they 

build their economic model based on a great deal of knowledge 

and interest in Saskatchewan economic variables, and I believe 

that I will certainly accept their advice before all others. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I would like to also point out, it isn‟t just our 

internal forecasters that are optimistic about the future and the 

strength of the Saskatchewan economy. BMO [Bank of 

Montreal] for example says, and I quote, “. . . the Saskatchewan 

economy remains the best sheltered in Canada. Strong 

population growth, fiscal stimulus and a diverse resource mix 

are helping to buffer the downturn.” 

 

That‟s pretty positive confirmation of our optimism in the 

future of the province. The Scotia says for example, and I 

quote, “The GRF revenue forecast is conservative.” And again 

they say, “. . . potash revenue could offer some upside 

surprise.” 

 

And finally the TD [Toronto-Dominion] says — who has a 

reputation of being fairly conservative in their estimation — 

says this: “. . . the government‟s efforts to pay down its debt 

and to set aside more than $1 billion in a rainy day fund has put 

its coffers in good shape to weather any unanticipated economic 

weakening.” 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — And so, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to 

the people of Saskatchewan and members opposite I am very 

much convinced that we‟re using cautious, prudent numbers in 

the presentation of this budget. 

 

But I would like to talk about one commodity in particular. I 

mentioned oil and I mentioned the exchange rate and other 

commodities in this province. What about the wonderful story, 

the incredible story of potash? You know as we travel around 

the province, most of us have driven by potash mines. We see 

them on the horizon. We see them some distance from the 

highway, and we pretty much have taken them for granted. But 

what a story for potash. And it‟s been an incredible story of 

economic growth and a future of success for our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, potash prices have strengthened dramatically over 

the course of the year. And you know it is sort of something 

that was new to me to understand the macroeconomics of the 

potash cycle, if you like. 

 

And when I was told by officials, the first comment where they 

started from is they said, Minister, do you realize that China had 

a bumper crop last year? And I‟m a town kid and I kind of was 

going to say, so? What does this mean? Well what it means is, 

is that China has farmed its soil for thousands of years. There‟s 

no natural fertility left in the soil. The only fertility that‟s in the 

soil of China is what you put there, and you get it there by 

putting fertilizer in the soil. And potash is one of the 

fundamental products of fertilizer. And so like it or not, China 

simply has to face the reality that in order to feed their 

population, they‟re going to have to increase the fertility of their 

soil. They‟re going to have to put fertilizer in the soil. They‟re 

going to have to buy Saskatchewan potash. 

 

And you can argue and you can debate if there really is any 

choice. And there isn‟t. As the crop was good last year, it 

needed to feed the population of China. They need to repeat that 

year after year after year because the demand does not go away. 

Eating is not a luxury that people sort of engage in at whim. 

They fundamentally need to have a reliable and steady source of 

food if you‟re going to have a stable and consistent government 

in any of these countries. So in China or India or a Third World 

or Brazil or anywhere where there‟s huge population growth, 

there has to be food. Mr. Speaker, the other reality is that in the 

population basically there‟s 75 million more people each and 

every year, many of them in fact — perhaps arguably most of 

them — in the Third World, and they also have expectations of 

a reasonable diet. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan finds itself in the enviable 

position of being the vast depository of the potash of the world. 

We have more and better and accessible potash than virtually 

anywhere in the world. And, Mr. Speaker, the industry is very 

optimistic and enthusiastic about its future. You know, it‟s 

encouraging for me to be able to meet with the industry and to 

listen to their plans of financial commitment that they‟re 

bringing forward to improve their mines and improve their 

resources. 

 

Several billions of dollars are being committed, $8 billion by 

the existing producers in improving their industry because they 

believe in the profit margins, they believe in the future, because 

those fundamentals of food do not change, going forward. 

 

New companies want to come into Saskatchewan and start 

greenfield production, one of them very close to my 

constituency hopefully, in BHP Billiton. And these are not 

small players. It‟s the biggest mining company in the world. 

And they‟re bringing to bear four billion of their own dollars in 

order to consider the start of a mine in my constituency. And I 

know my colleagues are sort of saying, no, it‟s closer to mine, 

but actually the shaft, I hope, will be on my side of the border. 

But what they also have said, that they can go several numbers 

of miles out in all directions — not as far as Kindersley, mind 

you. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, you‟re right if you say that we are 

optimistic in a prudent and guarded way about the future of this 

province. Mr. Speaker, we are confident of the future of 

Saskatchewan. We have a diverse economy, and we have 

wonderful opportunities in our province. I won‟t repeat the 

objectives of the expenditures that we made, but suffice it to 

say, Mr. Speaker, it was a very prideful thing to present the 

budget last week that really realized the promises that we made 

to the people of Saskatchewan when they chose our 

administration in the fall of 2007. 

 

We also did it in a timely manner. We didn‟t wait and drag it 

out in a cynical political move to get re-elected. We‟re doing 

the job that‟s given to us, and that‟s meeting the challenges that 

we‟re facing every day in this province, and that‟s what‟s going 

to get it going. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, people have asked me in 

the trips around the province in these last . . . week I guess. I 

think I‟ve made almost 15 presentations since the budget was 



March 26, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2587 

tabled. And right across this province people have come to me 

and said thank you. They‟ve said thank you to the government 

for its vision and optimism and enthusiasm because it‟s a vision 

that the people are expressing. The negativity that we hear in 

this Chamber is not coming from the people; it‟s coming from 

the NDP opposition. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — The people of this province are more 

optimistic than any other place, and I think it is a measure of 

how out of touch that NDP opposition are with the real people 

of this province. 

 

You know, I‟m old enough, Mr. Speaker, that I can remember 

when Saskatchewan‟s economy was largely based on 

agriculture. Our future rose and fell with the profit and loss in 

the agricultural sector of the country. And now, arguably, we 

may well be defined as being in a commodity-based economy 

— and that‟s changing and it‟s more diverse — agriculture 

being an important of that commodity-based economy. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, what is government needs to do and what this 

government is doing is looking to the future and trying to 

determine what the next economy of Saskatchewan is going to 

be based on. I‟d like to think it‟s going to be based on the 

strength of Saskatchewan people — a knowledge-based 

economy, an economy of optimism and promise, an economy 

that realizes our resources of a highly educated population, an 

economy that deals with the realities of the environment — 

carbon capture and storage and clean coal technology — on the 

opportunities that there‟s going to be in the nuclear industry for 

Saskatchewan because we, as well as being the custodian of the 

vast amount of potash, we also are the same of uranium. And, 

Mr. Speaker, the future energy needs of the world could largely 

rest on the shoulders of Saskatchewan‟s nuclear industry. And 

those are opportunities. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Those are opportunities, Mr. Speaker, 

going forward. And we believe that the people of Saskatchewan 

are facing those opportunities with enthusiasm and promise. 

Mr. Speaker, this budget was trying to provide the fundamentals 

of what‟s needed for this growing economy. If we‟re going to 

have increased activity, we need to support that activity with 

infrastructure investments. And I‟m very proud that we‟ve 

committed $2.5 billion of infrastructure investment over these 

two years on improving the economy and helping 

Saskatchewan grow. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in closing, I would like to say that many people 

have said, what‟s it like to be the Finance minister of the 

province of Saskatchewan? Mr. Speaker, over and above it 

being a great honour, it‟s wonderful. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

amendment presented by the member from Regina Douglas 

Park: 

 

That all the words after “that the Assembly” be deleted 

and the following be added: 

 

condemn this government for the return to poor fiscal 

management in the budget process and increasing the debt 

of the province. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — All those in favour please rise. Oh right, 

pardon me. Sorry about that. My apologies. Please say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed, please say nay. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Nay. 

 

The Speaker: — I believe the nays have it. Call in the 

members. 

 

[The division bells rang from 12:28 until 12:30.] 

 

The Speaker: — Those in favour of the motion please rise. 

 

[Yeas — 17] 

 

Calvert Harper Trew 

Van Mulligen Atkinson Nilson 

Yates Belanger Furber 

Forbes Morin Taylor 

Quennell Broten McCall 

Wotherspoon Vermette  

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed to the amendment please rise. 

 

[Nays — 36] 

 

Wall Stewart Elhard 

Bjornerud Draude Krawetz 

Boyd Eagles McMorris 

D‟Autremont Hickie Heppner 

Tell Gantefoer Harpauer 

Norris Morgan Hutchinson 

Huyghebaert Brkich Hart 

Kirsch Schriemer Allchurch 

Weekes Chisholm Wilson 

Duncan Michelson LeClerc 

Ottenbreit Ross Reiter 

Bradshaw Harrison McMillan 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Mr. Speaker, the 

results are as follows: yes 17, no 37. 

 

The Speaker: — The amendment is defeated. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly is a motion 

presented by the Minister of Finance: 

 

That the Assembly approves in general the budgetary 



2588 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2009 

policy of the government. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — Those in favour say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed say nay. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Nay. 

 

The Speaker: — Standing vote. Call in the members. 

 

[The division bells rang from 12:34 until 12:35.] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I would ask members that, as 

we take the vote this time, that members listen and pay attention 

and allow the vote to proceed quietly. Those in favour of the 

motion please rise. 

 

[Yeas — 36] 

 

Wall Stewart Elhard 

Bjornerud Draude Krawetz 

Boyd Eagles McMorris 

D‟Autremont Hickie Heppner 

Tell Gantefoer Harpauer 

Norris Morgan Hutchinson 

Huyghebaert Brkich Hart 

Kirsch Schriemer Allchurch 

Weekes Chisholm Wilson 

Duncan Michelson LeClerc 

Ottenbreit Ross Reiter 

Bradshaw Harrison McMillan 

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed to the motion please stand. 

 

[Nays — 17] 

 

Calvert Harper Trew 

Van Mulligen Atkinson  

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. 

 

Nilson Yates Belanger 

Furber Forbes Morin 

Taylor Quennell Broten 

McCall Wotherspoon Vermette 

 

Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 36; those 

opposed, 17. 

 

The Speaker: — Motion carried. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this House 

do now adjourn. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. This Assembly stands 

adjourned until Monday afternoon at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 12:38.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2563 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2563 

  LeClerc .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2563 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2563 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2563 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2563 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2564 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2564 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2564 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2564 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Remembering Doris Sitter  

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2564 

 Earth Hour 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2565 

 Epilepsy Month 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2565 

 Junior Achievement Business Hall of Fame Awards 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2565 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2566 

 Saskatchewan Population Increase 

  Chisholm .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2566 

 Learning Disabilities Association Tea 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2566 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Effect of Budget on Education 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2567 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2567 

 Support for Westside Clinic 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2568 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2568 

 Selection of Auction Contractors 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2569 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2569 

 Government’s Performance 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2571 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2571 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Expanded Coverage for Cancer Drugs 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2572 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2572 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2572 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2575 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2577 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2579 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2585 

 Recorded Division (amendment) ............................................................................................................................................... 2587 

 Recorded Division (main motion) ............................................................................................................................................. 2588 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 


