




















































Hansard: March 24, 2009


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 38A  TUESDAY, MARCH 24, 2009, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2461 

 March 24, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s my privilege and honour this afternoon to 

introduce to you and to all members of the House a large group 

sitting in the gallery, in the west gallery. Mr. Speaker, these 

students are from the Canora Composite School in Canora, a 

community in my constituency. 

 

There are 38 grade 8 students that have made the trek to Regina 

and visiting the Legislative Assembly here this afternoon. I 

would like to welcome the students, as well as we have a couple 

of teachers along with the group. We have teacher Carlena 

Bulich, and we have principal Brent Castle along with them as 

well. And we have two chaperones, Teena Quick and Brandy 

Zavaslack. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to welcome these 

students and chaperones and teachers to their Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to the rest of the Assembly, I‟d 

like to introduce two guests sitting in your gallery. One I don‟t 

think needs an introduction. She‟s probably pretty well known 

to most of the people in the Assembly. Her name‟s Donna 

Brunskill from the Saskatchewan Registered Nurses‟ 

Association, who of course works tirelessly in the province to 

promote the province, but also to attract and make sure that 

we‟re looked at as a place to come and work as far as the 

nursing profession is concerned. 

 

Also accompanying her is Rachel Bard. She is the executive 

director of the Canadian Nurses Association. I‟m looking 

forward to being able to meet with these two individuals shortly 

after and talk about the nursing situation, not only in 

Saskatchewan, but across the nation. 

 

So I‟d like all members to join me in welcoming them to their 

Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too, on behalf of the 

opposition caucus and in my position as Health critic, would 

like to welcome Donna. Welcome, Donna and welcome, 

Rachel. I had such a great time at the CNA [Canadian Nurses 

Association] last year. I‟m looking forward to continuing to 

meet and talk about our issues. Welcome to the legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just noticed 

coming into your gallery a very, very special guest . . . well, 

guests that have joined us perhaps for the rest of the question 

period proceedings here today. 

 

In 1997 the previous administration quite properly established a 

Distinguished Service Award to tribute those people from 

outside of our province‟s borders who have had a powerful 

impact and a positive impact in Saskatchewan. We just came 

from a luncheon, a number of ministers and myself, to honour 

Ron Cavell, Dr. Ron Cavell and his wife, Patricia. And I‟ll 

introduce the others that have joined him. 

 

But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, here on the record, as we did 

earlier at the luncheon, how grateful this province is for Dr. 

Cavell‟s absolute, essential, and key input into ensuring that the 

Canadian Light Source Synchrotron is located here on the 

Prairies, in the city of Saskatoon, working in tandem with the 

university and, again, the previous administration. Obviously 

that‟s a very important asset to the country — the only one in 

Canada; Canada‟s largest science project — and he was 

instrumental in making it happen. And so we want to say thank 

you to him today, as we did earlier at the luncheon. 

 

Joining him are his wife, Dr. Patricia Cavell. And his daughter 

is Catherine Bailey. Her husband, Doug, is with us. And Harvey 

Allyn, who put his name in a nomination, has joined us as well 

as other guests. 

 

Would all members please help me welcome them to this 

Legislative Assembly and to say thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I want to join with the Premier in 

congratulating Dr. Cavell on the Distinguished Service Award, 

to thank him again for his contribution to the synchrotron 

project and its location in Saskatoon, and to recognize also his 

family who are here. We welcome you. We thank you and we 

congratulate you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I stand 

today to present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan residents 

who are in support of the government‟s policy on green 

vehicles, Mr. Speaker. And the prayer reads: 

 



2462 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2009 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government ministers named in this petition to follow their 

own platform and government policies and trade in their 

Jeep Libertys for vehicles that are on SGI‟s 2008 list of 

recommended fuel-efficient vehicles. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan who have signed this 

petition are from the good city of Regina. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for wage equity for CBO 

[community-based organization] workers. And we know this is 

a big issue. We know that the low wages paid to CBO workers 

has a negative impact on the quality of care clients receive. I‟d 

like to read the prayer. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the development and 

implementation of a multi-year funding plan to ensure that 

CBO workers achieve wage equity with employees who 

perform work of equal value in government departments. 

 

And is in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And these folks are from Lloydminster, Meadow Lake, 

Battleford, Saskatoon, Prince Albert, and Regina. Thank you 

very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I‟d like 

to stand and present a petition on behalf of rural residents of 

Saskatchewan who are seeking assistance from the provincial 

government in dealing with the exorbitant cost of clean, quality, 

affordable drinking water in their riding. And the prayer reads 

as such: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly be pleased to cause the government 

to financially assist the town of Duck Lake residents for 

the good of their health and safety due to the exorbitant 

water rates being forced on them by a government agency, 

and that this government fulfills its commitment to rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And these petitions are signed by the fine residents of Duck 

Lake, Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of affordable housing in 

The Battlefords. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners note that the cost 

of rental accommodation is increasing and the number of 

apartment units is decreasing. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, the 

petitioners ask: 

 

. . . the Legislative Assembly to call upon the government 

of Saskatchewan to invest in an affordable housing 

program that will result in a greater number of quality and 

affordable rental units to be made available to a greater 

number of people throughout The Battlefords and across 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petitioners come from the constituency of The 

Battlefords. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a pleasure to 

stand today and present a petition in support of fairness for 

students in Saskatchewan through the expansion of the graduate 

retention program. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately expand the graduate retention 

program to include master‟s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are 

students from the University of Regina, from the University of 

Saskatchewan, as well as a number of health care professionals 

with graduate degrees practising here in Saskatchewan. I so 

present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

to repair Highway No. 135 that runs through Pelican Narrows, 

Saskatchewan. This petition is signed by the leadership and the 

community members of Pelican Narrows First Nations, the 

village of Pelican Narrows and area. Their prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to pave the 7 kilometres of Highway 135 

through the community of Pelican Narrows, as committed 

on August 24, 2007. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by the good citizens of Pelican Narrows. I do 

present. 



March 24, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2463 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu‟Appelle Valley. 

 

Remembering Ed Bloos 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to offer my sincere, heartfelt condolences to the family 

and friends of Mr. Ed Bloos. Ed was truly an important member 

of the community of Regina as well as our province. His 

dedication and hard work on behalf of those less fortunate is an 

inspiration to us all. 

 

Ed was born here in Regina in 1938. After a short period of 

time as a young lay missionary doing work in Papua New 

Guinea, Ed and his wife Luverne returned to make their home 

in our community. It was here he began a lengthy career 

helping to nourish those in need. 

 

In the early 1980s, Ed took a job as the first manager of the 

Regina Food Bank. For 23 years, Ed gave up his time and effort 

acting as a fundraiser and a promoter for the food bank in 

addition to his managerial duties. His work touched the lives of 

so many of the members of our community and will not soon be 

forgotten. 

 

Mr. Speaker, once again, I would like to extend my condolences 

to those who knew Mr. Bloos — not only for his family and his 

friends, but for those who benefited from his compassion and 

sympathy time and time again at the Regina Food Bank. His life 

and his work are certainly worthy of our appreciation. Thank 

you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Saskatchewan Lung Association Walking Program 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, chronic obstructive pulmonary 

disease, or COPD, is a chronic lung disease and a major cause 

of death, disability, hospitalization, and health care costs in 

Saskatchewan. Over 32,000 Saskatchewan citizens suffer from 

COPD, and it will soon be the third leading cause of death in 

the province. One of the newest initiatives of the Saskatchewan 

Lung Association is a walking program in Saskatoon‟s 

Confederation Mall, geared towards people who are living with 

chronic lung disease. 

 

The program has both an exercise and an educational 

component and concentrates on keeping the participants 

moving. Participants and their families join up with the program 

coordinators and various health care professionals three times a 

week to walk around the mall. Everyone involved learns the 

importance of regular exercise, good nutrition, and other 

techniques designed to keep participants healthy and happy. 

 

With the generous assistance of program supporters, such as 

ICR industries, the company who owns the Confederation Mall 

and VitalAire, the Lung Association of Saskatchewan is 

improving the lives of Saskatchewan citizens. They recognize 

that not having to spend as much time in the hospital or the 

emergency ward would be a great benefit. However the 

improvements in quality of life from the COPD rehabilitation 

go well beyond that. In many cases it is the difference between 

living and having a life. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hope other malls will join in the walking 

program. I‟m thinking of how valuable this program would be 

at Market Mall in my constituency of Saskatoon Eastview. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Prince Albert Student Receives Terry Fox Award 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night 

Prince Albert city council awarded a very special and deserving 

young man with the Terry Fox Award. 

 

Jordan Herzog is a grade 8 student at Vickers School in Prince 

Albert. He‟s been a classmate of my youngest daughter, 

Mackenzie, since the two first met in kindergarten. 

 

Jordan was born with spina bifida; however, this disability has 

never got in his way. In the few short years he has been alive, 

Jordan has been a tireless supporter of several worthy causes in 

and around Prince Albert. Jordan has been involved in the 

Canadian Cancer Society‟s Relay for Life for over the past 

eight years and has acted as a team leader for seven of those 

years. The Cancer Society recognized his achievements by 

awarding Jordan with the Leader of Tomorrow award. 

 

In 2007, Jordan received the Yes I Can Award from the 

Saskatchewan Council for Exceptional Children. This was 

given to an outstanding student who has overcome a challenge. 

 

Years ago, Terry Fox‟s brother, Darrell, spoke at Jordan‟s 

school during the annual Terry Fox Run. Since then, Jordan has 

repeatedly raised the most money for the Terry Fox Run at his 

school, for several years now. 

 

The Terry Fox Award is given for work ethic, compassion for 

others, and commitment — these are all qualities young Jordan 

possesses. He‟s an amazing young man, an inspiration and true 

role model to those around him. I know the staff at Vickers are 

proud to have Jordan at their school, and I want to add that 

Saskatchewan is truly a better place because of this young man. 

 

So today, Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in 

congratulating Jordan Herzog on receiving the Terry Fox 

Award and thanking him for his incredible contribution to the 

people of this great province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 



2464 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2009 

Remembering George Terry  

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I rise today to speak of a former constituent, George 

Terry, who passed away February 8 at the age of 85. 

 

Mr. Terry was Saskatchewan‟s most decorated Aboriginal 

veteran. George served in World War II and the Korean War as 

a medic, supply officer, and parachutist, and completed a 

32-year career of faithful service. 

 

After his retirement from the Canadian Armed Forces, Mr. 

Terry volunteered with numerous organizations including 

Senior Citizens Action Now, the Moose Jaw Aboriginal 

Association, The Royal Canadian Legion Branch 59, and the 

Moose Jaw race relations committee. And in his spare time, he 

counselled and provided spiritual leadership to many groups. 

 

George Terry received the prestigious honour of being inducted 

into the Order of Canada in 1997, and beyond that remarkable 

recognition he also received 13 Armed Forces medals, Moose 

Jaw Citizen of the Year, the Multicultural International Peace 

Prize, the Canadian Volunteer Service Medal, Saskatchewan 

Festival of Words, Moose Jaw Honours Award. And in 2005 I 

was very pleased to present him with the Saskatchewan 

Centennial Medal. 

 

George was a proud man with a quiet sense of humour. He 

cared about the well-being of his community and his fellow 

citizens. He was predeceased by his wife, Ann, in 1991, and he 

leaves to mourn five children and their families. He will be laid 

to rest this summer with his fallen comrades in the Field of 

Honour at the Moose Jaw Cemetery. I ask that all members join 

me in extending condolences to Mr. Terry‟s family and friends. 

He will be sadly missed and fondly remembered as a true 

inspiration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Tourism Awards of Excellence Gala 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last evening Tourism 

Saskatchewan celebrated its 20th annual Tourism Awards of 

Excellence gala, held at the Delta Hotel. This event was 

attended by approximately 500 people from across the province, 

all involved in the tourism industry, whether they are hoteliers, 

tourism operators, or event promoters. 

 

The Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport presented 

the Corporate Partner of the Year Award to Viterra of Yorkton 

for sponsoring a walking tour titled Crops of the Parkland. This 

one-of-a-kind attraction welcomes visitors from across North 

America, showcasing the importance of the agriculture sector to 

the province. Approximately 20,000 visitors have taken the tour 

and Viterra has covered all costs, making it free for the public. 

 

The Minister Responsible for Crown Corporations presented the 

Award of Excellence, sponsored by SaskTel, for the best 

promotional or marketing campaign to the Regina convention 

team. The Regina convention team made it their mission to get 

conference and event planners from across Canada to think 

Regina when planning future locations. 

 

The Chairman‟s Lifetime Achievement Award went to Donna 

Carlson-O‟Keefe, who spoke about her experiences establishing 

a fishing and hunting resort at Reindeer Lake in the early 1970s. 

 

I congratulate all the award winners, a 1 billion industry in 

Saskatchewan for tourism. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Anne Luke Recognized on Retirement 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a 

pleasure to stand today in recognition of an individual who for 

many years has been a shining light for a multitude of children 

and families in Regina‟s inner city, Anne Luke. Anne Luke has 

devoted her life‟s work to early childhood development. 

Thirty-two years ago, Anne left her job at the Regina Public 

School Board because she saw a need in the community, and 

the move changed her life forever.  

 

Anne says that “There were a lot of issues — poverty, racism, 

poor housing, lack of communication between schools and 

families, and it seemed to me the only way of resolving that was 

to go outside of the institution of school and talk with parents 

and find out their hopes and dreams and then offer my services 

as an early childhood teacher.” 

 

Anne Luke created a unique program which has served as a 

lantern for the community. The Regina Early Learning Centre 

combines culture, health, community, children, and early 

childhood education in a way that has had a tremendously 

positive impact on so many lives. 

 

Two years ago, Anne stepped aside as executive director, but 

instead of heading into retirement, Anne put her shoulder to the 

wheel as the leader of the Early Learning Centre‟s Small Hearts 

- Big Dreams Capital Campaign, and they are on the verge of 

having raised the targeted amount of $1.5 million. 

 

The goal about to be met, the end of March will see the formal 

retirement of Anne Luke from the Early Learning Centre. And 

though she may be retiring, Anne‟s legacy of commitment, 

community service, and love will go on for many lifetimes to 

come. I ask this Assembly to join me in recognizing the work of 

Anne Luke and to say very clearly to her, on behalf of so many 

kids and families in the province of Saskatchewan, thank you 

very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood River. 

 

Opinion on Retirements 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 



March 24, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2465 

many people these days aren‟t too impressed with the 

performance of the NDP [New Democratic Party] opposition, 

including one of their own leadership candidates, Yens 

Pedersen. Mr. Pedersen seems to think that some of the NDP 

MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] have passed their 

expiry date and it‟s time to clean house. 

 

In a blog posting on his website yesterday, Yens Pedersen said, 

and I quote: 

 

As leader, one of my first actions will be to privately 

discuss with our MLAs their plans for the next election. If 

any MLA is overdue for retirement, I will not hesitate to 

pointedly (but respectfully) encourage him/her to move 

on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, obviously Mr. Pedersen thinks that a number of 

the current NDP MLAs are “overdue for retirement”. 

 

In the last NDP leadership campaign, the member for 

Riversdale promised to tour the NDP MLAs around the 

province on a bus. Yens Pedersen is taking a slightly different 

approach. He wants to throw his MLAs out of the bus. Mr. 

Speaker, I would look forward to learning exactly who is on 

Yens Pedersen‟s hit list of NDP MLAs who are “overdue for 

retirement”. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Inner-City Health Care 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatoon Westside 

community clinic serves some of the city‟s poorest and most 

disadvantaged citizens. A key part of the Station 20 project was 

an expanded Westside Clinic. The expansion was put on hold 

when the Sask Party axed the Station 20 project. 

 

At that time, the Westside Clinic was invited to prepare 

proposals for expansion at a different site, which they did. And 

in their proposal, they targeted the expansion of their capacity 

to address and treat the HIV [human immunodeficiency virus] 

issue in the inner city. They were left hopeful that funding 

would be coming in this year‟s budget. 

 

Last week, Westside was both surprised and disappointed to 

find no funding in this budget for their expansion. To the 

minister: why did the Sask Party leave some of the province‟s 

most vulnerable citizens out of this budget? In a $10.2 billion 

budget that increased spending by 12 per cent, why was there 

nothing for the Westside Clinic? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m very glad to answer 

that question. And, quite frankly, I‟m glad to see that member 

on her feet. Mr. Speaker, the issue with inner city, some of the 

issues on inner city are definitely troubling, and we are very 

aware of that. That is why our government has worked with the 

Saskatoon Health Region to put a primary mobile bus touring 

the inner city in many of the different locations that see some of 

the problems that the inner city sees, for example, in Saskatoon. 

At that time the only fault that that member opposite could find 

was that it was a private partner, MD Ambulance which has 

served the community extremely, extremely well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this bus has been well received. People are feeling 

very comfortable. Where they wouldn‟t enter a hospital or into 

a primary health centre, they‟re entering the bus and receiving 

education and all sorts of health care benefits, Mr. Speaker. It‟s 

working very, very well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A conversation about 

the effectiveness of the bus will be left for another day. My 

question is about the Westside Clinic today. This clinic is over 

capacity and needs funding to expand. And the minister 

announced a review yesterday to talk about the HIV problem, 

but we don‟t need another review which we‟re being told could 

take another year. 

 

While the minister is conducting his review, we already know 

there is an HIV crisis in the province with a disproportionate 

number of inner-city residents, especially young Aboriginal 

women, being affected. And this crisis is not likely to slow 

while the minister is conducting his review. 

 

Yesterday the minister said he learned of the HIV crisis on 

Friday. The Westside Clinic says they were ringing the bells of 

the increasing number of HIV infections in their proposal they 

submitted last fall. 

 

To the minister: the HIV crisis was being brought to his 

attention in the fall. Did he not read the proposal before he 

denied it? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — As I mentioned yesterday, Mr. 

Speaker, this HIV situation is peaking now for sure. It has been 

going on over a number of years, a number of years when that 

government was in power and chose to ignore it, Mr. Speaker. 

Our government is not ignoring it. That‟s why the chief medical 

officer has struck a committee that is meeting today, will be 

meeting over the next three days, to see the best practices from 

across Canada to start addressing that issue, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I can tell you that we‟ve already moved in the area of HIV, 

whether it was the needle exchange program and the review of 

that; also the Aboriginal Health Transition Fund, Mr. Speaker, 

where one of the approved proposals is $715,000 that‟s going to 

Aboriginal health transition to address the issue of HIV in that 

community. 

 



2466 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2009 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — As I said, Mr. Speaker, a year-long review isn‟t 

going to help the people who have HIV now and are going to be 

getting it in the future. To say that we are peaking suggests that 

we are now going to be going down. That‟s not what the report 

has suggested. They have suggested we‟re going to see 

continual increases. 

 

And one of the consequences of neglect of the poorest and the 

most disadvantaged people in our province is a dramatic rise in 

HIV infection rates. People in low-income neighbourhoods also 

have higher injury rates, are more likely to attempt suicide or 

suffer from diabetes or coronary heart disease. 

 

An investment in the Westside community clinic would have 

been a first step in improving the health of people living in 

inner-city neighbourhoods. But the Sask Party made other 

choices in this $10.2 billion budget, choosing to continue the 

pattern of neglect that led to an increase in HIV infection rates. 

 

To the minister: why is the Sask Party continuing to choose 

policies that perpetuate the neglect of this vulnerable 

population? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I couldn‟t disagree more 

with the premise of that question. In 16 months this government 

has done more for inner city than 16 years of that opposition. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we‟ve announced St. 

Mary‟s School that will be being constructed in the very near 

future. 

 

Whether it‟s a primary health care bus . . . The members will 

talk about Station 20. Let‟s talk about Station 20. It was $12 

million to a building that didn‟t address the needs on the street, 

Mr. Speaker. Our government is addressing the needs on the 

street. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, last fall the Lemstra report 

recommended a $300 million investment to improve the health 

of Saskatchewan‟s poorest citizens — an investment the report 

estimated would save Saskatchewan people $1 billion over the 

long term. At the time the Sask Party claimed they were doing 

enough, but the rise in HIV infection rates and other growing 

health disparities make it clear that they‟re not. 

 

To the minister: in light of yesterday‟s news, will the minister 

implement the Lemstra report‟s recommendations? Will he take 

concrete steps to improve the health of Saskatchewan‟s most 

vulnerable citizens? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I would like to mention that in 16 years where this disparity was 

created of neglect in the area of inner-city Saskatoon, we have 

spent $16 million in 16 months. Eight million for a new school 

has been committed by this government, as well as an 

additional $8 million for housing on top of a housing 

commitment that was already made by the previous 

administration. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the member opposite mentioned $300 

million — and Lemstra said that that would just fix the problem 

— well we did more of that, more than $300 million, Mr. 

Speaker, to address major tax cuts which will be money in the 

pockets of the low-income people in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

SaskWater Operations 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, what‟s not in the budget is 

more often of concern than what‟s announced in the budget. 

And people looked to last week‟s budget to see if it would 

provide some answers for the people of Moose Jaw. But 

experience teaches us that the Saskatchewan Party likes to sit 

on bad news until they can put it through the spin cycle. Mr. 

Speaker, there are many concerned people in my community. 

 

To the Minister of SaskWater: is he proposing a change to the 

mandate of SaskWater? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. It is indeed a pleasure to answer questions regarding 

SaskWater. SaskWater is a water utility in the province that is 

going to be enhancing its responsibilities going forward, largely 

because of the increased concern across the province regarding 

safe and reliable water. 

 

But approximately two weeks ago I had a chance to attend the 

SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] 

convention to talk to many municipal leaders from across the 

province and talking about the need for enhanced municipal 

water and enhanced residential water. It‟s something that we‟re 

looking at very seriously through the Crown corporation. We‟ve 

engaged Meyers Norris Penny to look at the corporation itself. 

We‟ll be looking at if there are improvements that can be made. 

And we‟ll be announcing those in due course. 

 



March 24, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2467 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there‟s a lot of concern in 

my city that a change in SaskWater‟s mandate will mean job 

losses at the head office in our city. And when the minister said 

that he will impose his views on the Crown corporations, could 

he please give Moose Jaw a pure business deal assessment on 

SaskWater? Will he provide a guarantee today to the people of 

Moose Jaw and SaskWater employees that there will be no 

position cuts at SaskWater? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you for the question, Mr. 

Speaker. The employees of SaskWater provide a valuable 

service to Saskatchewan residents. Many of them have the skills 

necessary to provide that service in many different areas. What 

we‟re looking at is changes and enhancements to the 

responsibility to the job that SaskWater will be doing. It‟s 

something that the Saskatchewan residents are asking for, it‟s 

something that we‟re committed to doing, and as I‟ve said 

before in this House, the responsibility that will be undertaken 

as far as water management goes will be increasing in the 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, an analysis was prepared 

for SaskWater on its role on industrial water infrastructure 

projects and it shows that not all change is desirable. And I 

quote from the analysis. “A decision to remove new industrial 

projects from SaskWater‟s mandate will have major negative 

consequences for the corporation.” And, “Substantial layoffs 

would take place from the corporation‟s existing staff 

complement.” 

 

To the minister, again I ask: will he guarantee to the people of 

Moose Jaw and SaskWater employees that he will not take a 

course of action that will lead to substantial layoffs at 

SaskWater? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, and for all members 

and especially for the member who asked the question, the 

purpose of SaskWater‟s creation was to primarily address the 

municipal and residential side of water services. 

 

SaskWater going forward has had the opportunity to participate 

in the industrial side as well. They‟ve done so in a manner that 

reflects their mandate — in a break-even type of manner. The 

industrial side of the equation can be serviced by the private 

sector and indeed is done by the private sector. 

 

What we‟re seeing is an enhanced need for services on the 

residential and municipal side. That‟s where we‟re focusing our 

attention. That‟s where the growth will take place. That‟s where 

the enhanced responsibilities from those many people that 

provide that service will be required and that‟s what they will 

be asked to do going forward. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Tuition Fees 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday I and several of my 

colleagues met once again with university students who are 

concerned that they will be paying more and getting less with 

the Sask Party in government. These students presented several 

recommendations from the Canadian Federation of Students 

dealing with the critical issues of affordability and accessibility. 

 

They also presented a survey by Viewpoints Research that 

showed more than 80 per cent of Saskatchewan residents are 

concerned that students may not be able to afford university. In 

fact, a majority of people in rural Saskatchewan and a majority 

of people making less than $40,000 per year are concerned 

about increasing tuition. I understand the students also 

presented these recommendations and information to the Sask 

Party. 

 

To the minister: did the government listen to these students and 

what will be changing as a result of this meeting, or was the 

meeting simply an empty gesture? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for 

the opportunity to highlight our tuition management strategy. It 

includes increased operating funding for universities, Mr. 

Speaker. It includes increased infrastructure and renewal, Mr. 

Speaker, $25.1 million after more than 26 million had just been 

invested. 

 

2008 was a record year for Saskatchewan in that infrastructure 

for advanced education: $23.5 million as far as an offset on 

tuition with a very modest increase in tuition, Mr. Speaker; 

enhancements to student loans, Mr. Speaker, including one-year 

programs, including the capacity for student housing, including 

the capacity for student loans on a weekly . . . [inaudible] . . . 

rate that hadn‟t been moved since 1994, Mr. Speaker. Plus the 

graduate retention program, Mr. Speaker, the most aggressive 

youth retention program in the country. Happy to report we are 

supporting our students fully, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



2468 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2009 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the students I met with yesterday 

are worried about the impacts of rising tuition. While the Sask 

Party claims that the average increase will be 3 per cent, 

students are concerned that this will impact some much more 

than others. 

 

Students are already planning for next fall and need to know 

how much extra they need to earn this summer in order to be 

able to afford a more expensive education. They need to know 

which colleges will be hit the hardest by this government‟s 

decision to increase tuition. Will the professional colleges be 

hardest hit? For example, will law and engineering students be 

facing a 10 per cent increase? To the minister: which colleges 

will be hardest hit by this decision to hike tuition? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s with full respect to the 

institutional autonomy and the partnership that we‟ve 

established with the institutions that I read the following quote. 

This is from A Reappraisal of University Access and 

Affordability 2009: 

 

During the 1990s and the early part of this decade, 

university tuition fees rose at unprecedented rates. In 

Saskatchewan, the average undergraduate tuition fee was 

$1,545 in 1990-1991, but by the 2004-2005 academic year 

the average had risen to . . . [over $5,000]. This amounted 

to an average annual increase of 8.5 per cent over these 

fourteen years, almost four times the average annual rate 

of inflation, [which was] 2.3 per cent . . . During this time, 

a university education became much less affordable [Mr. 

Speaker] . . . 

 

And it was the members opposite that oversaw that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, not only will thousands of 

undergraduate students be hurt by the Sask Party‟s decision to 

hike tuition but so too will thousands of graduate students. 

 

Sadly we already know that the Sask Party‟s budget failed 

graduate students by continuing to exclude them from the 

graduate retention program. But now by deciding to force 

tuition to increase, the Sask Party is making it more difficult for 

graduate students to pursue their training. We need 

professionals like business grads, physiotherapists, 

psychologists, speech language pathologists, and researchers to 

fuel our economy and provide much-needed services. But with 

the Sask Party in government, graduate students are truly 

paying a whole lot more and getting a whole lot less. They‟re 

paying more for tuition and they don‟t benefit from the 

retention program. 

 

To the minister: why the double insult to graduate students, and 

how much more will he force graduate students to pay in 

tuition? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite knows 

very well that, on an average, Saskatchewan has the third 

lowest tuition rates for graduate students in all of the country. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it leads to another question. The member 

from Regina Douglas Park calls the budget, he characterizes it 

as having out-of-control spending, while his seatmate from 

Saskatoon Massey Place calls for an even greater spending, 

saying it just makes good economic sense, Mr. Speaker. What is 

it, Mr. Speaker? Is it out of control or do they want more 

spending, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, over the past year, the minister 

has often referred to a tuition management system. While he has 

often referred to this system, the details have never been clear. 

But the details are slowly emerging. Apparently what the 

minister means by a tuition management system is that student 

recommendations will be ignored, some students will be hit 

harder than others, grad students will be especially hard hit, and 

only some students will get their tuition rebated. 

 

Based on these characteristics of his tuition management 

system, I now understand why the minister was so reluctant to 

share the details of the system. To the minister: will he admit 

that his tuition management system is simply a euphemism for 

students paying more and getting less? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, quite simply I flatly reject 

the assumption and the accusation that have been inserted in 

that question. 

 

Mr. Speaker, operating and infrastructure — going up. Tuition 

support — going up, Mr. Speaker. Scholarships, student loans 

— going up, Mr. Speaker. The graduate retention — going up, 

Mr. Speaker. We have put in place a graduate retention 

program, Mr. Speaker, that is the most aggressive across the 

country. We have a tuition management system and strategy, 

Mr. Speaker, that reinforces that students and institutions, Mr. 

Speaker, students and institutions are a key priority for this 

government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



March 24, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2469 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty‟s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

SaskPower Capital Plan 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 

Minister Responsible for SaskPower. We listened yesterday as 

he made a ministerial statement reannouncing the 

announcement that was made on Friday, I believe, of last week 

concerning the capital expenditures of SaskPower, which he has 

announced will be, I think, in the current year $950 million 

planned and expended, which is about, Mr. Speaker, on par 

with the announcements and highlights of the 2007 annual 

report of SaskPower where, I believe, the total was 996 million 

in 2007. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the difference here is the 950 announced is in 

addition to the 7 or 800 million the government has now 

committed to clean coal, which will be in addition to any capital 

requirements or costs associated with a nuclear reactor. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this government has already submitted a 13 

per cent increase proposal for SaskPower utility payers. Mr. 

Speaker, my question to the minister is: how does he intend to 

pay for this capital? Because, Mr. Speaker, it‟ll either be 

through debt or through increased utility charges. Which is it? 

And if it will be increased utility charges, Mr. Speaker, how 

much will they be? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s with great 

pleasure that I answer a question on SaskPower. On Friday last 

I had the opportunity to announce the largest ever capital 

injection into SaskPower by any Crown corporation, Mr. 

Speaker. It‟s a responsible thing to do going forward because 

we have a growing economy, Mr. Speaker. Members opposite 

were not planning for growth. It‟s something that SaskPower is 

indeed doing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member opposite talks about what this 

government is going to do to show its commitment to Crown 

corporations. Well I‟ll tell you what this government is going to 

do. We have announced that we will suspend the dividend from 

SaskPower and reinvest it, not in Guyana, not in some place 

around the world, but right here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — To ensure that that we have safe, 

reliable power, that we can continue to ensure that the fastest 

growing economy in the country is right here in Saskatchewan 

where it should be, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, one dividend is not going to pay 

for this capital investment. My question was, how will it be paid 

for? Will it be paid through debt or will it be paid through 

utility rate increases? The minister refuses to answer. 

 

Perhaps he will then answer this question. I‟ve reviewed his 

commitments around capital infrastructure. I do not find, Mr. 

Speaker, anywhere on that list 1 kilowatt hour of new 

renewable energy production for SaskPower Corporation. Mr. 

Speaker, why is there no renewable component to the capital 

plan of the Sask Party government? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, there‟s two questions 

in there. I‟ll answer the latter first. We‟re undertaking a wind 

study right now. We‟re looking at biomass. We‟re looking at 

the contributions that solar can make. Right now in 

Saskatchewan we have one of the highest percentages of 

generation of wind power anywhere in the country. We will 

continue to work on that. Saskatchewan, as residents know, is in 

a wind tunnel and has some natural advantages. 

 

But I want to talk about the finances of SaskPower. That‟s an 

interesting question coming from that member. He talks about 

operations and borrowing. Yes, there will be increased debt, 

there will be increased money going into the corporation. But, 

Mr. Speaker, I‟ll tell you what will not happen from this 

government, and this member should know, and I quote from 

the Saskatoon StarPhoenix, Saturday, March 21, this past 

Saturday, and it says, back in 2003: 

 

Among the things . . . the total debt of the public utilities 

was the move by premier Lorne Calvert‟s government in 

2003 to carve out a cash dividend of $169 million from 

SaskPower, even though the company‟s profit [for] that 

year consisted mainly of an “on-paper gain” of $133 

million from currency rate differentials. 

 

So the currency rate differential . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The minister‟s time has elapsed. I recognize 

the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the very direct question to the 

minister responsible is: how much of his capital expenditures 

does he expect to pay for through increased rates to the 

businesses and consumers of SaskPower in Saskatchewan? It‟s 

a very simple question. What can we expect as a rate increase? 

 

We‟ve already got a 13 per cent increase on the books by this 

government being asked for. What more will they ask for from 

the consumers of electricity in this province to pay for the 

capital projects? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Well, Mr. Speaker, of the $954 

million, $293 million will be funded through internal 



2470 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2009 

operations; $661 million will be funded through additional 

borrowing. The capital requirements of the Crown continue to 

increase. And the capital asset value of that Crown will 

continue to increase as well. 

 

What‟s more interesting, Mr. Speaker, is for the last 16 years, 

and certainly in the last two elections, that NDP opposition — 

that NDP party when they were in government — they wrapped 

themselves in the flag of the Crown corporations, saying they 

were the defenders of the Crown corporations. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, when we became government, we saw that 

that is not true at all. They provided equity stripping. They did 

not fund the Crown corporation to the tune that it should have 

been funded. They didn‟t plan for growth. Mr. Speaker, we‟ll 

let the people decide who are the true defenders of the Crown 

corporations in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Certainly the people will decide. And they‟re 

going to be deciding as they look at their power bills going up 

and up and up. Mr. Speaker, when the Prime Minister of 

Canada was in Estevan . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize there is a number of 

members who want to get into the debate, but I recognize the 

Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Well thank . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I‟ll try again. When the 

Prime Minister of Canada was in Estevan, joining with this 

government in announcing the clean coal project, the Prime 

Minister made it very clear in what he said that day — with this 

kind of technology, we can expect costs to rise. The president of 

the Power Corporation at that same time, our current president 

of the Power Corporation said, with this clean coal technology, 

with these kinds of technologies, you can expect costs to rise. 

 

But last Friday the minister now responsible said: 

 

What we do have here is a commitment to keep rates as 

low as possible. And that‟s why we‟re undertaking things 

like clean coal initiatives, to ensure that we can keep the 

rates as low as possible. 

 

Well the Prime Minister of Canada says, if you do this, rates are 

going up. The president of the corporation says, if you do this, 

rates are going up. The minister says, if you do this, rates are 

going down. Which is it? Who are we to believe — the Prime 

Minister and the president, or the minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m very pleased to 

talk about why this government has made clean coal technology 

a commitment and a priority, Mr. Speaker. Certainly with the 

likes of people like Dr. Malcolm Wilson here in Saskatchewan 

where he‟s doing leading-edge research in carbon capture and 

sequestration and projects like the North Dakota-Weyburn 

project, like the proposed project between Montana and 

Saskatchewan — that indeed will keep costs as low as possible 

as we go out and do leading-edge technology, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to remind the members opposite what 

they did in the dying days of their administration. They looked 

at a $4.5 billion clean coal proposal. They found that the costs 

were rising. They walked away from it, Mr. Speaker. Did they 

have a plan B? Did they have a plan for providing sustainable, 

responsible power to Saskatchewan people? No. They had no 

plan for growth. They had no plan whatsoever, Mr. Speaker. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

SaskEnergy Funds Natural Gas Purification Research 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. It‟s with great pleasure that I make a ministerial 

statement today on behalf of SaskEnergy. 

 

Research is a vital component of our province‟s economy. The 

solutions developed by our universities today create jobs, 

investment opportunities, and continued growth for tomorrow. 

That‟s why I‟m very pleased, Mr. Speaker, to announce as 

Minister of Crown Corporations that SaskEnergy is funding a 

major research project to benefit the energy sector and the 

environment. 

 

This work will be conducted by the Faculty of Engineering and 

its students at the University of Regina. Over the next three 

years, SaskEnergy is committing $300,000 to the U of R 

[University of Regina] to find ways to improve the quality of 

natural gas that comes from producer wells. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‟re challenging the engineers at the U of R to 

design a new purification process for natural gas and gas 

associated with oil production. Natural gas or associated gas 

often contains impurities like carbon dioxide, nitrogen, 

hydrogen sulphide. If not removed, these impurities can 

interfere with pipeline operations. They can also reduce the 

safety or efficiency of natural gas appliances such as furnaces 

and boilers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

SaskEnergy maintains extremely high pipeline specifications 

for the gas it transports and distributes. So natural gas with 

impurities either has to be processed at a gas plant in order to be 

ready for the marketplace or it can‟t be used because it doesn‟t 

meet these standards. Often a gas plant is not nearby, so this 

energy source remains unutilized. This project involves 

removing these impurities through a unit that can be designed at 

the individual well sites. That will provide access to increased 



March 24, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2471 

volumes of natural gas for Saskatchewan. This will be a 

particular benefit to smaller scale producers in more remote 

areas without access to gas plant processing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that‟s why SaskEnergy and our province‟s natural 

gas producers are turning to the University of Regina. They feel 

the university has the right people in the right place to find a 

solution. It is SaskEnergy‟s hope that this investment in 

research will provide cost-effective natural gas purification 

technology. This is groundbreaking work, Mr. Speaker, with 

intellectual property implications for this technology far beyond 

our borders. 

 

Saskatchewan has had a long history of leading the way when it 

comes to innovation in energy technology. In the 1960s 

TransGas, the pipeline subsidiary of SaskEnergy, developed the 

use of underground salt caverns for natural gas storage. That 

technology is in use around the world today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while there are obvious economic advantages to 

developing this technology, it also has important environmental 

benefits. Natural gas with impurities which cannot be processed 

is often flared producing more greenhouse gas emissions. 

SaskEnergy is committed to working with the industry to 

capture this resource. Mr. Speaker, this partnership shows our 

Crown corporations, industry, and universities at their very best. 

We have a full confidence in the U of R professors and students 

involved with this project. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I look forward to providing updates to the House 

on these exciting results of this investment research. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

At the outset let me thank the minister for providing this side of 

the House with an advance copy of his speaking notes for the 

announcement today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the research being funded, if successful, will have 

great benefit for SaskEnergy, SaskEnergy customers, and the 

environment in Saskatchewan. And the minister is correct when 

he says that this is groundbreaking work with potential 

application around the world. 

 

We‟re pleased to see this research is to be conducted by the 

Faculty of Engineering at the University of Regina. The Faculty 

of Engineering has an excellent reputation for work of this 

nature, and the work is well done there and well situated, given 

the nearby location of the Petroleum Research and Technology 

Centre and the Greenhouse Gas Technology Centre at the 

university. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a win-win project for SaskEnergy, 

SaskEnergy customers, the environment, and the University of 

Regina. We welcome this announcement. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND 

SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 

Committee on Private Bills. 

 

Standing Committee on Private Bills 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present the third 

report of the Standing Committee on Private Bills, which I now 

do lay on the Table. Mr. Speaker, I move: 

 

That the report of the Standing Committee on Private Bills 

be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair of the 

Standing Committee on Private Bills: 

 

That the third report of the Standing Committee on Private 

Bills be now concurred in. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. The motion is carried. And pursuant 

to rule 98, the private Bill 902, An Act to incorporate the 

Stephen and Michelene Worobetz Foundation and Bill No. 903, 

The Ancient Order of Melchizedeq, Inc. Act are deemed to be 

read the first time and are ordered for second reading on the 

next private members‟ day. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟d like to table the 

answers to questions 263 through 294. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 263 through 294 are tabled. I 

recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. I‟d like to order 295. 

 

The Speaker: — Question 295 ordered. I recognize the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. I‟d like to table the answers to 

questions 296 through 319. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 296 through 319 are tabled. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Gantefoer that the Assembly approves 



2472 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2009 

in general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 

proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. Van 

Mulligen.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a 

pleasure to resume my speech from last night. I guess I‟d like to 

wrap up a few things, Mr. Speaker, in terms of things that I 

thought were decent measures in the budget. 

 

I was happy to see the $200 million for the new children‟s 

hospital. I was happy to see money for the early learning and 

child care sector. I was also happy to see the improvements 

coming forward for the child welfare system, though of course, 

Mr. Speaker, we‟ll be watching very closely to see how that 

plays out. 

 

Under the stronger and safer communities portion of the budget, 

again operating grants for municipalities increased. That‟s a fair 

measure, Mr. Speaker. The monies for additional police 

officers, I think that‟s a fine measure as well. I also understand 

that there are attendant increases for the safer communities and 

neighbourhoods program, something which I‟m glad to see 

being built upon. Community-based organizations seeing an 

increase of $27.2 million — again, Mr. Speaker, any monies 

into the hands of the CBOs, I think in a general sense, is good 

money being spent. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the other things. Investing in education and 

skills training, it was interesting. It was a bit of a blast from the 

past, Mr. Speaker. The minister was quoting from the McCall 

report, you know, again to use the common usage. 

 

And I can remember when the interim report came out, the 

member from Saskatoon Silver Springs said, you know, tuition 

is at this level; we should be below the national average at a 

minimum. And we couldn‟t get there fast enough, Mr. Speaker. 

I‟m sure he was outraged to see an increase on the average of 3 

per cent coming with the $23.5 million to the universities. So 

it‟s interesting how times change, Mr. Speaker. The member 

from Silver Springs, you know, continues to evolve on this 

issue and in a most interesting way. 

 

I was happy to see the extra money for the 1,100 

apprenticeships and additional training seats. I‟m interested to 

see the 5.9 million for the Aboriginal Workforce Development 

Fund. We‟ll see, Mr. Speaker. And again I‟m presuming that 

this is money that‟s flowing through from the Labour Market 

Development Agreement. We‟ll find out about that in the days 

ahead. 

 

We‟ll also see, Mr. Speaker, what happens around things like 

the Aboriginal Access Bursary as the millennium scholarship 

fund wraps up, and how Saskatchewan is impacted in that 

regard. Other measures associated with students — glad to see 

those, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I guess the last few things I‟d like to touch on in terms of 

general impressions of the budget, the monies for enhancements 

to the seniors‟ income plan. Again we‟re glad to see that, Mr. 

Speaker. I‟ll be interested to see how the monies previously 

announced, whether or not they‟ve actually flowed to the 

intended receivers. I know something in my office, there was a 

lot of fanfare with which the measure was initially announced. 

And there‟s some interest, of course, in terms of seniors that 

expect a great increase to their income. And there‟s also been 

some disappointment, Mr. Speaker, when the seniors come into 

my office and find out how much they‟re actually entitled to or 

not entitled to, and whether or not it lives up to the hype that it 

was announced with. 

 

I‟m happy to see the 12.5 million for the adjustment to shelter 

rates. Again I think that‟s a decent measure. I‟m also happy to 

see, you know, some money to new affordable housing units. 

Again, Mr. Speaker, the amounts that are allocated speak to the 

priority that the government puts on these things. 

 

And I know, Mr. Speaker, when we had the good fortune as a 

government to come across an extra 100 million mid-year in 

‟06, the pleasure that we took in being able to put that towards, 

40 million of that towards expanding adult basic education 

opportunities and adult education opportunities in the inner 

cities of Saskatoon and Regina. And putting an additional $60 

million, you know, on top of the monies that were already there 

in terms of the centennial affordable housing program and the 

HomeFirst program, an additional $60 million on to housing. 

And a great share of that, Mr. Speaker, going towards the 

building of new affordable housing units. 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, I‟m glad to see expenditures being made 

in a micro sense within the envelopes of the budget. But the 

amounts that they deal with overall, I don‟t think speak to the 

need that is out there. I know in the city of Regina, vacancies at 

point five per cent, an issue that comes up time and again in 

terms of my constituents is the availability of housing. And it 

seems to me that the current government, by not turning sod on 

new housing projects on a scale that was in keeping with the 

pace that had been achieved in bringing new housing stock on 

stream, it‟s a lost opportunity, Mr. Speaker. And it means that 

more families are going to be raising kids, and they‟re having 

their homes and houses that are substandard and that ought not 

be lived in. So again, Mr. Speaker, I think there‟s a lost 

opportunity there. 

 

[14:30] 

 

There‟s also a lost opportunity around in terms of resources 

available, and the opportunity to move in an aggressive way on 

an anti-poverty strategy. I know our spokesperson for social 

services issues, the member from Saskatoon Centre, will have 

some more precise things to say about that, and I‟m quite 

looking forward to it, Mr. Speaker. But again, there is a great 

opportunity here for a anti-poverty strategy, and that 

opportunity has been missed. 

 

In terms of how this budget has affected First Nations and Métis 

relations, Mr. Speaker, and in terms of the funds that this 

budget brings forward to First Nations and Métis issues in this 

province, again we‟d had some discussion of it yesterday in 

question period, but I think the headline of the Leader-Post 

story which appeared page A4, Friday, March 20, 2009, I think 

this says a lot. 

 

The title of the story is “„Totally excluded‟”, Mr. Speaker. And 



March 24, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2473 

the totally excluded comment arises from comments made by 

Vice-chief of the FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 

Nations], Morley Watson who had held a press conference on 

Thursday after the budget. 

 

And again in terms of the stakeholders and the people that are 

dealing with these issues on the grounds, you know, what 

someone like Vice-Chief Watson has to say on this, I think, is 

fairly important and fairly instructive. I‟ll quote a bit more at 

length from what he had to say, Mr. Speaker. And I quote: 

 

“As one of the largest stakeholders in the province, First 

Nations are extremely disappointed,” Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations (FSIN) vice-chief, Morley 

Watson said at a press conference. 

 

Despite a $5.9-million investment in aboriginal . . . 

initiatives, Watson said First Nations were almost “totally 

excluded” from the budget. 

 

He described the budget as a “missed opportunity” to 

address aboriginal issues, including poverty, education and 

the duty to consult with First Nations groups, affected by 

resource exploitation. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, the past year . . . And before that of 

course, there‟s been a lot of talk and a lot of expectation around 

the whole file of resource revenue sharing and what‟s happened 

with duty to consult and accommodate. And the file of course, 

Mr. Speaker, is getting more and more complex and more and 

more contentious all the time. And I think there is an 

opportunity with this budget to come forward with funds that 

says, we take this issue seriously. When we talk about First 

Nations and Métis people sharing in the wealth of the province, 

there is an opportunity with this budget to come forward in a 

meaningful way with those funds. And of course, Mr. Speaker, 

it was a missed opportunity in this budget. 

 

And I think the way that this is playing out in a . . . You know 

anybody that reads the paper can see this to be so. I think you‟re 

going to see more recourse to courts of law in terms of First 

Nations and Métis people trying to address their interests. And I 

think you‟re going to see more activity like we saw this fall 

around the blockade with Enbridge. 

 

And you know the Minister of First Nations and Métis 

Relations is hollering over at me, asking if that‟s what I‟m 

encouraging. And I‟ll say again for the record, Mr. Speaker, 

that if anyone reads the paper or watches the evening news, 

that‟s what you‟ll see going down. And I don‟t think it does the 

people of the province or, you know, the minister whose got a 

portfolio that deals precisely with this, any good to try and 

inflame the issue more than it already is. 

 

And I guess the interest that I have, Mr. Speaker, is that over 

the past year — despite the sweet words that were said on this 

file by the members opposite — they‟ve taken a year and 

they‟ve wound up even further behind in terms of where they 

were at with the draft guidelines. And First Nations and Métis 

people become increasingly frustrated when they‟ve seen a year 

where they‟ve tried to work in good faith, where they‟ve tried 

to work in respect, where they‟ve tried to work in partnership, 

and they see those efforts going for naught, Mr. Speaker. 

Because what this budget was about was sending a signal to 

First Nations and Métis people that their issues were being 

taken seriously. 

 

And I hear the member from Saskatoon Northwest hollering 

over, shame on me. And I guess, Mr. Speaker, if I‟m going to, if 

I‟m going to look at the budget and . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I would ask members to respect the 

right of other members to speak, but I also ask members not to 

draw other members into the debate. I recognize the member 

from Regina Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, you know, drawing them 

in. If he‟s jumping in, I mean you know, what do you do? 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I just ask the . . . Order. I ask the 

member just to resume his speech on the debate. Member from 

Regina Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. And again the members 

opposite like to holler over different things about trying to 

inflame the situation, but I would point out they‟ve had a year 

plus to work on this file. They‟ve raised expectations sky-high 

before the election in terms of what duty to consult and 

accommodate would mean in terms of First Nations and Métis 

people sharing the wealth of the province. 

 

And it‟s instructive I think, Mr. Speaker, that, you know, over 

the past little while we‟ve seen things like the draft guidelines 

being put out on the week before Christmas, at a time when, 

you know, I think that minister was well aware that the First 

Nations would not have sort of maximum opportunity to 

respond. 

 

I think you‟ve seen the interesting fact where the FSIN has a 

general assembly, and again, Mr. Speaker, it‟s sort of like if 

SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] had 

an assembly or SARM had an assembly and if the minister 

didn‟t show up. So where was the minister for not just one 

FSIN assembly but the past two FSIN assemblies? Where was 

the minister? Nowhere to be seen, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And in the past couple of weeks, the Métis Nation of 

Saskatchewan has had a duty to consult forum. And I think 

again it‟s instructive that, where was the minister? Nowhere to 

be seen. Because perhaps in that forum you don‟t have 

maximum control over the way your message gets out. You 

can‟t spin things the way you like, so you just duck it. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, you heard from the people at the 

microphones at that gathering that they were very disappointed 

and felt insulted by the fact that they had expected that minister 

to be there and she was not. 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, I wonder in the days to come, where this 

government has talked about working in consultation and in 

partnership and in respect, where they‟ve arbitrarily set 

deadlines and changed deadlines, I fear for how these 

negotiations are going to go, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So if the people over yonder are concerned about blockades and 

court action and those kind of things, I think they should take a 



2474 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2009 

look in the mirror, Mr. Speaker. I think they should take a look 

at how they‟ve been conducting themselves at the negotiating 

table, at how they‟ve been conducting themselves in the 

bilateral process, and if it‟s not working . . . You know, the fact 

that they want to blame everybody else for their failings, I find 

kind of sad in a standing government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we‟ll see how the days and weeks ahead play out around 

duty to consult, but if this budget is any indication as to the 

good faith measures being put forward by this government, I 

think we‟re in for a rocky ride, Mr. Speaker. So with that, I will 

conclude my comments. I‟ll be voting for the amendment and 

against the budget. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m pleased to 

enter this debate on the 2009 budget. Before I begin, I would 

like to echo the sentiments of some of my colleagues and very 

deeply thank my family members, including my wife Leone, 

my daughters Rayanne and Katelin — without their support I 

could not possibly be here — as well as the help of my 

constituency assistants Lauretta and Annie, again very valuable 

assets. And the people of the constituency of Yorkton who 

elected us by the narrow margin of 60 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 

I‟m lucky enough to be here and I really appreciate the 

opportunity. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, a lot of the stuff that we‟ve done over 

the last year and a little bit . . . I want to bounce back to even 

during the election some statements I made to some Crown 

corporation employees, government employees within the 

constituency of Yorkton — a lot of them friends of mine — 

who were worried about voting for a Saskatchewan Party 

government. And, Mr. Speaker, one of the statements I made to 

them was, you give us the opportunity now, I‟ll take that. The 

next one we‟re going to earn. 

 

Well what I‟ve heard after our last two budgets and our throne 

speeches, Mr. Speaker, is a lot of those constituents are saying 

you‟ve more than earned our support for the next election. So 

we‟re fully expecting those numbers to increase as long as we 

stay on the course and keep things strong and steady. 

 

As well I‟d also extend my thanks to the Premier and some of 

the appointments he has given me. I have had the opportunity to 

work with the Minister of Social Services on some important 

work, and I was really grateful for that opportunity to learn 

under her guidance. And now he‟s given me the opportunity 

and I‟m very lucky to be working with the Minister of 

Environment for some very important environmental initiatives, 

specifically with recycling and waste management. And I‟m 

really looking forward to working with her on that and helping 

her out on that file, Mr. Speaker. So, you know, some positive 

things that we‟re moving ahead with there. 

 

One thing I‟ve noticed, Mr. Speaker, over the last year and a 

half is negativity. And my wife is a very, very intelligent 

woman, and she gives me a lot of good advice over and over 

again. And two pieces of advice she gives me: you know, when 

you think you should have done something and you don‟t and 

you say I should‟ve, would‟ve, I should‟ve, would‟ve, 

should‟ve, would‟ve . . . And I hear, you know, a lot of that 

from across the floor. We were going to do that; we were going 

to do that. And my wife‟s advice is, don‟t should on yourself 

because shoulding on yourself is never very good. So, you 

know, don‟t use the word should. You just have to think about 

what‟s happening that‟s positive, get behind it, and move things 

forward. 

 

As well as some of the negative that I do hear . . . And another 

very important comment she makes to me is you bring about 

what you think about, and negative thoughts just keep bringing 

on negative outcomes. And I think we‟ve seen that over and 

over again. Another thing, Mr. Speaker, I‟ve noticed is if you 

speak it, you walk into it, and over and over I think I‟ve seen 

the negativity that, you know, members opposite keep walking 

into. 

 

And I think if they‟d just get on board and start thinking 

positive and working positively and, you know, point out the 

shortfalls and nobody‟s perfect. Our government isn‟t perfect 

and we recognize that. But work in a positive manner with 

positive comments and positive criticism; anybody‟s open to 

that. And I think that‟s where we have to strive for, Mr. 

Speaker, working collaboratively and productively and not with 

some of the things I see happening. 

 

We are looking forward, Mr. Speaker. We‟re looking at positive 

outcomes and positive moves within the province. 

Saskatchewan‟s economy is strong. Our government‟s taken 

actions to make it steady and strong, and also moving along 

with that is we‟re making life more affordable for the 

Saskatchewan people. And as I said, Mr. Speaker, that‟s been 

recognized. A lot of constituents have recognized that and 

reflected that to me, and I‟m very encouraged by that and that 

keeps me going day to day, Mr. Speaker. As I said, you know, 

we‟re trying to be positive. The people of the province out there 

are positive. If we could just get the members opposite to be 

positive, I think, all working together, we can really get things 

moving ahead for the better of all people in this province. 

 

One thing to keep in mind, Mr. Speaker, is this budget came in 

the time of a global recession where other jurisdictions are 

coming up with deficit budgets or worse. And you know, we‟re 

not immune to this, Mr. Speaker, but we‟re doing very well. 

And you know, the world‟s recognizing Saskatchewan as a very 

stable economic environment. They‟re looking to invest 

somewhere stable — Canada top of the G7, Saskatchewan, I 

would argue, the top of those provinces within that country. We 

have a lot of interest in this province right now. All the more 

reason for the members opposite to really get behind what‟s 

going on in the province and get more of a positive attitude, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We are forecasting growth. And one thing I‟ve really noticed 

from the members across, they are pointing out some numbers 

that some private organizations have come up with, with 

growth. But I think, Mr. Speaker, part of the problem with that, 

they might be pigeonholing some of the smaller amounts, 

smaller forecasts, brought out by some of the private 

organizations. I think if you take an average, I think you‟ll see 

the 2.1 per cent growth forecast is pretty close to accurate. We 

see a province that‟s growing. And again we‟re optimistic but, 



March 24, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2475 

Mr. Speaker, we‟re cautious. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, as well I‟d like to fall back — and no 

pun intended — and think about some of the past 

announcements that have happened with our fall 

announcements: the tax cuts, the investment in infrastructure, 

the stimulus packages, or the investment in the province‟s 

economies and the province‟s infrastructure for a true stimulus 

package. Not throwing dollars at some maybe empty job 

creation, but throwing money into meaningful projects that are 

asked for by municipalities and needed by the province, Mr. 

Speaker, that are definitely falling short, that create real jobs 

that we can use to create a stronger economy in the future. 

Some of that infrastructure that investors from outside the 

province and outside the country really need to move forward 

with business in our jurisdiction. So that‟s very positive. 

 

Some of the tax measures introduced by the Premier in the fall 

will benefit most Saskatchewan people if not all — actually all, 

Mr. Speaker, but those that have the lowest income will benefit 

the most whether they pay income tax or not. The record debt 

reduction, another long-term legacy I think, Mr. Speaker, that‟s 

going to pay dividends to the province for many years to come. 

What that means is less interest costs, less that weight being 

carried by the burdens of the taxpayer, meaning we can invest 

more into programs and infrastructure for the province to keep 

it growing. 

 

[14:45] 

 

The billion-dollar ready-for-growth initiative announced last 

year, very positive, and admittedly, Mr. Speaker, we did bring 

out 500 million from this coming year‟s budget for 

shovel-ready projects for that added stimulus. We want to make 

sure that momentum is going. We don‟t want to hold that 

money back and hold those projects back to the point that they 

can‟t really get going till late in the summer and maybe not 

finished in the upcoming fall and winter season. 

 

So that money coming out ahead of time I think really keeps 

our momentum going, keeps those projects moving ahead for 

added investment in our province and in our people, including 

schools, long-term facilities, municipal infrastructure, 

highways, affordable housing, and the much-needed jobs to 

help build that infrastructure, Mr. Speaker. As I said, true jobs, 

true stimulus — not empty gestures. 

 

Now on to the budget. One thing that‟s very exciting is in these 

economic times worldwide, we‟re looking at a balanced budget 

for Saskatchewan, arguably maybe the only one in the country. 

It‟s said that maybe one other jurisdiction in our country may 

come out with a balanced budget. But as my esteemed 

colleague from Kindersley did point out, that that jurisdiction 

may be getting a two and a half billion dollar transfer payment. 

And I don‟t know what kind of infrastructure investments or 

other investments they‟re doing, Mr. Speaker, so I think all told, 

a very positive move on the part of our government, and really 

received well by the people of the province. 

 

And touching on that as well, Mr. Speaker, I think we‟ll hear a 

lot of criticism, you know, maybe a little bit of arrogance, 

maybe a little bit of over-jubilation. But, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t 

think that for myself, and I know I can reflect the thoughts of a 

lot of my colleagues. That has nothing to do with any sort of 

arrogance or any kind of patting on the back for ourselves, Mr. 

Speaker. That goes . . . speaks to happiness for the people of the 

province that they‟re feeling as well, Mr. Speaker, that positive 

attitude with a lot of the positive things that are happening in 

this province. And they are reaping in the benefits, Mr. Speaker. 

People of the province are really excited about that and feeling 

really positive and upbeat. 

 

The property tax, I think, a great, great program. I know the 

hard work that the member from Rosetown put into that project, 

Mr. Speaker, how many nights I would see his lights burning 

late, late in the night, meetings over and over again in some of 

our meeting rooms, and unbelievable amount of work and I 

think some really good work done on the part of the member 

from Rosetown and the Deputy Premier on that file. So, you 

know, hats off to them. And I know many, many people are 

very encouraged by that. 

 

I‟ve heard some criticism as to, you know, maybe some of the 

school boards might not be happy with it, Mr. Speaker, but I‟ve 

heard from many school board people that have said it‟s a 

weight off their shoulders. They‟re very happy about that. They 

know they‟re going to be funded properly. They‟re going to be 

worrying about the operation of that school. They still have 

their autonomy. They don‟t have to be the tax collectors. The 

government‟s going to fund this for them — 63 per cent this 

year, up to 66 per cent financing for next year. Very happy 

about this for the most part. 

 

And I‟ve talked to some new people that would like to get on 

school boards, that this is actually encouraging them to maybe 

come on board, get on the school board because the one 

negative thing they saw was them as being tax collectors. That‟s 

off their plate. They‟re very happy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So it‟s $103 million extra financing tax relief to the people of 

the province, tied with the retroactive tax relief from the Throne 

Speech, and tied in with the upcoming tax relief, Mr. Speaker. 

Another stimulus — $700 million in the pockets of the people 

of the province to keep this province moving forward and let 

the people that pay the taxes, the people of this province find 

the places they want to spend money. The government doesn‟t 

have to tell them how to spend money. This is the largest 

property tax cut in history; $240 million in extra income going 

to the schools this year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Municipal revenue sharing. Now, Mr. Speaker, this I was 

surprised — well I guess I shouldn‟t say I was surprised — I 

was very encouraged by the reactions I got from this. 

Municipalities have been asking this for over and over and over 

again for years and years and years. Nothing was done but, Mr. 

Speaker, now we‟re seeing . . . Let‟s use Yorkton for example. 

Before the budget they were hoping for a point seven, point 

eight — you know, they would be happy with that. 

 

To come up with a point nine per cent of PST [provincial sales 

tax] this year and an additional point one next year for a full 

percentage point of PST next year — fully sustainable and fully 

bankable income for those municipalities, Mr. Speaker — they 

are so excited. And with Yorkton, we are looking at, we just did 

an announcement on Friday at the chamber of commerce 

luncheon. The member from Regina South was there, the 



2476 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2009 

Municipal Affairs minister. Two cheques he presented to the 

city of Yorkton, in total over $8 million, Mr. Speaker, with the 

Building Canada money. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Hear, hear. Building Canada money, the 

MEEP [municipal economic enhancement program] money, 

Mr. Speaker. As well as the mayor pointed out to me it‟s not all 

— with the SIGI [Saskatchewan infrastructure growth 

initiative] money that the city received, the low interest loan, 

another $2 million-plus in interest savings, Mr. Speaker, we‟re 

talking over $10 million in those initiatives alone. 

 

The surrounding RMs [rural municipality] around Yorkton: 

$200,000 for the larger one; 90,000-plus, almost 100,000 for the 

smaller one, Mr. Speaker. Very excited, they can‟t say enough 

good. 

 

Predictable revenue, like I said, totalling nearly $170 million 

this year. And we have to keep in mind is, Mr. Speaker, that‟s 

on top of the $100 million one-time funding for infrastructure, 

shovel-ready projects that the Premier announced this February. 

 

So what we‟re looking at is something that the municipalities 

wanted, the leaders wanted — a predicable revenue source. 

And, you know, we delivered. And I just have to touch on a few 

quotes here. A lot of the members in the House have been using 

quotes from different sources; I might be using some of those as 

well. 

 

A very respected local mayor, a phone call to me right after the 

budget, Mr. Speaker, “Who cannot be in love with the 

Saskatchewan Party government now?” I couldn‟t agree with 

him any more. 

 

And another comment he made on Friday, with their cheque 

presentation, “This is the most amount of money any council in 

the city of Yorkton has ever achieved or gotten from any 

provincial administration prior to this one.” Mr. Speaker, you 

know a very . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Yes, very encouraging words, and you 

know I‟m very thankful for those comments. But you know, I 

think it just goes to realize that, you know, our government, our 

cabinet, our Premier realizes the value of Yorkton, third largest 

trading area in the province. And it‟s recognized and there‟s 

investments in that respect. 

 

This budget, another $1 billion in infrastructure to keep things 

strong and steady, Mr. Speaker. Again, more of that stimulus 

money to keep things rolling and keep our province economy 

moving. 

 

Some of the promises we‟ve talked about, Mr. Speaker. I think 

it‟s well over 100 promises we‟ve kept. We‟ve pretty much 

completed the whole platform document. That‟s great news. 

We‟ve got over two years to go before the next election. So 

many more things to achieve, you know, to clean that off of our 

slate and really address other issues that come forward. 

 

And what I‟ve seen with a lot of the spending we‟ve done, Mr. 

Speaker, it‟s not reactive. Reactive spending is never a good 

thing. You‟re always behind the eight ball. I‟ve always termed 

that sort of the whac-a-mole system of finance; something pops 

up, you hit it. You‟re all over the map, you don‟t have any 

definitive plan. 

 

There‟s such a strong plan here. The Minister of Highways, a 

definite plan. Five year rolling plan; flexible yet, you know, you 

can see where the money‟s going; see where the plan is; and we 

can see where things are going. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Transparency. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — A lot of transparency as pointed out by my 

friend, the member from Saskatoon Northwest, very 

knowledgeable, well-spoken man. 

 

Proactive spending, Mr. Speaker, preventative spending. 

Something that in meetings early in our government, Mr. 

Speaker, some of the meetings I sat in on where I would use 

these words or some of my colleagues would use words like 

preventative and proactive, we would have people actually stop 

the meetings — thinking they were angry — and saying they 

had been meeting with administrations time and time again for 

a number of years, never have they heard proactive or 

preventative, Mr. Speaker. Those aren‟t my words. Those are 

the words of people that we have met with from north, south, 

east, and west. So you know, that‟s really encouraging for us to 

know that they feel we‟re on the right track. 

 

Mr. Speaker, safety in our communities — so very important. 

As in Yorkton, not really any specific gangs at this point, but 

definitely gang activity is all over jurisdictions, all over cities. I 

think the majority of our areas are finding that there is some of 

that gang activity. 

 

Thirty more police officers, again keeping up to that 

commitment that we made. Eighteen new RCMP [Royal 

Canadian Mounted Police] officers in this province, Mr. 

Speaker. And the commitment from my friend and colleague 

from P.A. [Prince Albert] Carlton that Yorkton is going to be 

seeing the benefits of some of those police officers, you know, 

so very exciting again. The mayor from the city of Yorkton 

catching wind of that could not be happier and cannot wait till 

we come to Yorkton with an announcement sometime very 

soon. Please keep tuned. 

 

And as well as the funding for the western gang strategy 

database, to share knowledge of these criminal activities across 

the jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker, not to just kind of look after your 

own little area. Let‟s share information. These gangs don‟t stay 

in small areas. They are province-wide. They are nationwide, 

Western Canada wide — sharing, collaborating, being 

co-operative to address that problem along the board. 

 

Help for the most vulnerable in society. A lot of good 

movement. We saw from . . . I said with my work with the CBO 

initiative through the hon. minister from Humboldt — great 

work, a great lady to work under, and a very good mentor. 

 

Some of the things that we came forward with through those 

CBO meetings, Mr. Speaker, some of the initiatives that have 



March 24, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2477 

been brought forward and acted upon already, quite honestly to 

me are quite stunning. As slow as government can move, how 

quickly she acted on some of these initiatives. And quite 

honestly, it really stunned a lot of people out there. They were 

very shocked and pleased — the extra money for additional 

funding to CBOs, as the hon. member across has spoken about. 

 

Another quote I‟ve gotten very shortly after the budget, and it 

was an email from a friend of mine that is the head 

administrator for Sask Abilities Council in Yorkton. And it 

reads: 

 

Great provincial budget with interim funding for recycling 

operations and the 3% lift of Social Services CBOs again, 

plus capital for physical upgrades and construction. The 

enthusiasm amongst our staff is palpable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they could not be more excited with the 

investments that are being made. 

 

Better life for all Saskatchewan children, Mr. Speaker. A 

thousand new child care spaces in Saskatchewan for those 

parents who work outside the home. Twelve million dollars will 

go toward space expansion, training programs, increased pay 

for early childhood learning and child care workers, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I‟m not sure how much I‟m running on 

time, but this is one point, it‟s very close to my heart, and it‟s 

not specifically in Yorkton. This is a province-wide initiative in 

Saskatoon. But this is one I‟m going to have to apologize to my 

fellow members, I might go on long. 

 

My family‟s past history with health care in this province — I 

can‟t say enough about the quality of care. The quantity was 

always the issue. The quality of care that we got when our son 

was sick, and ultimately passed away from cancer. Mr. Speaker, 

from the Saskatoon Cancer Centre, the child care we got there 

was second to none. 

 

But with this new investment, Mr. Speaker . . . and I mean it 

was over and over, it was seen that we needed one. And a story 

I‟ll relay: when at one point we were in the hospital with our 

son, and we were up on the third wing and walking down the 

hallway. And I‟m walking down there with a couple of the 

oncologists, and I said, you know, I thought this childhood 

cancer was so rare. What‟s going on up here? This ward is full 

of it. His statement to me, Mr. Speaker, was, they‟re all here. 

They‟re all here, the cancer kids. 

 

So what does that say about that ward being full of cancer kids, 

Mr. Speaker? Where are some of the overflow? Where are some 

of the other kids with serious issues that maybe can‟t fit in? 

They‟re maybe not quite as serious with cancer. Mr. Speaker, I 

can really relate to my friend, the member from P.A. Carlton as 

well. When I saw this, I was teary eyed, Mr. Speaker, from 

sheer jubilation and happiness that some of the children I‟ve 

seen fight and win, some of the children I‟ve seen fight and 

lose, Mr. Speaker, those little souls putting up that fight. 

 

And now we‟re putting some real dollars or real investment in 

this, $200 million over the next two years. It‟s hard to say it 

myself, but you know I‟ve got a few quotes here that I‟ve really 

got to, I‟ve really got to reflect on, Mr. Speaker. Brynn 

Boback-Lane, President and CEO [chief executive officer] of 

Children‟s Health & Hospital Foundation of Saskatchewan: 

 

Really today is about and dedicated to the children that 

have been challenged and lost and the children that are 

challenged and winning their fight with illness or injury.” 

This day is for them [Mr. Speaker]. 

 

There‟s a few more here, and I‟ve got to share these because I 

was reading through these and I couldn‟t just pick and choose 

yesterday, Mr. Speaker. And there‟s one I really want to focus 

on. Mayor Don Atchison: 

 

I can tell you, that children‟s hospital is not only for the 

. . . [citizens] of Saskatoon. [As I said, Mr. Speaker, this is 

for all of our people in the province.] That‟s for the entire 

province of Saskatchewan. We‟re one of the few places 

that do not have a children‟s hospital and I can tell you 

there‟s going to be a lot of happy families in the province 

[Mr. Speaker] of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I am one of those families. My family is one of those 

families. We still have a lot of contact with the Saskatoon 

cancer centre, and I know a lot of those families there that are 

going through this battle, this fight right now. They can‟t be 

happier for that kind of investment in the quality of life and the 

quality of care for those very, very valuable children. 

 

This one here really spoke to my heart, Mr. Speaker. Maura 

Davies, president of the Saskatoon Health Region: 

 

I met with the minister very briefly and I gave him a hug 

and I don‟t often give the Minister of Health a hug, but I 

had to give him a hug today. I‟m just thrilled about it . . . 

 

He‟s lucky he‟s not sitting down there right now, Mr. Speaker; 

the camera would have to pan, I would give him one big hug. 

He might even get a wet kiss. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — And very, very deservingly so. He‟s 

probably hiding outside. 

 

We have the investment in education and skills training, Mr. 

Speaker, as touched on by my one-legged friend from 

Saskatoon Greystone. $23 million to enable universities to limit 

tuition increases to the average of 3 per cent, enhance our 

student aid program to make education more accessible, the 

student tuition reimbursement program, support training seat 

expansions for doctors and nurses. 

 

Millions of dollars this year in a comprehensive plan to track 

more nurses and hard-to-recruit health care professionals. Some 

good work done by my very great member here that sits beside 

me from Regina. More funding to recruit more physicians to 

our province. 

 

Investing in Aboriginal workforce development fund, program 

highlights new employment opportunities for those First 

Nations and Métis. Eleven hundred new apprentice seats and 

additional apprentice training allowance support. More 



2478 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2009 

promises to keep our economy strong, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:00] 

 

As I touched on the infrastructure investment across the 

province, another investment in our city of Yorkton, Mr. 

Speaker, the truck bypass for Yorkton to service not only the 

new canola plant, the new canola industry, but those spinoffs 

developing that whole northern corridor that‟s expected to grow 

in Yorkton there, Mr. Speaker, and get our economy booming 

and keep our economy strong and to support those industries 

coming and wanting to invest in our province. This means a 

great deal for Yorkton and again the city of Yorkton‟s 

surrounding communities, very excited about this investment, 

$40 million that will help rehabilitate municipal roads to better 

support heavy loads and our growing economy; again, Mr. 

Speaker, province-wide support all of our economies and 

constituencies, something that benefits every person in the 

province. 

 

The Saskatchewan research and development tax credit 

encouraging motivation and that kind of investment in our 

province, Mr. Speaker, develop technologies here — 

Saskatchewan based technologies — grow them here, we can 

help jurisdictions around the world with what‟s developed here 

so, Mr. Speaker, very, very promising. 

 

Never-before-seen, I don‟t think, investments in agriculture, 

Mr. Speaker — agriculture people I‟ve talked to in my 

constituency and around the province are very excited. A lot of 

the green initiatives, the members across say, not enough 

money. But I‟m looking at a lot of the priorities, Mr. Speaker. 

With my background in environment issues for the past . . . I 

would argue 35 years or so, Mr. Speaker, I‟ve grown up in it 

and I‟ve worked in it my whole life. I‟ve never seen a Premier, 

I‟ve never seen an environment minister, I‟ve never seen 

government caucus before — being on the other side of the 

fence — so prioritized on environment and some of these 

initiatives right now. 

 

Definitely we‟re in a crisis. Nothing caused by the people in the 

province that are looking after this good work for us, Mr. 

Speaker, but recognized and willing to move forward. And I‟ve 

never seen, like I say, such a proactive and such a high priority 

placed on this initiative, Mr. Speaker, so very good initiatives. 

 

And along with the prior budget announcement of $2 million to 

help a lot of these predominately disability groups doing 

recycling in the province, Mr. Speaker, over 900,000 for those, 

over 300,000 for the waste regions, and 600,000 municipalities 

shouldering this burden on their own for a long time, showing 

definite investment. And we‟re not done there yet, Mr. Speaker, 

more good news to follow. We have ambitious projects helping 

to make life more affordable for our people that are needing 

help — government subsidized rental housing, more money to 

adjust shelter rates for income assistance program people, 

increased transit for disability people, help for seniors. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, with that, I think I‟m going to wind things 

up here fairly quickly. We‟re on a strong and steady course I 

believe. As I‟ve said, nobody‟s perfect, you know. We‟re open 

to criticism, address that criticism, and move on in a proactive 

and a positive manner. 

But in these financial times, Mr. Speaker, I can‟t be more 

excited about the investment, the tax cuts, still having a .425 

billion-dollar surplus, Mr. Speaker, .425 billion-dollar surplus, 

still over a billion in the Growth and Financial Security Fund, 

education property tax, infrastructure investment, investments 

in our people. 

 

One more quote, Mr. Speaker, I want to use before I close, this 

by a respected journalist in Yorkton. I won‟t use his name 

because I never cleared it with him. Any members that want to 

ask me who he is, definitely I‟ll give them his information. 

 

Coming out of the Chamber at lunch, Mr. Speaker, he walked 

up and he says, you know, Greg, you know I‟m no supporter of 

yours; and I said, you know, I know you‟re not but I respect 

your views. With him, an interview is never an interview. It‟s 

always a debate, Mr. Speaker, but he reports very fairly and, 

you know, a very fair journalist, and I can‟t argue about that. 

His statement to me was, you know I‟m normally no supporter 

of your party, but 90 to 95 per cent of what you are doing, I 

like. Now, Mr. Speaker, that — very positive news. 

 

I could get into some of these charts with the tax cuts, people 

benefitting. I think some of the other members have touched on 

that. So I‟d like to just close by saying how excited, honoured, 

and truly blessed I am to be working with these men and 

women on this side of the floor — the Deputy Premier, the 

cabinet ministers, the legislative secretaries, everybody in 

caucus pulling their weight, doing their part to make things 

move ahead and proactively for the province. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, the Premier, I can‟t say enough about our 

Premier, so I won‟t. That‟s what you call a career limiting 

statement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will be voting against the amendment. I will be 

using less language than my friend, the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest used, but I will be voting in favour of the main 

budget motion. I am very pleased to do so. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before I start my 

speech today, I would like to mention a couple of the people 

that work in my office back in Lloydminster. Marilyn, who 

really helped me through a tough time there after Christmas 

where I was quite busy in the office and we were a little short 

staffed. And Caren, who has just joined our team, she‟s an 

excellent team member. In fact I think the way she handles 

herself and the professionalism that she shows in my office, I 

truly appreciate. So having those two ladies on this team is just 

fantastic. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, today we‟re talking about the budget. This 

budget is titled Saskatchewan: Strong and Steady. Strong and 

steady is first and foremost a balanced budget, a commitment to 

fiscal responsibility, living within our means, keeping our 

financial house in order in a time of economic turmoil around 

the world. 

 



March 24, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2479 

Mr. Speaker, strong and steady is a commitment to 

infrastructure, putting the pieces back together after 16 years of 

neglect. Infrastructure is the engine that will keep our province 

productive as we go through this difficult time in the world 

economy. Strong and steady is keeping more money in the 

pockets of the men and women who work and live in this 

province, allowing these people to prioritize what‟s important to 

them in this changing world. Strong and steady is the right 

position for our province. 

 

Historically we have experienced the full effects of what global 

turmoil can do if a province is not prepared. Our province was 

filled with optimism and promise in the 1920s and was not 

prepared when the downturn of the Depression hit in the 1930s, 

and the effects of which have been felt for decades. 

 

Over 100 years ago the bravest people I can think of started this 

journey by settling the territory, then province. I scarcely 

comprehend the courage of these immigrants who spent their 

life savings to take a chance on a better life. They gambled 

everything to travel to an untamed frontier with no experience 

and little training. The lure of free land turned our barren prairie 

into an agrarian powerhouse, with families on almost every 

quarter section by the 1930s, with almost 1 million people in 

Saskatchewan by 1930. We had the third largest population in 

Canada. It was a very prosperous time in Saskatchewan. 

 

The boundless optimism was met with the cruel reality of the 

Depression, as our province felt its full effects and the effects 

that lingered for years after. Two generations and 70 years after 

the Great Depression, our province was still haunted by it. Its 

impact affected how we handled ourselves and how we were 

viewed by our neighbours. 

 

In 1990 I went to university in British Columbia. Being from 

Saskatchewan at that time had a stigma although my Wranglers 

and cowboy boots may not have helped break their stereotypes 

— likely not, Mr. Speaker. On a regular basis, my university 

counterparts would say their family roots were in 

Saskatchewan, but they had moved out long ago. I felt a little 

sore that Saskatchewan was often the butt of their jokes. While 

Torontonians were teased that they were from the “centre of the 

universe,” and Albertans were stereotyped as rich oilmen, you 

knew the jokes about Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan was often 

jested at a combination of being barren or flat, cold, a dry cold, 

prairie dust storms or snowstorms. We know the jokes, Mr. 

Speaker. Though meant in good humour, there may have been 

some truth. When honestly pinned down, their views of 

Saskatchewan was that Saskatchewan in the 1990s was kept 

afloat, and barely afloat by the good grace of equalization 

funded by their benevolent province. But Saskatchewan was a 

socialist basket case whose future held nothing but an exodus of 

our best and brightest. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would argue tirelessly. I would say to my 

counterparts, my friends, no, that is a simplistic view of it. In 

fact Saskatchewan is more than that; it is filled with 

hard-working people that have pride and confidence. But, Mr. 

Speaker, no sooner would I make these arguments than we‟d 

see on the TV an NDP politician, sometimes the premier, 

saying, in fact no, no we are a wee province. Or in fact we will 

be in and out of equalization. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some of them went so far as to say, the more of 

our young people that leave, the more there‟ll be left for the rest 

of us, now just perpetuating the negativity that was viewed of 

Saskatchewan at that time. And I knew that Saskatchewan was 

full of confident, hard-working people that didn‟t believe in 

equalization handouts, Mr. Speaker. But we would see on TV 

on a regular basis our politicians cutting the legs out of that 

argument. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, how things have changed — and for the 

better — since the election in 2007 and the ensuing change in 

perspective in our province, not to mention the cross-country 

attention we have received. I can tell you the tone of my 

university counterparts has also changed. At a recent wedding 

in the United States, people would come up to me and instead 

of a joke would say, wow, Saskatchewan. What are you guys 

doing there? It is prosperous. You guys are the shining light in 

Canada. I would have Americans come up to me and say, I 

heard about Saskatchewan on CNN [Cable News Network]. 

What‟s going on? Now, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you I felt full of 

pride to have people from the United States, Alberta, and 

British Columbia fawning over Saskatchewan as this shining 

light. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, discussion would ensue about 

how our economy is robust. Our Premier is seen in a positive 

light, who is impressing everyone across our nation and south 

of the border with his balanced, progressive approach. It is nice 

to finally be on the map. Now many years, many generations 

later, the veil has been lifted, and our province is again the envy 

of the nation and continent. 

 

This is why I got into politics — to be part of a team of 

optimists who share a positive vision for Saskatchewan, who 

know that we have not yet reached our full potential. Today I‟m 

proud to stand here and see how far we‟ve come in the last 16 

months. But I know how far we have left to go over the long 

term. 

 

While the NDP and their doom and gloom attitude may finally 

be history, our government is making history: the largest 

property tax cut in Saskatchewan history, a 14 per cent 

reduction in education property tax. 

 

When the NDP were in government, they talked about the 

problem. They recognized the inequity. They recognized the 

unfairness. They talked and talked. Sometimes they gave the 

same speech in two consecutive years to the same group. They 

never solved the problem. It wasn‟t a priority for them. 

 

This budget will increase the share of funding to school 

divisions by $241 million this year to a record $990 million. 

Our province will now fund 63 per cent of the operating costs 

of education this year and more next year. Heralded by both 

people in rural and the cities. 

 

To quote a couple. Dave Marit: partly because of the property 

tax and partly some other issues that were addressed in the 

budget he said, and I quote, “This is the best budget for rural 

Saskatchewan in history.” Mr. Speaker, that is a long history, 

and I‟m very proud to be on this side of the House when the 



2480 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2009 

stakeholders are making comments like that. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I find that the members on the opposite side 

of the House often make the mistake that this budget is rural or 

urban; it‟s good for one and bad for the other. Mr. Speaker, this 

budget is good for everyone, and the property tax issue is no 

different. 

 

I will quote Mayor Don Atchison and he says in regards to 

property tax, “There are a lot of good things in here for the city 

of Saskatoon and I‟m sure for a lot of other municipalities as 

well.” And Mayor Pat Fiacco, he gets on board by saying, “As a 

taxpayer personally, I think it‟s going in the right direction.” 

Mr. Speaker, to have endorsements from cities, rural, from farm 

groups, it is great that a budget can address the needs on a 

fundamental level. This is on top of the historic tax cuts, income 

tax cuts we‟ve made, historic levels of debt repayment in this 

current year, historic spending on infrastructure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP government is again history and our 

party is making history. Historic revenue sharing — point nine 

per cent and a full 1 per cent point of PST to municipalities in 

revenue sharing this year. 

 

Mayor Don Atchison says, “We‟ve been asking for years now 

to have long-term, sustainable, accessible funding . . .” Allan 

Earle of SUMA adds this is a historic day for a new formula for 

it to become a reality. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these groups have been asking for years. This 

money was clawed back and they‟ve been asking for years and 

the NDP — I heard them — they talked about the problem on a 

regular basis. They again recognized it, they identified it, they 

said it needed fixed. That‟s as far as it got, Mr. Speaker, that‟s 

as far as it got. 

 

Finally municipalities won‟t be subject to just ad hoc, 

unsustainable programming. They will have sustainable 

planning that can go forward over the long term. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in two short years our government has made 

historic changes to set us on a new path, a path started by our 

founders over 100 years ago. The same optimism, 

entrepreneurship, the roll up their sleeves hard work that they 

too shared upon arrival in this province is again moving us 

forward. 

 

[15:15] 

 

My eldest daughter who is now four, she often asks me, dad, 

what are you going to speech about today? Then she tells me 

that it‟s probably going to be boring unless it‟s about her, her 

mom, and Gracie. Well I certainly can think about my young 

family when I critique this budget, Mr. Speaker; how the 

previous government‟s policies drove out entrepreneurship, 

drove out optimism, and drove out families. 

 

I am proud to think of the new direction our government is 

taking. My daughter may choose to stay here in Saskatchewan 

when she grows up, that her future may be one where people 

say, wow you‟re from Saskatchewan; that is such a thriving, 

exciting place; it‟s been leading Canada for decades. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, historic investment in the 

children‟s hospital, $100 million this year, $100 million next 

year. This is good, good news for my family, Mr. Speaker. It‟s 

good news for families in Saskatchewan. And it‟s good news 

for families who are thinking of moving to Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. This is again something that‟s been long talked about 

in Saskatchewan, but it wasn‟t a priority for the members 

opposite. They knew that Saskatchewan didn‟t have one. They 

knew that it was a concern of people. They talked about it, but it 

wasn‟t a priority. 

 

The CEO of the children‟s hospital and health foundation of 

Saskatchewan said, “We are grateful and feel privileged to be 

part of such a momentous time for the next generation of this 

province . . .” 

 

Historic funding for child care spaces and early learning, an 

increase of 12.6 million. Mr. Speaker, 1,000 new child care 

spaces in Saskatchewan — this is historic. The most ever was 

500 spaces in one year. This year 1,000, Mr. Speaker. Active 

family benefit, $19 million. Increased funding for libraries, Mr. 

Speaker. This is good news for my family. This is good news 

for every family in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another initiative that must not be forgotten is the 

infrastructure investment. In last year‟s budget, we spent $1 

billion on infrastructure. We called it our ready-for-growth 

initiative, our ready-for-growth budget. $1 billion had never 

been seen on infrastructure in Saskatchewan and, Mr. Speaker, 

it was well received. It was well needed. It moved our province 

forward and it will continue to move our province forward. 

 

This year, Mr. Speaker, we decided we‟re going to put another 

billion dollars into infrastructure because it‟s needed. Sixteen 

years of neglect has left this province in need of countless 

amounts of infrastructure. That government didn‟t make it a 

priority. This government got it done, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Safer communities — 30 new police 

officers in Saskatchewan. This keeps our commitment in the 

campaign; this keeps our communities safe. This is a priority 

for our government. It wasn‟t a priority in the past, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Agriculture got a 58 per cent increase in spending, Mr. Speaker. 

Greg Marshall of the Agricultural Producers Association of 

Saskatchewan said that “The government „did a great job of 

[great job for, quote, great job for] listening‟ to the concerns 

faced by farmers and by rural Saskatchewan.” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this is something we‟ve heard from many 

groups, that in the past the doors to the offices in this building 

were closed, and that the new government has taken on a new 

direction of listening to the concerns of the people involved. I 

think that the former government got tired of talking about the 

issues with the stakeholders. But never being able to 

accomplish any of them, the meetings got somewhat repetitive 

and tougher for them to handle, Mr. Speaker. 

 



March 24, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2481 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to at this point maybe point out a 

couple inconsistencies that I‟ve seen from the critique coming 

from the aisle opposite in regards to this budget. I‟ve noticed 

some stuff that maybe wasn‟t particularly accurate, and I would 

just like to address a few of those issues. 

 

Part of the problem may be that such a well-rounded budget is 

hard for them to find an angle that they can attack. And I think 

this is borne out by a quote from Murray Mandryk, a columnist 

that often sits in this Chamber, and he said he wonders if the 

NDP have anything legitimate left to criticize. Mr. Speaker, I 

think that that might go part of the way to explaining the 

response we got from the members opposite. 

 

And this was evidently borne out in a John Gormley interview 

with the member from Douglas Park, the critic of Finance. 

When asked by John Gormley what he would change about the 

budget, he came up empty. Mr. Speaker, he didn‟t have a 

response. And in fact worse than that, the Leader of the 

Opposition and the Finance critic were both found out this past 

week that their understanding of the potash industry is 

somewhat limited. 

 

When they were starting to criticize that the revenues coming 

off potash may be tied to production as opposed to actual sales, 

it quickly backfired. But I think it left us all with a little less 

confidence that when they were in government, the people who 

were in charge of the finances didn‟t understand such a large 

portion of the budget. 

 

Further than that, many of the members on their side have asked 

a lot of questions that I personally haven‟t felt had a lot of 

depth. Most were centred on the morning‟s newspaper and how 

that would relate to this broad document in the budget or 

something no more insight than yesterday‟s stock prices. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when a budget is designed, when the 

process is moved forward, the modelling takes private sector 

forecasts; it takes historical trends; it brings in information from 

all sorts. And we have a Finance department full of experts 

whose professional, professional job is to design a budget that 

brings in the best information. It models it, and it scales it out 

over an entire year — not over yesterday‟s stock price — over 

an entire year, Mr. Speaker. And I think that the members 

opposite don‟t take that into account. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to comment on one other angle that 

I‟ve noticed coming from across the floor and that is that, you 

know, they were going to get to this or they had planned that. 

We were going to do it. That‟s our project. Mr. Speaker, I have 

to agree with them. I think they did plan a lot of this. In 16 

years, they had a lot of time to think about what they should be 

doing. The reality is that in 16 years, they didn‟t get it done. In 

16 months, we have accomplished so many things. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, a perfect example of that is the 

member from North Battleford who has taken it on his personal 

charge that the project in his riding is all of a sudden the 

number one priority. We hear from him on a daily basis that this 

project, the Saskatchewan Hospital, in his riding is number one. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, when I look at history, I seem to remember 

he was the minister of Health for a long period of time. He was 

the decision maker. He was the guy that set the priorities for his 

government. And when he was making the decisions, it wasn‟t 

a priority for him. He was the guy that signed the cheques, and 

he said, you know, that‟s not something his government wanted 

to do. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this government recognizes there are 

countless priorities in Saskatchewan. We are addressing them 

one at a time and, Mr. Speaker, at some point we will be 

addressing every priority in this province. And they will try and 

take credit for each and every one. Mr. Speaker, they didn‟t get 

it done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when they say they couldn‟t get it done, often it‟s 

because we didn‟t have enough money; we didn‟t have enough 

dollars. Mr. Speaker, it wasn‟t dollars that was the problem; it 

was common sense. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they had lots of money. It was just that they didn‟t 

have the right priorities. They thought that spending money on 

dot-coms, on potato schemes . . . And I call it a scheme because 

it wasn‟t a plan. It wasn‟t a well-thought-out business model. It 

was a scheme. And the taxpayers of this province paid for it, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, their plan was that as soon as their South 

American gamble paid off or their mega bingo payday paid out, 

they could build a children‟s hospital. Not that they could spend 

the money instead of on the potato scam or the mega bingo 

project on the children‟s hospital, but we would invest it there. 

And when it cashed out, we would spend that money on 

infrastructure for Saskatchewan. 

 

You know, I sat around the table as a child and we‟d talk about, 

you know, one good crop. If wheat prices go up this year, you 

know, maybe we can go to Disneyland. You know, one good 

canola crop and we can buy a new car. I wonder if those 

members would sit around their table and say, you know, if we 

have a good potato crop this year, just one good potato crop, 

and maybe we can fix the highway system, Mr. Speaker. Yes, 

one good potato crop. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McMillan: — If that Guyana power project hadn‟t been a 

wash, you know, maybe that could have been when the property 

tax issue was solved — maybe; maybe not, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think that the NDP had the resources; they just didn‟t have the 

priorities. They squandered opportunities again and again. One 

might have to question their philosophy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Our government has the confidence of the people of 

Saskatchewan. I heard this weekend from the members in my 

constituency how important it was that we have a balanced 

budget. I also was told by many people how much confidence 

they have in our Finance minister and the direction our Premier 

is leading. The people are proud of this budget. The people I 

talked to, they have their chests puffed out a little bit; you know 

— we have a balanced budget; the country doesn‟t. 

 



2482 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2009 

Lloydminster is right on the border of Alberta and for too long 

we‟ve watched our Alberta neighbours swagger around with 

their confidence. And good for them; they‟ve done very well. 

But the people in Lloydminster who have lived on the 

Saskatchewan side, this year are standing just a little taller, Mr. 

Speaker, because we are the province with the balanced budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I am proud to be 

a member of this team and a part of the optimism and growth. 

This budget is the next step on the journey started so long ago, 

and is a step in the right direction. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting the amendment, and I will 

be supporting the strong and steady balanced budget. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, it is a 

pleasure to enter into the 2009-10 budget. And we know this is 

one of the most important parts of our job on both sides of the 

House, where we look for what‟s good and right for this 

province, and what we should be doing, and what may not be as 

it appears. 

 

But before I get too far into my remarks, I want to send a 

special thank you out to a few folks, and of course on both sides 

we do that. I want to thank my family, of course, for their 

support over the past eight years. As we do this, as we engage 

in debate and sometimes it gets pretty heated and sometimes the 

comments are not quite on the mark but, you know, generally 

we have some pretty fruitful discussions in here and I 

appreciate the support from my family. 

 

I also appreciate the support of my constituency assistant, 

Leslie Bernett. She‟s a tireless worker, helping out as much as 

she can, getting the services for people, making sure that they 

can find their way through sometimes the challenging 

bureaucracy of the government. And she does an excellent job. 

 

Also I want to thank my constituents. Saskatoon is a very rich 

and diverse community. It‟s the heart of Saskatoon — I 

represent seven different communities, different parts of them. 

And it‟s an interesting and fascinating job to represent the core, 

the different challenges that core communities face, but also the 

downtown community in the high-rise apartments, whether they 

be Saskatoon Housing Authority apartments for seniors and for 

affordable housing, or from some of the upscale condos and the 

challenges that they face, and especially over the last couple of 

years around the housing issue in Saskatoon. 

 

I do want to say that there are some positives in this budget, and 

of course many of us on this side have remarked on this. We 

have a limited time of about 15 minutes, 20 minutes to speak on 

this, so I won‟t go into length. 

 

I am excited to see the continuation of our commitment to the 

children‟s hospital. Now I am concerned that it will take as long 

as we‟ve read in the paper; 2013 may be the date when it 

actually opens. But we understand that this is what happens, 

and we‟re glad to see that remains a priority. 

 

We‟re excited about the student housing project at the 

University of Saskatchewan. Very, very important. 

 

On a more sombre note, the work in terms of social services 

around the children‟s welfare response is an important move 

forward, and I will have more to speak about that in the future. 

 

Of course we do have some concerns, and I‟ll let the specific 

critics on this side do what they‟re supposed to do, and that is to 

ask the questions. Sometimes the other side thinks that we 

should have the answers before we have the questions. Of 

course we don‟t have the privilege of having the answers, the 

full answers, and so we have to ask those questions. And that‟s 

what people in this province expect us to do, and we will do 

that, Mr. Speaker, no doubt about it. And we‟ve been working 

hard, studying the documents, to really fully understand, what 

does this mean for Saskatchewan? 

 

For example today we had some questions about Westside 

Clinic, and we‟ll have more questions about that. What is the 

implication for the core communities fully when we understand 

the importance of health in the communities? 

 

Around environmental protection, I have some questions about 

that. We see what‟s happening federally. Jim Prentice, the 

Minister of Environment federally, has said that there may be 

some shortcuts when it comes to environmental protection. We 

sure hope that‟s not the case here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Another issue that I have some concerns about is around tuition. 

We understand there‟s been some money set aside, but the 

minister today said that he respects the autonomy of the 

university to set their tuition fees. And so what does that mean? 

We give them so much money but there‟s not really much they 

can do. So this is an issue. 

 

[15:30] 

 

Well what do we judge the framework against? What‟s the 

framework that we evaluate this budget? Of course we talk 

about transparency and there will be the opportunity in 

estimates to ask questions, and it‟s important that we get full 

and frank answers from the ministers. At that point, our 

committees really get down to the nitty-gritty and do the 

important work of asking questions and getting the answers of 

what does this budget mean for people here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Of course, fairness is also an important one. And of course we 

saw the headline on Friday morning in the Saskatoon 

StarPhoenix talking about Saskatoon being shortchanged. And 

we sure hope that‟s not the case. We have to wait and see. 

 

The communications out of budget really asked us with some 

serious questions about what does the education part of property 

taxes really mean, especially in some of the communities in 

some of the larger centres. This is something that we have some 

questions about. 

 

And of course my colleague, the member from Saskatoon 



March 24, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2483 

Nutana, had some very good questions about the intercity 

comparisons. And we asked about that. We can see the 2007 

intercity comparison for a single person. At $25,000 total 

income, their total costs were 9,671, and in 2009 it boosts up to 

11,149. This is a reality of people who are living in Saskatoon 

who are single. 

 

Now they can talk about taxes being cut, but the fact of the 

matter is costs are going up. And what are they doing about 

that? And I can go through this quite at length, but I want to get 

on to the main parts of my speech today. But clearly, costs of 

living are going up for people right across this province, and I 

have some serious questions about whether or not the 

government is actually meeting the challenge here in a 

meaningful way. 

 

And of course I think the biggest question we have on this side 

is about the sustainability of this budget. What is it that makes 

this a solid budget? And we‟ve had some different descriptions 

of this, talking about the shifting sands. And I have to say, Mr. 

Speaker, I have some serious questions about this. I think that 

our critic, on this side, of Finance raised some serious points, 

some serious questions about what have they based this budget, 

the revenue projections on. 

 

And of course the first one that came to mind, and I was 

shocked by the member from Lloydminster who was alluding to 

the fact they would just throw out the private sector forecast of 

GDP [gross domestic product], because they have better people 

inside the Department of Finance. Clearly we think that people 

inside the department are very capable, but I don‟t think you 

dismiss what the private sector is doing, particularly the current 

forecast. He can say you got to do this over a year. Mr. Speaker, 

we all know what‟s been happening in the economy around the 

world over the course of the past year. 

 

Clearly this government‟s not taking the world price of oil over 

the last year, averaging it out. We know what it was like year. 

So clearly this is a problem. The private sector forecast of GDP 

growth is point six. We‟ve established that and the rosy 

predictions of this government is 2.1. How can that be? Do you 

think they might take just another little look at that? I think they 

really need to do that. 

 

And of course the reliance on one commodity of potash. We 

think potash is a really important sector of our economy, clearly 

an important sector. We‟ve worked hard to make sure that 

sector can grow. In fact I seen the ministers in the front row 

wearing rose-coloured glasses. It‟s so bright in this . . . 

[inaudible] . . . right now, they‟ve taken to wearing sunglasses 

in the House. But, Mr. Speaker, the reliance on one commodity, 

one out of every $5 of the revenue for this budget comes from 

one sector. 

 

We hope they‟re prepared in case things don‟t work out as well. 

We think that the comments, and particularly we see the layoff 

notices, the questions about the future production of potash, 

clearly makes us stop for a moment and think about where is 

. . . what is the future of this commodity over the course of the 

next year? We hope that it‟s up. Clearly it‟s got a strong track 

record, but the reliance on one commodity is problematic. 

 

And of course, Mr. Speaker, the increase in debt and the 

staggering increase in spending is something that we all have to 

worry about for sure. 

 

I would say, Mr. Speaker, the one point that I want to make 

today as critic for Social Services is that this is clearly is a 

missed opportunity to really do something in a landmark 

fashion for this province. It‟s a missed opportunity. And we saw 

last November, and it was referred to earlier in the question 

period, but a report was released last year, last November, the 

health disparity report in Saskatoon — a very thick document. 

And all I remember last year in the budget debate asking the 

minister if he saw the precursor to this report, an article talking 

about the implications for the core communities of Saskatoon in 

terms of health disparity. And he assured me he had. And I 

hope he‟s had the time to take a look at the full report. It‟s a 

very thorough investigation into health disparity in Saskatoon. 

 

And what is their first recommendation? What is their first 

option? Well, they talk about a poverty reduction plan. And I‟m 

not going to read the whole thing here, Mr. Speaker, but I do 

want to talk about, they do a little review around the world — 

what‟s happening around the world. Well clearly Ireland is 

moving in a big way. The Netherlands is moving in a big way. 

Sweden‟s moving towards this, the United Kingdom. 

 

What‟s happening in Canada, Mr. Speaker? Well, we see that 

there‟s other provinces that are moving in this direction as well, 

and doing amazing things. For example, Quebec has taken on 

the idea of a poverty reduction plan, and making major inroads 

into this really unfortunate area. We see that Nova Scotia‟s 

doing this, and as well, Ontario‟s doing this as well. 

 

Well, their option number one, Mr. Speaker, and I want to read 

this into the record, is very clear because I think if the Minister 

of Social Services did any one thing this is the first thing she 

should have done, and I will quote: 

 

Evidence Based Policy Option #1 — Develop a 

Multi-Year, Targeted Plan to Reduce Poverty. 

 

Develop an effective plan to reduce poverty and health 

inequality for Saskatoon and Saskatchewan that includes a 

multi-year approach with concrete measurable targets, 

broad support and an evaluation plan. 

 

The plan should: 

 

Consist of interventions that have been shown to be 

effective 

 

Include an evaluative component that continues to conduct 

research directed at the development of new interventions 

 

Include concrete targets for each of the proposed strategy 

areas to measure progress 

 

Include both short and long term targets 

 

Be broadly supported across many sectors (both public 

and private) in order to be effective 

 

[And] The results should be reported publicly on an annual 

basis. 



2484 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2009 

Clearly a very well thought out recommendation. And I think 

it‟s very unfortunate that both the Minister of Social Services 

and the Minister of Health have it seems, it appears that they‟ve 

concluded to dismiss this report, and I sure think that‟s a step 

backwards, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I know in my community much of this work has been based on 

was hoping they would see more work from the government to 

meet the options and the recommendations outlined in this 

report. It‟s a landmark study and it‟s just unfortunate this 

government has chosen to ignore this. 

 

Now as I said, others are calling for this as well. And I had a 

chance to meet with some of the folks from the National 

Council of Welfare, and they call for this as well. They‟re 

calling for a national conversation about an anti-poverty 

strategy. And what are the four cornerstones? And I talked 

about this last year, so this is not new. But this is what people 

are talking about Canada. What are the four cornerstones? 

 

Well they talk about “A national anti-poverty strategy with a 

long-term vision and measurable targets and timelines.” That‟s 

what Lemstra‟s talking about. Why can‟t we be doing it here? 

 

The second one: “A plan of action and budget that coordinates 

initiatives within and across governments and other partners.” 

Clearly again what the health disparity report talked about — 

both public and private, right across governments, both federal, 

provincial, and municipal. And I think we‟re missing an 

opportunity here. 

 

The third point: “A government accountability structure for 

ensuring results and for consulting Canadians in the design, 

implementation and evaluation of the actions that will affect 

them” and “A set of agreed poverty indicators that will be used 

to plan, monitor change and access progress.” So important, Mr. 

Speaker, and I think we‟ve missed an opportunity. 

 

We see, Mr. Speaker, across Canada, in fact in Saskatchewan, 

and in fact in Saskatoon, how the wage gap — the income gap 

— is spreading, and we need to do more to make sure that 

doesn‟t adversely affect people in Saskatchewan. And we have 

the tools at hand to do this, and I would really encourage this 

government to take some time to do it. 

 

And as I said, Ontario just released their new one, and it‟s 

called the Breaking the Cycle: Ontario’s Poverty Reduction 

Strategy, just released a few short weeks ago. 

 

And of course, I‟ve got to mention for sure poverty-free 

Canada, formerly known as the National Anti-Poverty 

Organization or NAPO, has also been calling for this for many 

years. But clearly, provinces, countries are getting on board, 

and why is Saskatchewan lagging behind when we can be a true 

leader, but more importantly, serve the needs of those less 

fortunate in our society. 

 

Now the other issue I have, and it‟s part of this and very much 

connected to this, is around HomeFirst. And we are, as I said, 

very excited about some of the announcements the minister has 

made in terms of the student residence at Saskatoon and the 

Milton apartments here in Regina and a project in P.A. But 

there‟s not an overarching policy framework or a vision that 

talks about how we view housing as a basic human right and a 

need in our communities. And in fact it was interesting. 

Merriman even talked about this in his report when he talked 

about the housing continuum. We need to do more and we need 

to make sure all levels of government are on board. 

 

Now the unfortunate thing here is that this housing policy 

framework for Saskatchewan 2004, of course, is a five-year 

plan and expires this year. And we were really looking forward 

to seeing what this government would do to replace it as a 

framework. As I said, there are many interests in one-time 

announcements, but how does it all tie together? And I think 

we‟re really missing an opportunity to really break through and 

talk about Saskatchewan‟s new direction in housing. We 

recognize there are challenges now in Saskatchewan that 

weren‟t there in 2004, that are here in 2008 and ‟09. And we 

need to make sure that some work is done here. 

 

Now again I just want to emphasize that we really do want to 

see work in this area. And unfortunately when you don‟t have 

partnerships between the three levels of government . . . We 

know the municipal governments are stepping up to the plate. 

We‟ve seen that in Saskatoon and Regina and some of the other 

communities, but we have not seen the federal government step 

up to the plate on housing. In fact we see them retracting, and 

we need this provincial government to really call on the federal 

government to say, we want you to engage in housing in a 

meaningful way right across the board, not on selected issues. 

And the issues they have are very worthwhile — First Nations 

and seniors — but you need to do more than that. 

 

Now I see that the minister has set aside $15 million as well as 

the 29 million for the three projects that she has. But she 

doesn‟t talk about what‟s that going to be used for. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we saw the unfortunate circumstance of 

what NHOP, or the neighbourhood ownership program, 

happened last summer where in the middle of the summer, 

actually early in the summer, the program ran out of money. 

And the government did not put more money into this. And so I 

am worried that this is a signal to low-income earners that 

NHOP now is finished, that it will be done and we won‟t hear 

anything more about that. And so I‟m looking forward to more 

specific announcements in the near future; what this $15 million 

is all about. 

 

And I also want to raise a concern around those who find 

themselves in absolute homelessness circumstances. We see 

very little, if anything, from this government. We know there 

are community groups who are ready to move forward on this, 

but this government has chosen to be silent on this issue. And I 

think this is really truly unfortunate when you‟ve increased 

spending some 12.4 per cent, but yet you have no money for 

those who are in absolute homelessness. And I worry about this. 

So we call on the minister to come clean with this as quickly as 

possible. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, probably more importantly is what I see 

happening over in Alberta. Last week, the Alberta government 

announced a $3.3 billion initiative to end homelessness. And in 

fact, that‟s the headline on the government website, on their 

press release. And I have to applaud the government of Alberta 

and their task force for bringing this forward. This is visionary. 



March 24, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2485 

It sets out a framework for how they‟re going to end 

homelessness in their province. They recognize that there is a 

problem. They‟re going to work with communities; particularly 

Calgary, Edmonton, and Red Deer on this. And I have to 

congratulate them for doing this. 

 

[15:45] 

 

And probably the most important thing that they‟re doing 

though, as well as setting some benchmarks, and I find this very 

interesting, and I‟ll read directly from the press release: 

 

Along with developing a ten-year provincial plan to end 

homelessness, the Alberta government has a plan to create 

11,000 affordable housing units by 2012. To date, Alberta 

has supported the development of 5,600 affordable 

housing units. 

 

Excellent. They‟ve set some targets and they‟re going to meet 

them, and they‟re in a short time frame. 

 

The other thing, Mr. Speaker, that I think is very innovative — 

and I would like to see this government embrace this — is to 

endorse the housing first approach. And I‟ll quote from the 

press release on this: 

 

The plan adopts a „Housing First‟ approach of providing 

immediate housing along with client-centred support 

services such as mental health services, addiction 

counselling, employment training and other tailored 

supports as needed. Other jurisdictions in North America 

such as Portland and New York City have found the 

approach to be successful and sustainable over the long 

term. 

 

That‟s something we should be thinking about, Mr. Speaker, 

very seriously. Clearly our neighbour to the west has 

recognized this as a problem that has gone on way too long, but 

they are stepping up to the plate. 

 

Before I move on to the next issue, I just want to say there are 

some shovel-ready projects. I want to see them move quickly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we talked about how this government has been 

reluctant to really support community-based initiatives, 

programs like Station 20, and now today we hear Westside 

Clinic is not going to be supported in their expansion. I think 

this is truly unfortunate. Too often this government has waited 

until the eleventh hour to act and here is another example, 

especially when we‟ve heard the news around HIV. We have 

been following this over the last little while. We were shocked 

to hear that the minister did not know about this, but he‟s taking 

now, I guess, the option to study it. We just think this is not the 

appropriate thing. He needs to act quickly on this. 

 

I want to talk a little bit about a very important report that came 

out just last February, and it‟s called, it‟s the report from the 

Children‟s Advocate office, A Breach of Trust. Clearly the work 

around the foster care issue needed to be done. The report was 

very thoughtful and very thorough. The advocate, the 

Children‟s Advocate talks about the history of this, starting 

back in the ‟80s. And unfortunately we needed to address this 

now. 

And so I think that the minister‟s response has a lot of merit to 

it. We are looking forward to seeing the results of this. I agree 

with many of the initiatives. And I particularly am committed, 

and I think the right thing is around the children and youth first 

principles. I am glad to see that the government is embracing 

that. These are principles that we can set our legislation and our 

policies on, and I think this is very important. 

 

I do have a concern — and I hope the minister will take some 

time to think about this — and this really relates back to our 

anti-poverty strategy. I think the real solution to the issue facing 

the increased numbers of children at risk is really addressing the 

needs of vulnerable families. We need to really step up to the 

plate and make sure we strengthen the vulnerable families right 

at the very beginning. 

 

And we‟ve heard some talk. We‟ve been hearing the questions 

on HIV. But unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, we‟ve not seen the 

amount of resources that we need to see to go into the 

communities right across the province — not just the core 

communities of Saskatoon, but right across the province — so 

we don‟t have that unfortunate circumstance where children 

need to be apprehended. 

 

I‟m hearing that way too much in my office here. We have 

many families — and this is really unfortunately happening way 

too many times — people are coming in, moms are coming in 

saying, what can I do to get my baby back? And, Mr. Speaker, I 

think that‟s just truly unfortunate when you have moms coming 

into offices saying, what can I do to get my baby back? And for 

them it‟s too late. They needed the resources before that. And 

we need to make sure we have those resources in place so that 

just doesn‟t happen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in estimates I will have questions about the 

initiatives, particularly around the actual costs, the timelines, 

and the benchmarks. But we will discuss that further. 

 

Particularly I have a question around the $15 million price tag 

around the computer system. There are about 6,000 youth and 

children who are in the system, and I look at that and I go, this 

is about $2,500 a kid. And I look at this, and they‟re saying they 

need three years to do this. I think that there‟s some serious 

questions about why does this take so long. We‟ve heard the 

minister say we are the last province to do this, so if we‟re the 

last province, why could we not just see what other provinces 

are doing and take it off the shelf if we need to? 

 

So I have some serious questions around the computer system. 

Fifteen million dollars seems a little much. And in fact it‟s been 

announced for over a year now that she‟s going to be moving in 

this direction. We‟ve not seen any real movement on this. 

 

But as I said, Mr. Speaker, I do think at the end of the day I 

have to say the minister is being short-sighted. I understand, 

and I understand fully the crisis that we find ourselves in and 

that it goes back a long ways. But this is really the time to put 

resources into supporting vulnerable families so they find 

themselves that they can meet the challenges of raising young 

children and young people in our province. And this speaks to 

affordable, adequate housing and to community health. And I 

think that clearly we need to do more. 

 



2486 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2009 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I just want to address quickly a couple of 

concerns that I have. And I hope the minister can address this, 

maybe in some announcements in the days ahead. I understand 

that there‟s been an increase of $2.7 million to SAP 

[Saskatchewan assistance plan] and to TEA [transitional 

employment allowance], but we don‟t see the details. We know 

and we appreciate the increases to the rental supplement and the 

housing supplement — very good stuff. But when I look at the 

budget document, a big question mark: what is the $2.7 million 

is there for? 

 

Now I had my colleagues raise this question earlier and I have 

to ask this as well. And I can‟t, I actually can‟t believe this — I 

don‟t know if this is an oversight — but we‟ve heard the 

Minister of Education talk about the 1,000 new spaces of child 

care. He‟s not quite done the 500 prior, so we‟re getting quite a 

backlog. 

 

But when I look at the budget document and I look under Social 

Services vote 36, the child care parent subsidies this year is 17.1 

million and last year was 17.1 million. Mr. Speaker, there‟s no 

change. Does this mean those new 1,000 spaces are not for 

people who will be getting subsidies? Or they‟re not increasing 

the subsidies? Or was this an oversight? Clearly this has not 

been well thought out and we have some problems. 

 

Indexation, Mr. Speaker. Now we know that the minimum 

wage is going to go up to nine twenty-five on May 1. We were 

hoping this government would index that, put the legislation 

into this so it removes it from the political arena, and it would 

just go up to the cost of living. And this would be a wonderful 

thing. And I‟ve just been so disappointed that this government 

has chosen not to index it. And we‟ll fall back, fall behind like 

we were in the ‟80s, and I just feel that this is unfortunate. 

 

But the other one that I think is unfortunate is that they‟ve 

decided not to index the seniors‟ income plan. They increase it 

with quite a bit of money, and that‟s a good thing, Mr. Speaker. 

But unfortunately that money will soon be eaten up because it 

was not indexed. In a few years this $100 will be worth $95, 

then 90, and then we‟re into the 80s. And this is unfortunate. 

The irony, Mr. Speaker, is its partner program, the GIS 

[guaranteed income supplement], is indexed. So why is it that 

we have one indexed and the other not? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have to ask this question too. A year ago 

we had quite a kerfuffle, quite a thing about the modernization 

strategy. It‟s gone silent on that front. I would hope that we 

would hear more about that, what has been happening on that 

strategy. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have to say that every day I‟ve had the 

pleasure to present petitions calling for wage equity for CBO 

workers. Now we know that they put some money into this, but 

clearly not enough. People are looking for equity with workers 

in the departments, and we hope to see that would happen. We 

know that they have been traditionally underpaid and many 

continue to earn poverty-level wages. 

 

We know, Mr. Speaker, that this results in high staff turnover, 

and a subsequent lack of caregiver continuity has a negative 

impact on the quality of care clients receive. And we know that 

CBO workers care for and provide valuable services to some of 

the most vulnerable members of our society, such as those 

living with mental and intellectual disabilities; women and 

children in crisis; low-income, at-risk individuals; young 

children; youth; Aboriginal; immigrant and visible minorities. 

And so we know that they‟re also paid 8 to $10 per hour less 

than employees performing work of equal value in government 

departments. And so, Mr. Speaker, I want to make sure that this 

issue should be addressed in the near future. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as I draw to the close, I want to say, and I 

appreciate the . . . One of my colleagues last night talked about 

seeing this movie before. And I‟ve got to say, I‟ve got that same 

eerie feeling. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other issue is I‟ve listened to some of the 

members opposite, you know. I would just like a little straight 

talk from the other side. It has been so glowing and over the 

top. Just a little straight talk. 

 

I think there is a lot of good things in this budget. There are a 

lot of good things. I‟ve said that. And you know, and I 

appreciate it. And I have to say, the ministers in the House . . . 

And I appreciate the comment you made about recognizing One 

Arrow housing. Very good. 

 

But we need to hear some more straight talk. We often get 

blamed on this side for being too negative. But I would like to 

say, Mr. Speaker, sometimes I‟ve got to say, I just feel a little 

uncomfortable about how over-the-top those folks are over on 

that side. 

 

The member from Lloydminster talked about doing things one 

at a time, and I couldn‟t agree with him more. They do like to 

do things one at a time. And there is a reason for that, Mr. 

Speaker. They like the photo op. They don‟t want to do a lot 

because they miss just too many photo ops. I have a real 

problem with that, and for repeating announcements. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I am going to take my seat, but I do have to 

say that across Canada they are calling for a national 

anti-poverty strategy. Let‟s do that here. Let‟s not ignore this 

health disparities report. It‟s just too, too good. There‟s too 

much in it to be ignored completely. I have a problem with that. 

Let‟s get an anti-poverty strategy happening here, a 

comprehensive housing strategy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will be voting for the amendment and not for the 

main motion. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Martensville, 

the Minister Responsible for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟d like to 

begin today by thanking my staff, both in the constituency 

office and in my office in Regina — to Whitney, Drew, Drew, 

Krista, and Kelly — for the work that they do. We have a whole 

lot of fun in my office. I told them when they were hired that I 

don‟t take myself very seriously at all — I certainly take my job 

seriously — and we have a pretty good time. 

 

I‟d also like to recognize and thank my nieces and nephews. I 



March 24, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2487 

have six of them. They certainly help to keep me humble. They 

don‟t care at all that I‟m an MLA or a minister, doesn‟t matter 

to them, and all they care about is when is auntie coming home 

so we can play on the weekends. So they‟re pretty special to 

me, and I‟d like to thank them for being my friends, as well as 

being my nieces and nephews. They‟re pretty special. 

 

I‟d like to thank also my new Legislative Secretary, the MLA 

for Yorkton. He has a specific role to play with the Ministry of 

Environment on recycling. It‟s a very important initiative for 

our province. He has an excellent background and a passion for 

this file, Mr. Speaker, and I look forward to the continued good 

work that he‟s going to do. 

 

This is a very exciting budget for the Ministry of Environment, 

and I‟d like to take this opportunity as well to thank all the staff 

within the Ministry of Environment and Saskatchewan 

Watershed Authority for all the work that they do. Over this last 

year, the ministry has been undertaking a regulatory review. We 

will modernize the ministry and move to a results-based 

framework. And I‟m very proud of the hard work of the 

ministry staff and, Mr. Speaker, we are finally moving the 

Ministry of Environment into the 21st century. 

 

I found it very interesting when I learned that a results-based 

model had first been proposed by ministry officials in 1978. To 

quote from a Ministry of Environment report prepared in that 

year, and I quote: 

 

The regulatory burden for industry has an identified 

impact on project development in the province. The 

benefits of a Saskatchewan Results-Based environmental 

management model will not be realized without 

cooperation between federal/ provincial/municipal 

agencies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, 1978 was a very long time ago. In 1978 I was just 

learning to read chapter books in Mrs. Markwart‟s grade 2 

class. My colleague from Weyburn-Big Muddy hadn‟t even 

been born. And 1978 is so long ago, it was the first year that 

Dwain Lingenfelter was elected to this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[16:00] 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — I was even more surprised, Mr. 

Speaker, to find out that for three decades the NDP completely 

ignored these recommendations. Instead they were addicted to a 

prescriptive approach that‟s awkward, inflexible, and very 

time-consuming, both for the ministry and for proponents. It 

does not necessarily provide the best protection for our 

environment, and it‟s frustrating for industry and Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

My ministry has been working in a bygone era. Thanks to the 

NDP, permits and applications are all paper-based. If an oil 

exploration permit is requested and granted, it first has to be 

mailed, mailed to the office in Melville, and then we will mail 

the permit back to the proponents, Mr. Speaker. We are living 

in an electronic world in the 21st century, and it‟s about time 

that the ministry gets with the times, and that‟s what we‟re 

working on. The 2009-2010 budget includes an investment to 

provide modernized electronic information platform with a 

view to conducting 90 per cent of ministry business 

electronically by 2011. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan‟s North is a land of amazing 

potential and opportunity. This area of the province is home to a 

vast array of natural resources. A balance between the 

environment and economic development is needed in this 

valuable region of our province. For the second year in a row, 

we are investing $1 million to support the northwest sustainable 

development plan. We need a sustainable land use plan in the 

Northwest to position our province to meet the future challenge 

of balancing economic interests with environmental integrity. 

This work had not been undertaken by the NDP, even though 

they happily signed off on exploration permits. You cannot plan 

for economic development while ignoring environmental 

protection. The NDP failed our North on this front. 

 

We are also concerned about the impacts development will have 

on the North. That is why we are providing $378,000 to develop 

an acid deposition monitoring framework. The program will 

address the potential risk of acidification in northwestern 

Saskatchewan and will also look after air monitoring. 

 

Mr. Speaker, speaking rather late in the rotation on the budget 

means that most of my colleagues have outlined the very good 

things that are involved in this budget, but it also allows me the 

opportunity to set the record straight on some of the 

misinformation coming from the opposition benches. 

Unfortunately there was so much of it, I don‟t have time to 

address it all, so I will address the things that affect my 

ministry. 

 

The NDP Environment critic opened her speech yesterday 

praising President Obama‟s climate change plan. She praised 

the idea that Obama wants to have 10 per cent of the American 

electricity coming from renewables by 2012. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, in Saskatchewan, according to former MLA Peter 

Prebble, Saskatchewan already receives 29 per cent of our 

electricity from renewables, so I‟m not sure exactly what she‟s 

proposing except that we actually go backwards to 10 per cent 

to meet the President‟s goal. 

 

She also praised the amount of money that Obama will be 

spending over the next few years on green technology to reduce 

greenhouse gas emissions. I find it a bit curious then, Mr. 

Speaker, that the NDP is now so opposed to the money that 

SaskPower is spending on clean coal. And what are we 

spending that money on? Green technology that will reduce 

greenhouse gas emissions. Mr. Speaker, the hypocrisy is rather 

astounding. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the NDP critic apparently only has three 

talking points — the Office of Energy Conservation, the NDP 

climate change secretariat, and their phantom fund of $320 

million. 

 

So let me begin by addressing the Office of Energy 

Conservation. The office consisted of two people. One was a 

part-time contract position. One of the positions is now housed 

in SRC [Saskatchewan Research Council], a world-leading 

research facility, doing great work on the climate change file. 

And we changed the part-time contract position to a full-time 



2488 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2009 

position within my ministry to work on environmental 

education. All the activities that were present under the Office 

of Energy Conservation before are still in place. There has been 

no reduction in programming. 

 

The NDP‟s climate change secretariat meant nothing more than 

the NDP‟s attempt to grow government, and it would provide a 

forum for the NDP to do more talking about climate change. 

There were no actionable items associated with the secretariat. 

On this side of the House, we are not interested in more talking. 

We are interested in action which is why we will do what the 

NDP absolutely failed to do. We will take real action, and I will 

speak about that a bit more in a moment. 

 

And for all the member opposite‟s blustering over her mythical 

money, the phantom fund of $320 million, it was a press 

release. It was never allocated. Kind of like their $40 million for 

the North Battleford hospital, it was dumped into the GRF 

[General Revenue Fund] and there was no corresponding plan. 

Had they been serious about this . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — They would‟ve actually done 

something with this money. 

 

On one hand, the NDP continue to say that we‟re spending too 

much money in this budget, yet on the other hand are saying 

that we are not spending enough. The NDP Environment critic 

seems to believe that $320 million was the magic number 

needed to solve all of our environmental issues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, allow me to run through all that we have done in 

16 months: $70 million for green initiatives; $500,000 for 

increased funding for watershed planning; $400,000 increase 

funding to conservation and development authorities; $1.8 

million for a water availability study; $9.5 million funding to 

the Petroleum Technology Research Centre and International 

Test Centre for CO2 Capture with the University of Regina; 

$758 million through SaskPower to reduce their carbon 

footprint through clean coal technology; $2 million over two 

years for northwest development land use plan; increased 

funding and added staff to the Ministry of Environment, 

environmental protection branch; $11 million over four years 

for the provincial toilet replacement rebate program; increased 

funding for air and water testing in the North; $2 million in 

bridge funding for struggling recycling organizations; $2.4 

million for the SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance] 

hybrid rebate; $3 million for SaskBIO [Saskatchewan biofuels 

investment opportunity]; $21 million for the ethanol fuel 

program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if $320 million was going to solve the problem, 

just imagine what $1 billion will do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — I was also a bit shocked yesterday, Mr. 

Speaker, to hear the NDP Environment critic condemning 

carbon capture and storage. She cited the millions of dollars that 

we have set aside for it and called it, and I quote, “. . . a 

technology the Sask Party claims to be cost-effective which is a 

claim that is simply dubious . . .” Mr. Speaker, apparently she‟s 

not aware of the work that her own government did. She‟s 

surrounded by three former Environment ministers. Perhaps one 

of them could fill her in on the details. 

 

The NDP are obviously against nuclear. They‟re against carbon 

capture and storage. They‟re against clean coal. The NDP say 

that they have a plan to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. 

Perhaps then they could explain how — considering they‟re 

against every available technology to reduce greenhouse gases 

— how they plan to meet the targets, Mr. Speaker, targets by 

the way that they introduced without doing a cost analysis. I 

asked for one to see what was left in the ministry after the NDP 

moved over to the opposition benches, and there was nothing 

done. 

 

The member for Regina Lakeview when he was Environment 

minister said that Saskatchewan residents would happily pay 

higher SaskPower bills in the name of climate change but 

refused to say what those costs would be. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP Environment critic also said that on 

water, there was more to do than just conservation. I couldn‟t 

agree more. That is why again we are doing what the NDP 

failed to do. While we are promoting conservation through our 

toilet replacement rebate program, we are also ensuring the 

long-term sustainable use of our water supply. That is why we 

are engaged in forming an integrated water strategy. I know the 

NDP talked about doing this, but again, Mr. Speaker, they just 

didn‟t get around to it. 

 

We are also making sure that our water supply is safe which is 

why we are doing what the NDP failed to do. We have 

increased funding for monitoring lakes in the North to get base 

line information. Mr. Speaker, the NDP actually discontinued 

monitoring of Lake Athabasca in 2006. They stand here and 

they‟re concerned about the effects of the oil sands in 

Saskatchewan at exactly the same time they stopped the 

monitoring process in the North. Mr. Speaker, I‟m happy to 

announce that we have reinstated the monitoring in Athabasca. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — We are also concerned about capacity 

and health and safety issues facing our communities, which is 

why again we are doing what the NDP failed to do. We have 

supplied unprecedented infrastructure money for communities, 

an additional $100 million in per capita funding for 

municipalities, and established a new revenue-sharing deal with 

municipalities. All of these things will help communities 

address water issues. 

 

The NDP seem to want us to do what they did. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, doing what the NDP did isn‟t good enough for us. 

They failed to offer a real plan on environment. They failed to 

offer any support for our communities to meet water needs. We 

will not do what the NDP did. We will do and must do better. 

 

And back to climate change for a moment. The NDP 

Environment critic was praising President Obama yesterday. 

Allow me to quote the president‟s chief energy and climate 

change advisor, Carol Browner. She said and I quote, “You can 

get the clearest instruction by passing legislation.” I couldn‟t 

agree more. So while the NDP spent the last year in office 



March 24, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2489 

printing up glossy brochures on climate change, we have done 

the heavy lifting the last 16 months, and I will be introducing 

climate change legislation into this House this spring. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP‟s position on the 

environment is absolutely different from ours. And for that I am 

very thankful. The member from Saskatoon Centre, when he 

was Environment minister, oversaw the NDP government‟s 

cutting of 200 jobs from the Ministry of Environment. At the 

time he said, and I quote, “We have our priorities and we have 

to support those priorities.” Obviously, Mr. Speaker, the 

environment was not the priority for him or his NDP 

government. Mr. Speaker, not only is this budget good for the 

environment; it is extremely good news for the people of my 

constituency and all of Saskatchewan. 

 

We can be very proud of what we have accomplished in this 

province. It wasn‟t that long ago, Mr. Speaker, that our beloved 

province was the butt of jokes and derision throughout the rest 

of Canada. That likely had more to do with the previous 

stewardship of this province than anything else. Today we have 

the number one economy in all of North America and are 

quickly becoming the new destination of choice. Ours is likely 

to be the only provincial government in the country to post a 

balanced budget, let alone a surplus this year. 

 

It is true that this is in large part due to our good fortune with 

natural resource prices, in particular potash. But, Mr. Speaker, I 

don‟t believe that that is all. The NDP like to think that we 

would be enjoying the same level of success today if they were 

still on this side of the House. Mr. Speaker, there would still be 

resource revenue, but I think the difference is the level of 

confidence that the business community and the resource sector 

have in our government. 

 

It‟s one thing to have high resource prices but if the companies 

that develop those resources won‟t come into your province, 

you will realize no benefit. And that, I think, is what held this 

province back for too long. We have always had the raw 

potential but until recently we did not have the leadership 

required to turn that potential into success. The resource sector 

always had in the back of their minds that the socialists might 

try to renationalize the industry. That is why one of the very 

first Bills that we introduced upon forming government was to 

reverse the NDP‟s previous legislation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — And, Mr. Speaker, that has not gone 

unnoticed by industry. The NDP, under the leadership of the 

member for Riversdale, simply did not inspire enough 

confidence among the business community to move this 

province ahead. That is something, Mr. Speaker, that my 

constituency of Martensville has always understood. 

 

The Saskatchewan Valley area north of Saskatoon has 

consistently led rural Saskatchewan in population growth 

during the last few decades. What‟s also interesting, Mr. 

Speaker, that not once has my constituency ever been 

represented by either a CCF [Co-operative Commonwealth 

Federation] or NDP member. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, that is not a coincidence. 

It‟s that kind of forward thinking that explains why the towns in 

my constituency have historically been able to grow at 

phenomenal rates even when the NDP were chasing people out 

of the province. 

 

The folks where I am from simply didn‟t buy into the NDP‟s 

doom and gloom mentality. Maybe they didn‟t appreciate the 

NDP‟s adherence to the Regina Manifesto, something that the 

NDP still proudly proclaim on their website. One of the 

Manifesto’s main tenets is that they will not rest until capitalism 

is eradicated from Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, try selling that 

in my constituency. 

 

Well I guess they did, but last election they received only 18 per 

cent of the vote. I would venture to guess, Mr. Speaker, that 

more people believe that Elvis is still alive than anybody who 

actually still believes the NDP philosophy in my constituency. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I understand the opposition members have been 

getting out their maps and hitting the road and venturing out 

into our constituencies. And I‟m sure the map is required 

considering that they‟ve ignored rural Saskatchewan for the last 

16 years. 

 

The member from Massey Place in particular, I hear, has been 

out and about in my constituency and, Mr. Speaker, I welcome 

him. I am glad that he‟s there. And I believe that he can learn a 

lesson or two from the people of my constituency. They have a 

lot to learn about growing economies, about how to grow 

communities, and about how to grow this province, and I think 

my constituency can offer some of that information for them. 

 

I hope that the member from Massey Place is listening to my 

constituents and taking that advice back to his colleagues on the 

other side, Mr. Speaker. It‟s important to all of us in this 

province that the NDP — even in opposition — also grow in 

their understanding and try to move ahead. 

 

Mr. Speaker, maybe the member from Massey Place has taken 

note of the huge infrastructure need that exists in my 

constituency. Today growth is through the roof because people 

understand that we now have a government that shares the 

values of its people and understands what it takes to grow. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think I represent the most constituents of any 

member in this Chamber with the exception possibly of the 

Minister of Justice or the Minister of Crown Corporations. And 

there are infrastructure needs in my constituency. I have two 

towns — Warman and Martensville — that have both far 

surpassed the population requirements to be named a city. They 

actually both sit about 6,000 people, and the people moving into 

these two towns are almost all young families. New schools are 

needed in both communities. These new schools, Mr. Speaker, I 

predict will be almost full by the time we build them. That is 

how fast my communities are growing. 

 

[16:15] 

 

There are other needs as well. The growing community of 

Hepburn needs water. They are moving from the status of a 



2490 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2009 

village to a town later this year. They understand the need for a 

municipal water system and have recently chosen to move 

ahead in securing that water supply. As Minister Responsible 

for the Saskatchewan Watershed Authority, I was pleased to 

offer free testing to Hepburn residents. They operate on private 

well systems that are not regulated under any government 

ministry, and we offered free well testing so they would know 

what the quality of their water was. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, for all the NDP Environment critic‟s 

lamenting about the need for clean water in Saskatchewan, 

perhaps she could explain why, between 2001 and 2006, the 

NDP government systematically denied every MRIF 

[Municipal Rural Infrastructure Fund] grant that Hepburn put 

forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House we are committed to 

working with communities to help them meeting their 

infrastructure needs. And one of those needs, Mr. Speaker, is 

roads and we see road improvements going on across this 

province. In my constituency we are seeing an acceleration of 

twinning of Highway 11 past Hague and Rosthern towards 

Prince Albert. This government understands the need for 

improvement and we are taking steps to do this as quickly as we 

possibly can. 

 

For my constituents what is by far the biggest piece of good 

news in this budget is the education property tax reduction. Due 

to the reassessment that was taking place this year, my 

constituents in the fastest growing communities north of 

Saskatoon were about to experience a massive increase in 

property taxes. Martensville mayor, Giles Saulnier, led an 

information campaign during the last couple of months to alert 

people to the situation facing them and what the consequences 

would be if their government did not take action. In a press 

release dated January 14 the town of Martensville estimated that 

if the status quo remained, Martensville residents could be 

facing up to a 39 per cent increase on the education portion of 

their property taxes. 

 

You can imagine, Mr. Speaker, that my constituents weren‟t 

real happy with the thought of a 39 per cent increase and 

certainly let me know through letters and emails and telephone 

calls. I‟ve never received more emails or phone calls on any 

other topic, Mr. Speaker, and as their government MLA I was 

certainly their number one target. But, Mr. Speaker, I welcomed 

this. I ran two elections actually making promises on behalf of 

the Saskatchewan Party that what we would do for the 

constituents if they put their trust in us, and fixing the property 

tax issue was one of those. And I told everybody I talked to to 

definitely, yes, hold us to account. We made you a promise, and 

we will keep that promise. And, Mr. Speaker, I‟m very proud 

that our government kept that promise this year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I actually campaigned on 

this issue twice — in 2007 during the Martensville by-election 

and then again in the general election later that fall. When asked 

about the property tax issue during the by-election, the NDP 

candidate, John Tzupa, actually responded in a local newspaper 

that he said, it wasn‟t an issue, that nobody had ever mentioned 

it to him. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I thought that was a little bit odd 

considering it was the number one issue that I heard at the door. 

I don‟t know how the NDP candidate could have spent any time 

in my constituency without hearing about education property 

taxes. I‟m thinking perhaps, Mr. Speaker, the problem was that 

he just wasn‟t listening. Shortly after he made that statement, 

the NDP received the single worst election result in any 

constituency in any election in 60 years, with just 10 per cent of 

the vote. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when we hear the member for Douglas Park 

and others on the other side of the House say that they would 

have gotten around to the same kind of property tax reduction 

that this government undertook, I have a very hard time 

believing that. I have a hard time believing it because when 

they were in power, they were in power for 16 years and didn‟t 

get around to it. I have a hard time believing it because they 

said in my constituency, while looking for by-election votes, 

that they weren‟t concerned about it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there‟s another quote I‟d like to mention. I know 

that a couple of my colleagues have already brought this up, but 

I think it‟s worth saying again. And I quote: “We are pledged to 

do away with education tax as soon as we get new sources of 

revenue to take the place of the revenue now realized from that 

tax.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, that‟s Tommy Douglas in 1944. That‟s 65 years 

ago. I don‟t believe that a single person in this Chamber is 

actually old enough to remember him saying those things. Mr. 

Speaker, my parents were in diapers when he said this. My 

mother is now retired, my father is no longer with us. Entire 

lifetimes have been lived by Saskatchewan people without 

seeing this promise fulfilled by successive NDP governments. 

 

Tommy Douglas didn‟t do it. Woodrow Lloyd didn‟t do it. 

Allan Blakeney didn‟t do it. Roy Romanow didn‟t do it. Then 

along comes the present member for Saskatoon Riversdale who 

thought he would dust off that promise again, and in 2003 at a 

SARM convention, he told them that “. . . the status quo is not 

on.” He then proceeded to govern this province with a status 

quo. 

 

So it‟s going to be very interesting to see how the opposition 

members vote on this budget, Mr. Speaker. Are they going to 

support the property tax cuts that we are proposing? Mr. 

Speaker, if they‟re not willing to support the budget for their 

own constituents, could they please at least support it for 

Tommy? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, delivering a balanced 

budget in these difficult economic times is quite exceptional. 

All during the fall session, the NDP demanded that more and 

more money be spent on more and more programs. Then at 

budget time, they complain about spending. 

 

They can‟t have it both ways. If the NDP truly believed there is 

too much spending in this budget, I would challenge them to 

tell us what they want us to cut. And, Mr. Speaker, the NDP 

Finance critic is on record as supporting two key initiatives: 

education property taxes and municipal revenue sharing. If the 



March 24, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2491 

NDP agree with these programs, I look forward to seeing them 

voting with us on the budget because, Mr. Speaker, if they vote 

against it, they are voting against municipal revenue sharing. 

They are voting against education property tax reform. They are 

voting against a children‟s hospital. They are voting against 

unprecedented infrastructure funding. And the list goes on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the best things that can be said of any 

government is this: they did what they said they would do. With 

this budget we have kept even more promises — well over 100 

of them in 16 months. Mr. Speaker, we are doing what we said 

we would do. We will continue to keep our promises. And for 

all of these reasons, Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting the 

NDP‟s amendment, but am proud to support my government‟s 

second budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu‟Appelle Valley. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First I would like to 

thank Kelly, my constituency assistant, for all her hard work 

and support. But I would also like to thank the residents of 

Regina Qu‟Appelle Valley for their support and their great 

encouragement. 

 

The 2009-2010 budget is entitled Saskatchewan: Strong and 

Steady. Now this title embodies what we as a government have 

strived for. We believe that to govern responsibly in this time of 

economic uncertainty we must be good stewards. And we must 

also manage to create the economic climate that will benefit the 

majority of Saskatchewan residents. The economic challenges 

that so many countries around the world are facing is 

devastating for most businesses and families. Here in 

Saskatchewan we are not immune to this economic turmoil 

happening elsewhere, but we are better positioned than most to 

meet the challenges ahead. We are optimistic and we are 

cautious. 

 

However, we are in a unique position with the budget that was 

just presented — our budget, a Saskatchewan Party 

government‟s budget — that is maybe the only one in Canada 

that is balanced. In fact we may be the only one in all of North 

America that is balanced. This is truly a unique budget. It is a 

good budget. Our economy is strong. The job of our 

government, a Saskatchewan Party government, is to make sure 

that it stays that way. The job of this budget is to make sure that 

the framework is in place for a strong economy. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, when the world economy was melting this 

fall, our government took action to prepare, to help cushion 

Saskatchewan‟s economy from being as adversely affected as 

possible. We were taking action. We cut taxes. We invested in 

infrastructure. And we provided economic stimulus and funded 

projects that would put money into our economy by providing 

jobs. 

 

Last spring we announced the $1 billion ready-for-growth 

initiative, the largest investment in infrastructure in 

Saskatchewan‟s history. This past fall, we announced we would 

increase our investment to 1.5 billion in 2009. $500 million of 

this investment was unveiled last month in our economic 

booster shot. 

 

This means better schools for our children, better long-term 

care facilities for our seniors, better municipal infrastructure for 

our communities, safer highways for all our drivers, more 

affordable housing for those of lower incomes. The record tax 

cuts for Saskatchewan people and the record investment in our 

ready-for-growth initiatives are helping to keep our economy 

strong and steady. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, our government made significant 

investments in infrastructure projects. We made these 

commitments because the people of Saskatchewan deserved 

better than what had happened in the past. In the past, lots of 

announcements and promises, but the follow-through was not 

there. This spring when the ground thaws, we‟re going to see 

the start of projects across this whole province. 

 

Now I know some people are getting tired of hearing the term, 

shovel ready. Well get used to it, because we‟re going to hear it 

over and over again. Because in this province, people are 

rolling up their sleeves and they‟re getting ready to get to work. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have maintained a balanced budget 

and we delivered on major commitments we made to people of 

Saskatchewan. When we went door to door during the 2007 

campaign, the residents of Regina Qu‟Appelle Valley told us 

they wanted to see some changes. They wanted to see these 

changes to the educational portion of their property taxes. The 

property taxes of Saskatchewan have funded a high share of 

education costs for far too long. We made a promise of seeking 

a long-term solution to this problem. This budget has kept that 

promise. 

 

The member for Rosetown-Elrose, who serves as the 

Legislative Secretary to the Minister of Education, property tax 

initiatives, has dedicated 16 months, consulting with 

stakeholders and meeting with residents across Saskatchewan. 

And the member has put forward a progressive idea that has 

been incorporated into this budget. This represents the largest 

education property tax in a single year in our province‟s history. 

The vast majority of Saskatchewan property owners will pay 

less education tax under the new system. The constituents of 

Regina Qu‟Appelle Valley thank the member from Rosetown 

for his hard work and dedication. 

 

Now Lee Harding of the Canadian Taxpayers Federation states, 

and I quote: 

 

It‟s welcome to see that after so many years we‟ve finally 

got to have some education property tax relief. It has been 

our number one issue for a long time. Last year we were 

sitting here saying where is the income tax relief, where is 

the debt reduction, where is the school property tax relief. 

And by now we have all three, which is fantastic.  

 

During the 2007 campaign, we made important commitments to 

Saskatchewan municipalities. We said that our government 

would look at a revenue-sharing deal with our municipalities, 

tied to the province‟s own source of revenue. In this budget, we 

have kept that promise. This is what municipal leaders wanted 

to tap into — a predictable revenue source. And we have 

delivered. 



2492 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2009 

The mayor of Regina states, and I quote: 

 

This is a very good day for the city of Regina.  

 

The vision for Regina is to be Canada‟s most vibrant, 

inclusive, attractive, sustainable community, where people 

live in harmony and thrive in opportunity. Today‟s budget 

helps to move our community in that direction. 

 

And Allan Earle in the SUMA news release stated, “„This 

budget confirms the Government of Saskatchewan‟s 

commitment to share the responsibility for making all of our 

villages, towns and cities better places to live‟ . . .” 

 

Our government will invest in our infrastructure system and in 

our people. Our government‟s balanced budget will also support 

and enhance key priorities. 

 

Now our government is building on our promise for a better life 

for all Saskatchewan‟s children. We are creating 1,000 new 

child care spaces in Saskatchewan for children of parents who 

work outside the home. The YMCA [Young Men‟s Christian 

Association], with a new licensed child care facility in my 

constituency of Regina Qu‟Appelle Valley, will be opening this 

spring near the Sherwood Village Mall. The provincial 

government provided $225 for this facility which will have 75 

spaces. Over $12 million is added funding that will go toward 

space expansion, training programs, and increased pay for early 

learning and child care workers. And our government is 

delivering on our promise to provide $18 million to active 

family benefits. These are promises we made, promises we are 

keeping. 

 

[16:30] 

 

Our government will launch a multi-million dollar, $25 million 

strategy to address needs in the child welfare system. A 

Saskatchewan Party government will deliver on our promises 

for a new children‟s hospital in Saskatoon. Two hundred 

million dollars over two years will be provided for the 

construction of this much-needed facility dedicated to the health 

and well-being of our province‟s youngest citizens. 

 

And this has been quoted in the past, but I think it‟s so 

important that I will repeat it. Brynn Boback-Lane, president 

and CEO of the Children‟s Health Hospital Foundation of 

Saskatchewan stated on budget day, and I quote, 

 

We are grateful and feel privileged to be part of such a 

momentous time for the next generation of this province; 

families, children, and a hospital for their unique needs is 

what the Children‟s Health & Hospital Foundation of 

Saskatchewan has represented since 1992. 

 

Really today is about and dedicated to the children that 

have challenged and lost and the children that are 

challenged and winning their fight with illness or injury. 

This is a day for them. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we care about our kids. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are building on our province to keep 

our economy strong. This budget delivers on our promise to 

dedicate millions towards improving our roads and our 

highways across the whole province of Saskatchewan. In my 

constituency of Regina Qu‟Appelle Valley, a new bypass road 

to connect highways No. 1 and No. 11 will be constructed on 

the west side of the city of Regina. This will support the 

development for the global transportation hub. This is progress. 

 

Our government is building on a promise of a greener 

Saskatchewan by supporting innovation of capture and storage 

of CO2 emissions. We‟ll commit over $17 million towards these 

and other go-green initiatives. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are working hard to keep life 

affordable in our province. Our government will begin to 

renovate government subsidised rental housing. Millions of 

dollars of funding will help adjust shelter rates for income 

assisted programs. And we are helping senior citizens by 

increasing monthly support to seniors to help them cover their 

costs of the rising living expenses. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are building on our promise to invest 

in education and skills training. We are going to invest in 

Aboriginal workforce development fund. This program 

highlights new employment opportunities for those First 

Nations and Métis heritage. 

 

This budget will also increase apprentice training seats to 1,100, 

an additional apprentice training support for their allowance. 

We will also commit over $23 million to enable universities to 

limit tuition increases to an average of 3 per cent. 

 

Our government made commitment for training seats expansion 

for doctors and nurses. We will provide $23 million this year on 

a comprehensive plan to attract more nurses and hard-to-recruit 

health care professionals to Saskatchewan and keep them here. 

This budget will also provide more funding to recruit more 

physicians to Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for 16 months I‟ve served as a Legislative 

Secretary to the Minister of Health, nurse recruitment and 

retention, travelling across our province, our country, and 

overseas to learn best practices, and inviting nurses to work in 

our province. I‟ve learned that in our province, nurses are 

assuming leadership roles and developing innovative ideas and 

made-in-Saskatchewan solutions to deal with the impact of the 

nursing shortage. I‟ve had the opportunity to talk to nurses and 

health care professionals across the whole province. And during 

this time of consultation process, we have talked to over 3,000 

nurses who have shared their thoughts and concerns about our 

health care system here in Saskatchewan. 

 

This past January I joined with the workforce planning branch 

of Saskatchewan Health to hold the celebratory and 

collaborative nursing symposium in Saskatoon. We wanted to 

showcase the innovative ideas we have heard from the nurses 

throughout this province. This symposium provided an 

opportunity to bring our nurses together to showcase 

mentorship programs, new hospital working models, and hear a 

panel on successful recruitment of internationally educated 

nurses in our province. This day was well received by all who 

had the opportunity to attend. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, our government understands the 



March 24, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2493 

importance of recruitment, and we also value the importance of 

retention of our health care employees. Keeping and attracting 

key health providers is a top priority of our government. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, our government, a Saskatchewan Party 

government has set the course for a strong and steady 

Saskatchewan. This budget has put forward the largest 

education property tax in our province‟s history. Our province 

will stay strong and steady through these significant tax 

reductions. Mr. Deputy Speaker, our province will remain 

strong and steady through the much-needed infrastructure 

projects. We will keep Saskatchewan residents working and our 

economy moving forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our economy is strong, and the job of this budget 

is to make sure that the economy stays that way. Mr. Speaker, I 

will not be supporting the amendment. But, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I will be supporting the budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It‟s a pleasure 

to enter into this budget debate here in the year 2009. It‟s a 

special pleasure for me on this day, March 24, 2009, as it is my 

daughter Solveig‟s 20th birthday. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Nilson: — I think all of us who are in this legislature are 

here because we want to do things for our children and our 

grandchildren and for the coming generations. And that‟s I 

think a special reason why budget debates are so important 

because they are that one time a year when you can evaluate 

what things that you‟ve done that will build for the future. And 

I‟m, with my colleagues, acknowledging a number of the very 

positive parts of this particular budget that use the resources of 

the people of Saskatchewan in ways that will benefit all of us. 

 

But my concern is that there‟s a very good budget, but there are 

many people who are uneasy. Why are these people so uneasy? 

And it seems to be a bit of a strange situation where all of the 

good news that‟s out there comes with this underside or 

underbelly of uneasiness. 

 

So I started to look through the document and tried to figure out 

what the reason for this uneasiness is. And I thought, well 

maybe it‟s some groups are left out. And we‟ve heard from 

Indian, First Nation, and Métis people that maybe they‟ve been 

left out. Some of the funding for arts and some of those areas 

are fairly well flatlined There are not major increase there. 

We‟ve heard about the decreases or the changes at a place like 

Government House that affect a lot of individuals, but more 

importantly they affect the sense of well-being in the 

community. 

 

As a former Health minister, I have many questions which I 

hope will be answered as we move over the next number of 

weeks about the Health budget because there doesn‟t appear to 

be sufficient funds in that budget to deal with all of the 

challenges and the requirements of making sure that the Health 

budget continues in a positive way. 

 

The Minister of Environment seemed to think there was lots in 

her budget for environment, but I would have to say that, 

looking at it with an experienced eye, I would say that there are 

quite a number of areas where there aren‟t sufficient funds. And 

we will be quite interested to hear the explanation of some of 

the choices that have been made. 

 

Clearly the students know that this year they‟re going to be 

paying more tuition because there aren‟t sufficient funds to hold 

the line on tuition as it relates to the post-secondary budget. 

 

And one area, Mr. Speaker, whether it‟s in agriculture or in 

some of the other areas that seems to have had the brakes put on 

it a bit, is the whole area of research. And that ties in with our 

post-secondary institutions as well. So there‟s a number of 

people that are kind of left out probably, and they‟re feeling 

somewhat uneasy. But I don‟t know if that‟s why in general 

people are uneasy about this budget. 

 

Another group of people are quite torn by this, and that I think 

includes the school boards. The school boards in the province 

have received lots of money, but they‟ve changed quite 

dramatically how the democratic process works for the school 

boards. And so there‟s uneasiness there, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

There‟s uneasiness — and why? Well maybe it‟s because of the 

type of, quote, consultation that happened, or didn‟t happen. Or 

maybe it‟s just this whole process of change, and it may be that 

2009 was the year that this kind of change should take place in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

But there‟s another group that actually got lots of money in this 

budget, but I think there‟s also some uneasiness there, and 

that‟s the rural municipalities. Because this template of 

reorganization of the school boards is very transferable from 

school divisions over to rural municipalities. And so the 

question comes in many of those places: are they next? Is that 

the next target of this particular government? So there‟s 

uneasiness there, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

There‟s also uneasiness by many people who are observers of 

our economic situation, of the financial markets, as it relates to 

the assumptions that have been made in building this budget. 

And the potash one is, I guess, a bold kind of bet, which is what 

sometimes budgets are. But it may be bolder than what we as 

Saskatchewan residents can stand. And we‟re all with the risk 

and hope kind of perspective on this one. We hope that it works 

but unfortunately it creates another level of uneasiness, 

underlying uneasiness, about this budget. 

 

Same thing happens with the other resource aspects. I think 

there‟s been some careful work to try to get the best choices 

around what the prices are going to be in the coming year. But I 

think that unfortunately in this particular whole area of the 

economy, the information that showed up immediately — that 

the assumptions by the provincial government of economic 

growth being at 2.1 per cent and almost three times, or more 

than three times as high as the average of all the other economic 

predictors, including banks and bonding companies and such — 

well that creates a whole sense of uneasiness among those 

people who know that particular field. 

 



2494 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2009 

And we could see it on budget day. Many of the businessmen in 

this room were uneasy when some of these things were laid out, 

and that was brought out in conversations later. It‟s been the 

kind of information I‟ve received when I‟ve talked to people 

when I was in Saskatoon on the weekend or in my constituency 

or in other places. There‟s also some fairly clear assumptions 

about the amount of income tax that‟s going to be received by 

the province and curiously, this is I think the first time that both 

the corporate and personal income tax received pursuant to this 

budget will be less than the anticipated revenues from potash. 

And that‟s another reason to be anxious about what‟s happening 

here. 

 

[16:45] 

 

Now when there‟s good news in a budget like this one — 12.3 

per cent increase in the expenditures, first provincial budget 

over $10 billion — there are a number of people including me 

who ask questions. And we‟re uneasy because the question 

comes: who‟s going to pay for this? How are we going to pay 

for this? Now the budget, as I said before, has made some very 

clear bets on things like potash prices, oil and gas prices, some 

of those kinds of things. But we‟re still raising a lot of concerns 

about how is this going to be paid for. 

 

One of the other aspects of this budget that concerns me is the 

way that it appears that overall provincial debt is going to be 

transferred from the General Revenue Fund into the Crowns. 

And this is done in a few different ways which were identified 

earlier today, but basically what happens is, if you don‟t have 

sufficient dollars to do the long-term capital plans that have 

been laid out for the Crowns, you have to get that money to 

make sure that the jobs are done, whether it‟s new power lines 

or new gas lines or more services provided or just basically 

providing for the staff to do the kinds of work that‟s there. But 

ultimately, it‟s these capital plans that are the most capital 

intensive. 

 

And I know that in the retooling of the various hummers or the 

big power plants in SaskPower, over the last many years, there 

were large amounts of capital set aside. And that‟s what we‟ve 

heard again this week, that that‟s going to happen. And there 

are methods and ways of budgeting to have that money 

available. 

 

But what I heard in the last few days was that the dividend to 

the General Revenue Fund was going to be kept by the Crown 

corporation, that they were going to borrow more money. And 

that was just to deal with some of the capital plans that were 

laid out in the long-term capital plan for SaskPower. It doesn‟t 

deal with possible amounts around the whole area of the clean 

coal project. 

 

It doesn‟t deal with any of the kinds of provincial participation 

that we hopefully are going to hear about in the next month or 

so as it relates to any discussion of nuclear power. All these 

things we know are very, very expensive. So once again the 

uneasiness — who‟s going to pay for all of this? 

 

What we know is, in 1992 when our dear friend Mr. Eddy 

Tchorzewski was the Finance minister, his biggest worry and 

ultimately the biggest problem that he had to deal with was to 

take the Crown debt out of the Crown corporations again and 

put it back into the General Revenue Fund so that the Crown 

corporations could survive. And there are many of us who lived 

through that experience, as customers or taxpayers or 

shareholders or whatever you want to call us, that we don‟t 

want to see that happen again. 

 

So there‟s great uneasiness about the kinds of money that‟s 

being spent, the debts that are going to be created, and this lack 

of clarity of how it‟s being dealt with between the Crowns and 

the General Revenue Fund. 

 

So to pay back this money, we‟re going to probably have higher 

utility rates. That seems to be a given. I‟m not sure if there‟ll 

have to be an increase in income taxes to cover this once they 

finally figure out how much it costs. Maybe we‟ll have to take 

another look at sales tax, and that‟s a possibility, or there may 

be some new Sask Party tax that we haven‟t heard about yet. 

But all of those kinds of discussions create an uneasiness in the 

community. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, with such a good budget, why are people 

so uneasy? I‟m not sure what the answer to that is, but it‟s been 

compounded by some of the ways that this budget has been 

communicated. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I have to say that listening to the public 

descriptions of the budget and, more pointedly, a number of the 

speeches in this Chamber, that we have a whole revisionist 

history of what happened in Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, 

we have people talking about how we got to this place where 

we actually have resources to do some of the things that we 

want to do in a way that is so distorted from reality that it 

makes you wonder why this has happened. And I think, in fact, 

that type of communication is what has also created a great deal 

of the uneasiness that we hear about this budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to quote from a book called, Why Some 

Ideas Survive and Others Die . . . Made to Stick by Chip Heath 

and Dan Heath. And in there they say a secondary effect of 

being angry, which was recently discovered by researchers, is 

that we become more certain of our judgment: 

 

When we‟re angry, we know we‟re right, as anyone who 

has been in a relationship can attest. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I get the impression that there are quite a number 

of angry people who are giving the speeches in this Chamber 

from the government side. That are drafting and developing the 

communication strategy for the budget. And that anger comes 

out in a way that seems to say that they‟re convinced that . . . 

Well it sounds as if they are convinced that they‟re right even 

though any calm listener to what they say would say it‟s not 

accurate. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that anger shows up whether it‟s in the 

speeches or whether it‟s in some of the communication 

documents or other places. I think that Saskatchewan public in 

general know that it was all of the people of Saskatchewan 

working together who dealt with the severe debt problems, the 

almost bankruptcy of the province in the early ‟90s. And the 

NDP were in government. They had lots of difficult things to 

do. But they didn‟t do all of the work that was necessary, alone. 

They did it together with all of the people. 



March 24, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2495 

And I think that the communications that we‟ve had around this 

budget and around the funds that are here in this province, come 

from some very angry people who are so convinced that they‟re 

right, that they forget that this is something that we‟ve all done 

together. We‟ve done this as Saskatchewan people, and we‟ve 

done it in a way that allows us to build for the future. And, Mr. 

Speaker, when they start spouting off things about 16 years of 

this and 16 months of that, people out there, they turn off 

because it sounds like a bully in a sandbox. And it sounds not 

very logical. Another quote that I always loved from Mark 

Twain is, and this is quote, a lie can get halfway around the 

world before the truth can even get its boots on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you say things that you know are wrong in a 

way of, and in anger, you end up distorting how the whole 

community deals with this. This should be a budget and a time 

when we‟re all celebrating together about all the hard work that 

we‟ve done as Saskatchewan citizens, as Saskatchewan 

governments, plural — both NDP and Sask Party, Conservative, 

Liberal, all the mix that‟s there — and we should be saying yes, 

we‟ve worked hard. We‟ve been careful. We‟re now in a 

situation where there‟s lots of challenges coming from around 

the world, but we‟ve got a solid base to work from. And that 

should have been the message about this budget, which is a 

budget of celebration. 

 

But unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, the way it‟s been laid out, the 

way it‟s been communicated, the way it‟s been described by the 

people opposite in this legislature, seems to come out of a 

deep-seated anger that then distorts the whole thing and it 

makes it such a thing that people are very, very uneasy. 

 

And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that uneasiness is there because 

people are concerned not so much about Saskatchewan but 

about the world around us. And to not have a calm, steady hand 

. . . I think it‟s quite telling, the title of this particular budget, 

because I think quite often when you think you‟re not strong 

and steady, that‟s when you say it. It‟s when you show it and 

when you feel it and when you are strong and steady, you don‟t 

have to have yourself telling yourself that you‟re that way. And 

I thought that was a very telling description of this whole 

budget when I saw that particular title. 

 

I think what people are doing right now, they‟re taking some 

advice that came from an interesting source. I don‟t know how 

many people remember the 1979 presidential election in the 

United States, when Ronald Reagan was running against Jimmy 

Carter. Jimmy Carter was the incumbent. And it didn‟t matter 

whatever they talked about, they always came back to this point 

and this was the one sentence, “Before you vote, ask yourself if 

you are better off today than you were four years ago.” And it‟s 

basically a question of, are you confident or are you uneasy 

about what‟s going on. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think people are asking the same 

question right now. They‟re saying, are we better off today than 

we were 16 months ago. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Nilson: — And unfortunately I think for the people of 

Saskatchewan, the answer to that is we‟re not certain. We don‟t 

know. We can‟t tell. 

And this kind of arrogant response, which comes I think out of 

a deep-seated anger, proves my point. It proves the point that 

this budget should be a celebration for all Saskatchewan people 

but unfortunately it‟s become a partisan document that‟s not 

going to do the things that needs to be done. 

 

So I will be voting in favour of the amendment and I will be 

voting against the motion because, Mr. Speaker, I think what 

we need is to have people who are leaders in this province, who 

go forward with confidence and provide leadership, not ones 

who yell and yell and yell and basically get everybody upset. 

Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — It being 5 p.m., this House stands in 

recess until 7 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly recessed until 19:00.] 



 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2461 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2461 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2461 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2461 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2461 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2461 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2462 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2462 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2462 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2462 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2462 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Remembering Ed Bloos 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2463 

 Saskatchewan Lung Association Walking Program 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2463 

 Prince Albert Student Receives Terry Fox Award 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2463 

 Remembering George Terry  

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2464 

 Tourism Awards of Excellence Gala 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2464 

 Anne Luke Recognized on Retirement 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2464 

 Opinion on Retirements 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2464 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Inner-City Health Care 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2465 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2465 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2466 

 SaskWater Operations 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2466 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2466 

 Tuition Fees 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2467 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2467 

 SaskPower Capital Plan 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2469 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2469 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 SaskEnergy Funds Natural Gas Purification Research 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2470 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2471 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Private Bills 

  Allchurch ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2471 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2471 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY (BUDGET DEBATE) 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2472 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2474 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2478 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2482 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2486 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2491 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2493 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 


