




















































Hansard: November 04, 2009


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 9A  WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 4, 2009, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3431 

 November 4, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well 

it’s a great honour for us to be able to welcome a number of 

very special guests representing the Métis Nation of 

Saskatchewan and actually the Métis Nation of British 

Columbia as well, as we gathered together in the rotunda 

moments ago to officially proclaim 2010 the Year of the Métis. 

And we’re obviously joined by many of our fellow citizens 

within the Métis Nation of Saskatchewan. 

 

If I may, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce those that are here. I 

apologize for those that I miss. And what I’ll do perhaps is ask 

members of the Métis Nation, after they’re introduced, if they 

wouldn’t mind standing and just stay standing until the group’s 

been introduced, if they are here with us today, so that we can 

properly welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

I’ll begin with the president of the Métis Nation of 

Saskatchewan, Robert Doucette; Allan Morin, the 

vice-president; Gabe Lafond, treasurer; Max Morin, secretary; 

Senator Nora Cummings who said prayers earlier today; 

Michael Maurice, senator; Pauline Anderson, senator; Norm 

McQuill, elder; Brian Kembel, CEO [chief executive officer]; 

Gaylene Poulin in communications. 

 

And there are many entertainers that had joined us as well 

earlier in the rotunda, Mr. Speaker, as you may know. They 

were accompanied by Donny Parenteau on the fiddle, as well as 

Dallas Boyer on the fiddle and Phil Boyer on guitar. Modeste 

Mckenzie was one of the jiggers. Allison Kimberly was a 

jigger, as well as Riel Reelers. And there were other dancers 

who aren’t on this list. 

 

There were a couple of other dancers — the member for Regina 

Elphinstone and myself — that were definitely bringing down 

the average. We don’t expect to get a call from Dancing with 

the Stars any time soon, but we’re grateful for the patience and 

the quick lesson that we got from one of the dancers today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, also joining us is a special guest from British 

Columbia, I believe the president of the Métis Nation of BC 

[British Columbia], and someone who traces in his ancestry 

back to Gabriel Dumont, Bruce Dumont from the province of 

BC, president of their Métis Nation. To them and all of the 

members of the Métis Nation of Saskatchewan who have joined 

us on this historic day may I just say, on behalf of the 

government, welcome to their Legislative Assembly. And to 

you and through you, Mr. Speaker, welcome to each and every 

one of them as they’ve joined us here this afternoon. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

join with the Premier and welcome the folks that were here to 

mark the proclamation for 2010 as the Year of the Métis. Of 

course it’s the 125th anniversary of the North-West Resistance, 

a very significant historic milestone in the life of this province. 

 

I want to thank the Premier for the proclamation and the 

members opposite for a good celebration, a good 

commemoration of this important milestone. It was indeed a 

good celebration, a good time to come together, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Certainly Senator Nora Cummings started us off right with a 

good prayer and so many wise words. She talked about the 

importance of the Métis sash and the fact that we are drawn 

together, those many threads in a sash. That is what the Métis 

people have done; they have drawn together those many threads 

of humanity. And that in a province where our motto is “from 

many peoples, strength” the Métis sash also brings to mind that 

strength through diversity, and certainly the importance of the 

Métis people in that diversity and the ability to celebrate this 

important milestone. 

 

And I have to say as well, we’re not going to be up for Dancing 

with the Stars any time soon certainly. Only Karen LaRocque, I 

think, could pull that off, Mr. Speaker, in terms of getting us out 

on the dance floor. 

 

On behalf of the official opposition, and I know my two very 

proud Métis colleagues from Athabasca and Cumberland, we 

join as the official opposition in marking this very important 

day. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I’d like to take a moment as Speaker of the 

Assembly to invite some very important guests who have joined 

us in the province of Saskatchewan. A number of 

representatives from a number of states as well as MLAs 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly] from the Western 

provinces who are here for the Pacific NorthWest Economic 

Region fall legislative conference. It’s my pleasure to introduce 

them and I would ask them to all stand. We welcome you to the 

province of Saskatchewan, to our Legislative Assembly. So if 

the guests with the Pacific NorthWest Region would stand, 

we’d like to extend our warm welcome to you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

you in welcoming all of our guests who are here with the 

Pacific NorthWest Economic Region. We are very pleased to 

have them here in Saskatchewan. And I know that all of the 

members of the House, and especially those of us on this side, 

on the official opposition side, will be looking forward to 

chances to visit with you and to explain how our government 

works. But more importantly, explain how our community 

works, and why we very much like living in the province of 

Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you and 



3432 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2009 

to you to the Assembly, it’s also my distinct privilege to 

welcome our visitors to Saskatchewan. Actually this is the third 

time today that I’ve welcomed them — breakfast, lunch, and 

now question period — but we certainly do welcome them. I’d 

particularly like to welcome our President, Senator Lesil 

McGuire from Alaska and the entire group. 

 

Today we are participating in a legislative academy which is 

designed to familiarize Canadian politicians with the American 

system, and American politicians with our system. One of the 

distinct differences is what we call question period. And they 

are very much looking forward to that this afternoon. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 

want to join the Premier and my colleagues in welcoming the 

Métis Nation of Saskatchewan here today, and particularly the 

president, Mr. Doucette. I want to point out that it is a very 

historic day, and we join the celebration as 2010 being the Year 

of the Métis. 

 

And I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that my card number for 

Métis Nation is 04868. And I have a 2007 voter card. I look at 

that card, and today certainly was a proud moment for me. The 

only problem I had is I wish I was better looking because now 

you need photo ID [identification] to vote in the Métis Nation. 

 

And I want to point out that it’s always nice to be able to 

participate in Métis celebration, and I commend the Métis 

Nation for their work. And I wish them good luck in the future 

plans and meetings with the current government, and to point 

out that once you’re a Métis, you’re a Métis forever — not just 

at the spur of the moment, but forever. And I congratulate the 

Métis Nation and welcome them here today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you to all members, I also would like to 

recognize the very many special guests in the House today. I’d 

like to welcome my friends from the Métis Nation, President 

Robert Doucette. It was great to be part of a historic moment. 

 

But also it’s a privilege for me to stand in the House today and 

introduce a group of public servants seated in the west gallery 

who are participating in the parliamentary program for public 

service employees. Welcome to your legislature. We have 23 

public servants in the gallery today from the following 

ministries: Advanced Education, Employment and Labour; 

from Agriculture; from Education; Health; Legislative 

Assembly; Social Services; Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

And one from the ministry I have a privilege of being 

responsible for, and that’s the Public Service Commission. 

 

As everyone in this Assembly recognizes, the decisions that are 

made in this Assembly could not be completed without the 

dedication and the hard work and the commitment of the public 

servants. And we thank you. 

 

This program has been very popular in previous sessions and 

very well attended. The program includes in-depth history and 

tour of our Legislative Building, briefings by the Legislative 

Library, the Legislative Assembly Clerk’s Office, Executive 

Council. And they’ll be observing the House proceedings 

through question period. And I’ll have the pleasure of meeting 

them personally along with other members of the Legislative 

Assembly. Mr. Speaker, I’d like all of our colleagues to 

welcome these participants in the parliamentary program here 

today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today it’s my honour 

to introduce someone that needs little introduction to many of 

the members of the Legislative Assembly. Seated behind the 

bar on our side is none other than Ms. Vi Stanger. Vi 

represented the Lloydminster area very capably and spoke out 

very clearly on behalf of her constituents and people right 

across the province. Those of us who know Vi know she cannot 

be stifled or muzzled in any way, but we very much appreciate 

Vi’s straightforwardness and welcome her here today to the 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Seated in your 

gallery are two guests. One is my constituency assistant, Rita 

Flaman Jarrett, and the other one is her daughter, Rachel Jarrett. 

Rita has been my constituency assistant since 2003 and has 

served me very well in that capacity. 

 

The one blemish on her career, Mr. Speaker, is that during the 

1980s she worked in this building, and one of her roles was to 

hire summer students. And she hired a young summer student 

from Swift Current who actually went on to become the MLA 

for that area, who is currently in the House today. I think that’s 

something we’ll sort of leave in the distant past. 

 

Rita has brought her daughter Rachel to the House for a bring 

your child to work day. Rita has chosen to interpret that as bring 

your child to see whether your boss really works day. And 

today is one of the days that I plan to work. In any event, 

Rachel is a 14-year-old grade 9 student at Holy Cross High 

School, very active in sporting activities and the Holy Cross 

junior band. And I would ask that all members welcome both 

Rita and Rachel to the House, to their legislature today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you, I 

would like to acknowledge, as my colleagues have, the Métis 

Nation, the people. Being a Métis person, very proud, the roots 

that I have, I guess, had an honour to be a part of from my 

grandparents who were both Métis, very proud. Taught us to 

make sure that we were proud of our culture, what we had to 

offer as a society, and that we have a lot to add. 

 

We are willing to work with people. Our hearts are in the right 

place. We have our challenges like everyone else, but we are 

very proud. And I am proud to be part of the nation, the Métis 

Nation, as a Métis person. And it is an honour to have our 

leadership and our community members here. Thank you, Mr. 



November 4, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3433 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Humboldt, the 

Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s indeed a 

pleasure for me to introduce two constituents of mine who are 

sitting in the west gallery. Today we have with us Lloyd and 

Janice Howden. They are a couple that live in Humboldt and I 

have to say I’m very proud to be able to say that they are my 

friends. 

 

On behalf of myself and the Agriculture minister, who pointed 

out to thank Lloyd in particular for the work that he does with 

SPCA [Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals] and 

the great relationship that our provincial government has with 

that organization. It is very much appreciated. So I would like 

to everyone to join me in welcoming Janice and Lloyd to their 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Many guests 

here in our Assembly or their Assembly here today. It’s very 

special. But through you and to you, seated in your gallery, I am 

very proud to welcome leadership from the Regina Outside City 

Workers’ Local 21. Now these city workers are celebrating their 

75th anniversary as a local. It’s our honour to have them in their 

Assembly. They’ve provided highest quality service to residents 

and business for many, many years in this city. 

 

And specifically I’d like to recognize a few of these members: 

President Tim Anderson; Vice-president Greg Moyer; Wade 

Zalopski. Now to be honest, I see Wade at the gym probably a 

few times a week. This is the first time I’ve seen him with 

sleeves on. So welcome, Wade — less intimidating like this. 

John Gangl, Alexandra Dobbs, Cal Pfeifer, Mauro Milessa, 

Clint Driedger, Cindy Jessop. And these are but some of our 

leadership for Local 21. I ask all members of this Assembly to 

welcome these civic leaders to their Assembly and congratulate 

them on their 75 years and send on our regards. Thank you very 

much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. While still on my feet, seated in the 

east gallery, Mr. Speaker, to you and through you, I am very 

pleased to introduce two constituents and friends, Will Leach 

and Nicole Leach. Welcome to your Assembly. Thank you. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 

the west gallery are two constituents of mine that I’d like to 

introduce to the Assembly. They are Greg Lawrence and his son 

Ryan Lawrence. They are here to mark the proclamation of the 

Year of the Métis. They came from Moose Jaw this morning. 

 

Greg is one of our employees with SaskTel in Moose Jaw. He’s 

also very involved with the community with air cadets and is 

also the president of the Métis local in Moose Jaw. And with 

him, his son Ryan. Ryan is a Grade 11 student at Vanier and 

he’s quite a tough football player. You can tell by the cast on 

his hand. So I’d ask all members to welcome Greg and Ryan to 

the Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

definitely a popular place here today. 

 

I want to introduce to you and through you a number of 

individuals seated in the eastern gallery. I’m talking about some 

students and some teachers from the Rainbow Youth Centre’s 

Road to Employment program. They’re accompanied by 

teachers Andi Schenk and Brika Steinberg. 

 

They were actually here, Mr. Speaker, able to participate in the 

proclamation activities around the Year of the Métis. I didn’t 

see them get up and jig. We’ll check them out on that later, Mr. 

Speaker. But we’ll give it a whirl. Anyway it’s really good to 

see them here in their legislature, so if all members could please 

join me in welcoming them here to their legislature. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Silver Springs, the Minister Responsible for Enterprise and 

Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. I would also like to join colleagues in recognizing 

guests. I see a constituent of mine in the government gallery, 

Mr. Mike Couros. 

 

Mike’s been a resident of Saskatoon for quite some time and 

very involved in the community, certainly through the Progress 

Club and his work with Care & Share and other organizations 

that benefit our community. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming 

Mr. Couros to his legislature and thanking him for the work that 

he does do. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you in 

your gallery are two constituents from the great constituency of 

Saskatoon Fairview. And they are Sharlene Rayner; she’s a 

CUPE [Canadian Union of Public Employees] representative. 

And she’s brought her daughter here today, Alison Haarstad, 

because it is take your kids to work day today, Mr. Speaker. 

And they’ve decided to come here and spend part of that day 

with us. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, Alison is a grade 9 student in the Tommy 

Douglas Collegiate, our new collegiate in Saskatoon Fairview. 

She enjoys story writing, and I understand she’s a great debater, 

Mr. Speaker. And I look forward to perhaps seeing her on the 

floor here in one of these chairs in the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet I’d also like to introduce in 

your gallery, Bert Royer, business manager with the 

Ironworkers Local 771; Wayne Worral, business agent for the 



3434 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2009 

Ironworkers Local 771; and Jason Dielschneider. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I too want to extend my congratulations to all the 

CUPE workers, the outside workers for Local 21. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to 

join with the minister and welcome all the members of the 

public service that are here with us today. It’s nice to see them 

come to their Assembly. We appreciate you coming, and we 

hope you enjoy your day here today. 

 

The Speaker: — Just before we move on to presenting 

petitions, I just want to remind our guests who have joined us 

today that you’re more than welcome to be here, but we ask that 

you don’t participate in any of the further proceedings as we 

move on from here. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of wage equity for CBO 

[community-based organization] workers. We know that 

workers in the community-based organizations, called CBOs in 

Saskatchewan, have traditionally been underpaid, and that these 

workers work and care for, provide valuable services to some of 

the most vulnerable members of our society such as persons 

living with mental and intellectual disabilities, women and 

children in crisis, low-income, at risk individuals, young 

children, youth, Aboriginal, immigrant, and visible minority 

persons. I’d like to read the prayer, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

development and implementation of a multi-year funding 

plan to ensure that CBO workers achieve wage equity with 

employees who perform work of equal value in 

government departments. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the petitioners come from Yarbo, 

Saskatchewan, Yorkton, Norquay, Veregin, Saskatoon, and 

Birch Hills. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

in support of a new long-term care facility in La Ronge. The 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately invest in the planning and 

construction of new long-term care beds in La Ronge. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by the good people of La Ronge and area. I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition in support of fairness for students here in 

Saskatchewan through the necessary expansion of the graduate 

retention program. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately expand the graduate 

retention program to include master’s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals that signed this petition are from 

the city of Regina. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present yet another petition on behalf of rural residents 

of Saskatchewan who question why the Sask Party government 

is leaving them behind with respect to providing safe and 

affordable water. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to financially assist the town of Duck 

Lake residents for the good of their health and safety due 

to the exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency, and that this government fulfills its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good 

residents of Duck Lake. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I stand and present a petition 

today in support of maintaining quality health care services. Mr. 

Speaker, we’re hopeful that the government of Saskatchewan 

realize that the utilization and value of a full range of 

professional skills offered by health care providers is promoted 

through the address of retention and recruitment issues and 

thereby ensuring safe staffing levels, Mr. Speaker. The prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to commit to maintaining quality health 

care services and job security for all public health care 

providers. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petitions are signed by people from Maple Creek, Golden 

Prairie, Saskatoon, Morse, Hodgeville, and Vanguard. I so 

present. 



November 4, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3435 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased today to 

present a petition in support of affordable rents and housing for 

The Battlefords from residents who have been given notice of 

rent increases of about 40 per cent, and who note that the 

vacancy rate for rental accommodation in The Battlefords is 

very low. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to call upon the 

Government of Saskatchewan to develop an affordable 

housing program that will result in a greater number of 

quality and affordable rental units to be made available to 

a greater number of people throughout The Battlefords, 

and that will implement a process of rent review or rent 

control to better protect tenants in a non-competitive 

housing environment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by residents of the city of 

North Battleford. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents of 

Saskatchewan as it relates to the unprecedented 

mismanagement of their finances. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to start managing our 

provincial finances responsibly and prudently to ensure 

that it does not continue its trend of massive budgetary 

shortfalls, runaway and unsustainable spending, equity 

stripping from our Crowns, and irresponsible revenue 

setting. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions, Mr. Speaker, are signed by concerned citizens 

and good residents of White City, Eyebrow, and Humboldt. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Batoche. 

 

Year of the Métis 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Métis Nation of 

Saskatchewan has requested that 2010 be designated as the 

Year of the Métis in Saskatchewan. Our Saskatchewan Party 

government recognizes the unique history and culture of Métis 

people. And we appreciate the contributions that they have 

made to help mould Saskatchewan into the province it is today. 

 

Our government will honour the Métis Nation, recognizing 

2010 as the year of the Métis in Saskatchewan. The year 2010 

also marks the milestone anniversary for the Métis citizens of 

Canada as it marks the 125th anniversary of the North-West 

Resistance. Each year, thousands return to Saskatchewan to pay 

respect to the Métis that were part of the struggle 124 years ago. 

 

Throughout the next year, Métis along with all residents of 

Saskatchewan will take the opportunity to celebrate the rich 

culture that has made our province the heart of the Métis Nation 

and home to all. 2010 will be a year of celebration and 

hopefully a year of learning and reconciliation for all residents 

of our great province. 

 

Our Saskatchewan Party government looks forward to 

continuing to build a strong working relationship with the Métis 

Nation. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 

official opposition, it is a pleasure to restate our support for the 

proclamation of 2010 as the Year of the Métis. With the 125th 

anniversary of the North-West Resistance, 2010, as the Year of 

the Métis, will be a time of celebration and reflection for all 

Saskatchewan people but especially for the Métis Nation of 

Saskatchewan. It was great to see the Métis Nation of 

Saskatchewan present today in the rotunda for the proclamation 

and the sounds of prayers and proud words and fiddling, guitar, 

and shock-a-ways filled the air. 

 

On this side of the House, we are proud of the contribution that 

the Métis make every year to Saskatchewan. We are proud to 

serve alongside the Métis members from Athabasca and 

Cumberland. We are proud of the trail that was blazed by the 

first Métis minister of the Saskatchewan Crown, Keith Goulet. 

And we are proud of the things that we have been able to 

accomplish by working in partnership and respect with the 

Métis like The Métis Act, the naming of the Louis Riel Trail, the 

Clarence Campeau Fund, the Gabriel Dumont Institute, and the 

Gabriel Dumont Technical Institute, and adequate core funding 

for the Métis Nation. 

 

And while we are glad to celebrate, we are concerned that 

inadequate core funding, confusion on duty to consult and 

accommodate, and constraint and insecurity on core Métis 

institutions seem to be the hallmarks of the Sask Party 

government’s approach to Métis issues. 

 

But to close, today is a day to celebrate. We are glad that 2010 

will be the Year of the Métis, and we in the official opposition 

will continue to work for those measures that will make every 

year a good year to be Métis. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Outside City Workers’ Local Celebrates Anniversary 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased 

to recognize a special anniversary for a union that thousands of 

proud and contributing Regina citizens have belonged to. This 

year, 2009, marks the 75th anniversary of the Regina Outside 

City Workers’ Local 21 and I hear the member from Regina 

Elphinstone was also once a Local 21 member. 

 

These members have provided quality public services to 



3436 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2009 

citizens and business of Regina for the past 75 years. I want to 

take this opportunity to congratulate its members and executive, 

past and present, for their leadership in our community. 

 

I’m pleased to have some of its current leadership joining us 

here in their Assembly here today. These employees of the city 

of Regina have maintained and enhanced the city’s sewer and 

water systems, roadways, parks, rinks, pools, sport fields, 

stadiums, and public spaces, as but a few examples. 

 

The Regina Outside City Workers’ Local 21’s motto is 

“commitment to community.” These members certainly 

exemplify this motto. These members, past and present, are no 

small part of what makes Regina such a fantastic place to live, 

work, and raise a family, Mr. Speaker. I ask all members of this 

Assembly to join with me in thanking and recognizing Local 

21, city of Regina outside city workers past and present, for 

their meaningful contributions to our community. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

2010 World Junior Hockey Championships 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise today to 

speak about Saskatchewan hosting the 2010 World Junior 

Hockey Championships in both Regina and Saskatoon. The 

competition will bring together the world’s top junior hockey 

players from 10 countries. The 2010 World Junior Hockey 

Championship organizing committee and Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport jointly launched a promotional campaign 

designed to encourage Saskatchewan residents to invite 

out-of-province friends and families home for the 

championship. For 10 action-packed days, junior hockey’s most 

skilled players will be in our community and playing on our 

rinks. 

 

[14:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is an incredible privilege to have the 

championship back in Saskatchewan. The last time the world 

junior hockey championship was held in Saskatchewan was 

1991, and it’s great to have it back. This tournament will not 

only be played in Regina and Saskatoon, but several 

pre-tournament games will be held in Swift Current, Moose 

Jaw, Weyburn, Unity, Prince Albert, and Humboldt. 

 

And with all due respect to our American guests, Mr. Speaker, I 

would encourage every member of the Assembly and everyone 

in this province to invite their friends and family to come home 

for the holidays and watch Canada’s world junior hockey team 

bring home the gold. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Winston Knoll Students Participate in Science Events 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, Winston Knoll High School, 

located on Rochdale Boulevard in Regina, has earned a 

reputation for science knowledge. Winston Knoll students were 

awarded the top prizes at the Regina Regional Science Fair, 

earned four spots at the Canada-Wide Science Fair, and even 

participated in the international movement for leisure activities 

in science and technology or MILSET [Mouvement 

International pour le Loisir Scientifique et Technique] at 

Expo-Sciences International. 

 

Near the close of last year, Winston Knoll students Jordan 

Brears and David Skibinski with their project, Thinking Outside 

the Gas Pump; and Lauren Gamble with her project, H2O and 

Your Home; and Benjamin Korol with his project, Genomic 

DNA Quantities went on from the Regina regional science fair 

to represent Saskatchewan in the Canada-wide science fair held 

in Winnipeg this summer. This past July, Jordan Brears and 

David Skibinski, now graduates from Winston Knoll, 

participated in the 2009 team Canada delegation to the 

Expo-Sciences International held in Tunisia, Africa. Jordan and 

David represented Saskatchewan in the 46-student delegation 

from Canada to this distinguished, non-competitive biannual 

international youth science event. 

 

At the close of the MILSET Expo-Sciences International, team 

Canada for the first time was recognized as the best delegation, 

based on the quality of their projects, team organization, and 

overall contribution to the international expo, which hosted 

approximately 1,000 young scientists from over 40 countries. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask all my colleagues to join with me in 

offering our congratulations to the above-mentioned students, to 

the dedicated teachers of Winston Knoll High School, and by 

extension to all Saskatchewan students who are inspired to 

learn. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 

 

Members’ Responsibilities 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, the people we represent 

deserve respect from their elected representatives. Their 

individual privacy should be rigorously protected. 

Unfortunately, one member opposite has failed utterly to meet 

the important obligation. Yesterday the Minister of Corrections 

received an email from Mr. Scott Taylor, a corrections worker 

in Regina. Mr. Taylor . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I recognize the member 

from Lloydminster. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Taylor says he’s personally offended 

the opposition . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Members will come to order. 

The member from Lloydminster has the floor. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Taylor says he is personally offended 

the Opposition House Leader has publicly released documents 

that should never have been released. Further, Mr. Taylor 

believes his good name and reputation have been damaged 

because of the member’s failure to black out the names that he 

released to the public. Mr. Taylor has requested a written 



November 4, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3437 

apology for what he calls the member’s lack of professionalism. 

 

Mr. Speaker, members of this Assembly are afforded special 

rights and privileges. They are allowed to say things in the 

House that they could not say outside of this Assembly. 

However with these special rights comes responsibilities. These 

special rights of members must be used in the public interest, 

not in a way that will harm reputations of innocent people. 

 

I call on the members opposite to return the documents that 

were obtained illegally and provided to them by a person who 

broke an oath. I call on the member opposite to correct a wrong, 

to apologize, Mr. Speaker, to Mr. Taylor. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Montgomery School Makes Top School List 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, Today’s Parent magazine 

recently published its sixth annual list of top schools in Canada. 

I’m proud to report that Montgomery School of Saskatoon was 

one of only 20 schools from across the country to receive this 

honour. 

 

Readers nominated schools in a range of categories developed 

by a panel of teachers, parents, and education experts. 

Submissions from hundreds of schools across the country were 

poured over, and Montgomery School stood out of the pack in 

the punched-up programming category for its ScienceTrek 

program. 

 

This stimulating program blends hands-on science activities 

with outdoor excursions in labs at the University of 

Saskatchewan. Activities include camping, canoeing, biking, 

and skiing. Grads who earn more than 70 per cent can then 

fast-track into Grade 10 science the following year. Ninety-one 

students from all across Saskatoon applied to this ScienceTrek 

program last year, a clear testament to the popularity of this 

program. Mr. Speaker, the staff at Montgomery School has 

gone above and beyond expectations to create innovative and 

enjoyable learning opportunities for grade 8 students. 

 

As a mom of two young children myself, I recognize the 

importance of providing a quality education to our province’s 

children. I certainly appreciate the work schools like this are 

doing to enhance students’ educational experiences. Mr. 

Speaker, I ask all MLAs to join with me in recognizing 

Montgomery School of Saskatoon for its exceptional 

achievements in creating a quality education for our children. 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Relevance of Responses and Decorum 

 

The Speaker: — Before I call oral questions, I’d like to raise a 

couple of issues that have been of concern to me lately 

regarding procedure. First, the question of order relates to the 

scope of responses during question period. I ruled on this issue 

on a previous occasion, but I am concerned that certain 

ministers might have lost sight of rule 19(3) that responses shall 

be relevant to the question, but a minister may decline to 

answer or take notice of a question. 

 

During the exchange yesterday between the member from 

Saskatoon Fairview and the Minister of Advanced Education, 

Labour and Employment, there were questions posed regarding 

occupational health and safety rules and safety standards 

relating to a specific crane. I find that although the minister 

related his responses to occupational health and safety, they did 

not relate to the specific crane in question. This response was 

not completely irrelevant, but it does raise some concerns of a 

trend. 

 

In the same question period, the question brought forward by 

the member from Regina Dewdney focused on objections by 

police forces in issuing a media advisory. The response 

provided by the Minister Responsible for Corrections, Public 

Safety and Policing related to a disclosure of confidential 

inmate files. I find that the minister’s responses were not 

relevant and therefore not in order. If unable to provide a 

relevant response, ministers may decline to answer or take 

notice of the question. 

 

Secondly, I want to remind members to conduct themselves in a 

manner befitting this Assembly. In the last few days, there have 

been several instances where members have hurled insults 

across the floor. The latest example was yesterday during the 

period leading up to the recorded division on the address in 

reply. The Minister of Health hurled a comment across the floor 

that caused considerable disorder. 

 

I want to remind members that the language used in the 

Assembly should be temperate and worthy of the place it is 

spoken. Members are responsible for the words they choose. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Public Safety Procedures 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise again 

to ask a question I’ve asked in the past. The policy to deal with 

the escape or release in error of a level 1 dangerous offender is 

clear. The public is made aware of the incident immediately 

unless the relevant police service objects to the issuance of the 

media advisory. To the Minister of Corrections, Public Safety 

and Policing: which police force objected to making the public 

aware that a dangerous sex offender was unlawfully at large? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, I’m going to quote 

from paragraph 1 on page 1 of CPSP’s [Corrections, Public 

Safety and Policing] incident reporting policy, and I quote: 

 

Determination of whether or not an exception will be 

made regarding the issuance of a media advisory is at the 

discretion of the Deputy Minister, informed by advice 

from police and senior corrections officials. 

 

In this particular case, Mr. Speaker, after my deputy received 



3438 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2009 

advice from senior corrections officials who had several 

conversations with police, his recommendation to me was that a 

news release would do nothing to enhance public safety because 

the individual was not aware he was unlawfully at large, was in 

full compliance with his probation conditions, was employed, 

and had a known address. In short, the RCMP [Royal Canadian 

Mounted Police] knew where he lived and worked, and were in 

the process of picking him up. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, my question to the Minister of 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing is simple: which police 

force? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, the corrections 

officials talk to many police forces or other police forces. I do 

not know which ones they talked to. If the member wants a 

name of somebody they talked to, I do not have that. If he really 

wishes to have one, I can look into it and I’ll take notice of it. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Severance of Public Servants 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In May of this year 

we found out that the estimated cost of severance packages for 

70 fired civil servants would be $10.7 million, and that there 

were still some outstanding severances at that time. Mr. 

Speaker, the government provided an answer to a written 

question that the NDP [New Democratic Party] asked in the 

spring. We received that answer just recently. In this document, 

the government discloses 24 more cases of dismissed civil 

servants from government at a cost of $1.3 million more than 

previously disclosed. 

 

To the Deputy Premier: can he confirm that the cost of 

dismissed civil servants is now more than $12 million, and the 

number of cases has increased from 70 to more than 100? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, over the years when the 

opposition was in government, they terminated a number of 

people each and every year. Those costs continued to go on 

during the time they were in government and those costs 

continue to go on as employees come and employees go. And 

those are a routine part of forming government. 

 

We’ve provided answers to questions, Mr. Speaker, earlier, 

with regard to the specific costs relating to when this 

government came to office. And, Mr. Speaker, I would pleased 

to provide the member with an update. And I will take notice of 

that part of the question and will provide that to the member. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In answer 

also to written questions, the government discloses an 

additional nine people dismissed from Saskatchewan Liquor 

and Gaming Authority, Mr. Speaker, at a cost of $1.2 million 

more. That is on top, Mr. Speaker, of the civil servants 

dismissed from government, possibly putting the price tag now 

as high as $13 million. 

 

A recent column, Mr. Speaker, in the Leader-Post had this to 

say, and I quote, “But those additional 2008-09 firings of 

long-serving civil servants were not only unconscionable but 

perhaps the biggest government spending waste in years.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: when is the government going to 

stop wasting money firing career public servants? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to advise the 

House and the members opposite that we have a great deal of 

confidence and respect for the civil service in this province. The 

members of the public that work in the province’s civil service 

are polished professional people. They are mostly career 

individuals, and this government has the greatest amount of 

respect for those people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on occasion there are situations where people have 

been terminated. In those cases, it is the policy and practice of 

this administration to ensure that those people and those files 

are treated with respect, and that those people get good 

severance packages offered immediately upon termination, and 

that we endeavour to settle those as promptly as possible. 

 

I am not, Mr. Speaker, familiar with the specific files related to 

SLGA [Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority] and make 

the same undertaking to the members opposite, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the same package 

of information we received, we found out there are still 16 

dismissed civil servants who have not yet settled with 

government. Based on the numbers to date — the average 

settlement being approximately $120,000, Mr. Speaker — this 

means that after all of these cases are settled, there could be 

another $1.8 million price tag attached to this process. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, to the minister — a simple question, perhaps a 

simple answer — will the minister simply confirm the total cost 

of dismissed civil servants. One number, Mr. Speaker, all in. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

[14:15] 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it is the intention . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, when that government 

came into office in the early 1990s, they fired and terminated in 

a ruthless fashion over 200 employees. Mr. Speaker, this 

government has treated employees with dignity and with 



November 4, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3439 

respect, and we have terminated far fewer employees. And in 

each of those cases, we have endeavoured to make a prompt and 

complete settlement with those individuals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if there are any that are outstanding, it would be 

fewer than five that are outstanding from the time of this 

government forming of the transition terminations, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. The government also 

claims, in answer to written questions, that rather than using 

Department of Justice and human resources departments in 

government to settle these claims, they’ve used outside law 

firms, Mr. Speaker, to settle the claims. 

 

Outside law firms, Mr. Speaker, were contracted, were 

contracted, Mr. Speaker, in 40 cases. And legal fees of more 

than $340,000, Mr. Speaker, were paid to these law firms. All 

four law firms, Mr. Speaker, that were contracted by this 

government to do this work, were top donors to the 

Saskatchewan Party. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why did this government pay 

$340,000 to Sask Party contributing law firms to do the work 

that government lawyers normally do? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for the 

question. I think it’s normal practice when governments change 

that outside counsel is used for that type of matter. As a matter 

of fact, Mr. Speaker, it’s my recollection that when the NDP 

came into power in the early 1990s, the firm of Olive Waller, 

etc., did a large number of that work. 

 

And in fact, Mr. Speaker, another firm did a large amount of 

work. The member for Saskatoon Meewasin was himself 

employed and went on leave from his firm so that he could do 

exactly that kind of work on a full-time basis for a period of 

time, Mr. Speaker. Nothing unusual there at all, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Workplace Safety Issues 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, my question has to do with the 

government’s admission yesterday that it has allowed an unsafe, 

uncertified crane to be operated at a Regina area construction 

site since late July, in violation of its own occupational health 

and safety laws. Mr. Speaker, the law is clear. A crane cannot 

be allowed to work on a construction site until it has a 

completed logbook, has passed a full safety inspection, and has 

been certified by a professional engineer. 

 

My question to the minister is: why has the government broken 

its own occupational health and safety laws? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for 

the opportunity to provide a bit of an update on this specific 

crane, Mr. Speaker. And I guess the question that began 

yesterday, Mr. Speaker, it began with the notion that there was 

no logbook, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to have 

a photocopy of the logbook that they didn’t know existed, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government takes occupational health and 

safety very, very seriously, Mr. Speaker. As it pertains to the 

crane, what I can say is five inspections have taken place. Two 

highly experienced occupational health and safety officers have 

inspected the crane in the last 24 hours. And we confirm that 

the crane is safely operating, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask the minister to 

table that document. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the occupational health and safety department 

went out to the site, looked at the crane, ordered a single hook 

to be replaced, and then they got the crane working again. Mr. 

Speaker, that’s really standing up for the safety of 

Saskatchewan workers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, outside the Assembly the minister said the 

department was just giving the Ontario contractor who owns the 

crane a reasonable amount of time to comply with the law. And 

his official said the uncertified, unsafe crane presented no 

unusual danger to workers. Mr. Speaker, the law doesn’t say 

after a reasonable period of time. These requirements must be 

met before the crane is allowed on to the construction site. Mr. 

Speaker, this is a life-and-death decision because this 

equipment routinely lifts 10 tonnes or more of steel over the 

heads of iron workers on this site. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why did the government make this unlawful 

exception for an out-of-province contractor at this construction 

site? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the people of 

this province, on behalf of people that often tune in, there’s an 

email I’ve received, Mr. Speaker. And I thought what I’d do is 

just provide an opportunity to quote from that. 

 

Mr. Mike Morrison from Morrison Inspection Services wrote to 

me this morning, and I quote: 

 

It has come to my attention that yesterday afternoon my 

name was mentioned in the legislature in regards to an 

unsafe crane and that my inspection is not recognized here 

in Saskatchewan. Not only do I feel ridiculed, but hurt 

over the accusations that the NDP has made, i.e., that I 

was related to Mr. Steve Mullins — that’s untrue; that my 

inspection was in conflict of interest — that’s untrue. I 

signed an oath stating that I would conduct my inspections 

in a professional manner and never compromise the safety 

of others. 



3440 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2009 

I would like the member of the NDP to get his facts 

straight before he speaks about me or anyone else for that 

matter. Words that are spoken, whether they are true or 

not, can never be taken back. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are in compliance with the regulations. Mr. 

Speaker, occupational health and safety is a key priority. And 

I’m ashamed, Mr. Speaker, for the members opposite to have 

mentioned the question as they did yesterday, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, talk about being 

ashamed. Talk about being ashamed. This minister talks about 

Mission: Zero, and I’ll tell you what. What the people of 

Saskatchewan have come to realize is that that stands for zero 

enforcement of occupational health and safety in this province. 

That’s what that stands for. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I have here an inspection report from 

a Saskatchewan engineering firm, Kova Engineering, which 

shows that the Ontario contractor hired them in August to try 

and get this crane certified. The report lists nine different safety 

problems with the crane and, Mr. Speaker, refuses to certify it, 

refuses to certify it — problems like cracks on the main frame, 

bulged areas, cracks on the boom, and broken safety latches. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister: did his staff know 

that the Saskatchewan engineer had already rejected this crane 

for certification in August when they signed a report a few 

weeks later saying that they would await certification from an 

Ontario engineer? Did they know that? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, section 216(3) of The 

Occupational Health and Safety Regulations, 1996 states and 

requires that: 

 

. . . a mobile crane is subjected to a thorough inspection, 

including non-destructive testing, under the supervision of 

a professional engineer [and it also prescribes that these 

inspections occur] every two years or 1,800 hours of 

operation, whichever comes first. 

 

The crane was inspected in the United States on November 

12th, 2008 and again, Mr. Speaker, was inspected here by 

Morrison Inspection Services, an Ontario company that 

specializes in these inspections throughout North America. 

Since at least 1998, officers under the former government and 

ours have consistently interpreted the regulation to allow cranes 

certified in other jurisdictions to operate in Saskatchewan, 

providing that they meet the requirements of this section. Mr. 

Speaker, this regulation has been in place. It’s been interpreted 

for years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Our occupational health and safety officers have been on site 

five times, Mr. Speaker, well in advance of the last 24 hours. 

We’ve visited twice in the last 24 hours, Mr. Speaker. We have 

every faith in our officers and we have every confidence that 

the occupational health and safety of the people of this province 

is taken seriously within our ministry. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Support for Seniors’ Centres 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, even volunteer seniors’ centres 

in rural Saskatchewan can’t escape the rising cost of living 

under this Sask Party government. I want to quote from a letter 

by Saskatchewan Seniors Association president, Len Fallows, 

published in Rural Roots on October 11th, and the quote goes 

like this: 

 

Numerous centers . . . have an income of about $500 [and] 

are faced with expenditures of $5,000 to $6,000. Most of 

that expenditure sits squarely on the shoulders of the cost 

of energy, power, water, telephone and taxes. 

 

Centers that used to be open five days a week are now 

struggling to have their doors open two days a week. 

 

Most of those added costs like utility rates are rising. To the 

minister, when is the Sask Party government going to support 

these Saskatchewan seniors’ citizens centres? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s indeed a pleasure to stand in the House and to 

answer the member’s question. It has been a goal of this 

government to ensure that Saskatchewan residents pay the 

lowest utility rates possible, whether they’re residences, 

whether they’re businesses, whether they’re senior citizens’ 

homes. Mr. Speaker, it’s important to keep those costs as . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, as I was saying, it’s 

important to keep the costs for residences, for businesses, for 

seniors’ centres at the lowest possible cost. And that’s indeed 

what our Crown corporations have been doing. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, today cabinet approved a decrease in the 

rates of SaskEnergy, taking it from $5.96 a gigajoule to $5.21 a 

gigajoule — Mr. Speaker, a 12.6 per cent reduction in the 

commodity rate, making it amongst the lowest in the country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, next door in Manitoba, they now pay a rate of 

$5.54. We’re below that. In British Columbia, they pay $5.97. 

We’re below that. And we’re right in the range of what they’re 

paying in Alberta. It continues to be a priority for our Crown 

corporations and that’s the way we’ll operate. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, this is a widespread problem. 

We visited the Birch Hills Senior Centre this last summer on a 

relatively cold day when they couldn’t afford to turn on the 

heat. It was absolutely freezing in that building. Their annual 

income is $126 but they have more than $4,000 a year in 



November 4, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3441 

expenses. 

 

Duck Lake seniors’ centre annual income, $670; expenses, 

5,400. Big River, 450 in annual income; expenses, 3,000. And 

in Swift Current, $2,000 in income and $7,800 in expenses. 

This is a lot of money for organizations that are volunteer 

driven, Mr. Speaker, and it’s made worse by escalating costs. 

 

To the minister: when is the government, the Sask Party 

government going to assist seniors’ centres in keeping their 

doors open? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that our government is very aware of 

some of the pressures and struggles that seniors’ centres face 

around Saskatchewan, as most of the seniors’ centres would be 

represented by members on this side of the House. We’ve had 

conversations with seniors’ centre organizations that would be 

in our communities, Mr. Speaker, and I’ve had the opportunity 

to meet with the provincial organizations that absolutely talked 

about the struggle that they see, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we take seniors’ issues as a priority, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s why we have a Legislative Secretary that the Premier 

named that is going around the province talking to seniors 

throughout the province, looking at the issues that they’re 

facing, Mr. Speaker. This may be one that comes to the 

forefront. 

 

And it is a struggle for them out there, Mr. Speaker. But I 

would ask the government that, over the last 16 years, how 

much did they put into seniors’ centres over the last 16 years, 

Mr. Speaker? Not very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, several months ago seniors 

asked this government for funding to help seniors’ centres 

across the province keep their doors open. But in a pattern 

that’s becoming all too familiar with this government, they’ve 

waited months to hear anything. Now, Mr. Speaker, we know 

that the Sask Party has money — $340,000 to pay Sask Party 

lawyers to deal with long-term public servants that have been 

fired. We know that they have $14 million to pay severance to 

long-time career public servants that have been fired. How 

much longer do seniors that run these volunteers seniors’ 

centres have to wait? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud in the 

past two years of the different initiatives that we’ve taken that 

have helped with seniors across the province. For example, the 

senior income plan that the Minister for Social Services 

increased — first increase in 16 years, Mr. Speaker. Under the 

NDP government they did absolutely nothing in that area, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was very proud to be able to announce $152 

million that have gone to long-term care facilities. After touring 

many of these long-term care facilities . . . These aren’t just 

rooms that they stay in, Mr. Speaker. These are their homes, the 

homes that were just unacceptable in many, many communities, 

Mr. Speaker. I’m glad we’ve put $153 million into that. 

 

[14:30] 

 

The seniors’ centres across the province absolutely are 

struggling. Some are doing better than others, Mr. Speaker, 

because they have a larger membership. Some are struggling, 

Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re looking forward to the 

report from the Legislative Secretary that may identify some of 

those problems. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Forestry Sector Issues 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, in June, Eacom Timber acquired 

an option on the Big River saw mill. Now the members 

opposite waved their pompoms and tried to start a two-car 

parade, but that failed. The MLA from Saskatchewan Rivers 

promised that no decision on the allocation of the P.A. FMA 

[Prince Albert Forest Management Agreement] had yet been 

made. But an October 26th email from Eacom says that the 

Saskatchewan Party continues to ignore the forestry industry in 

Saskatchewan by saying, “To date we have not received a lot of 

support from government.” 

 

The CBC’s [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] now reporting 

that Eacom may move the mill out of the province if they can’t 

get a deal on timber. To the minister: will he work with Eacom 

to reopen the Big River pulp saw mill or will he let this 

opportunity slide by, as he did earlier this week with the 

Wapawekka saw mill? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the 

Minister for Energy and Resources stated yesterday, our 

government is taking a new approach on the FMA [forest 

management agreement] in Saskatchewan. We are working on a 

co-operative approach. 

 

The preliminary allocations — it is not finalized yet — the 

preliminary allocations were based on meeting the needs of 

existing mills, Mr. Speaker. We will continue with this process. 

We are engaging larger industry, smaller industry, the 

independents, and First Nations, Mr. Speaker. We think their 

inclusion in this is important, and we look forward to the 

resolution of the FMA . . .[inaudible]. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — I can tell you this, Mr. Speaker. The people of 

Big River believe that they’ve got an existing saw mill that 

needs some attention from this government. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, these aren’t my quotes. These are quotes 

directly from Eacom. They’re an indictment of this 



3442 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2009 

government’s ability to deal with the P.A. FMA. And the quote 

reads: 

 

Most governments around the world welcome new 

investment . . . Saskatchewan has been a challenge and we 

are monitoring things, as government has to decide if they 

want jobs and investment . . . It is always easier to do 

business where one is welcome and treated properly. 

 

Implying that they’re not being treated properly by this 

Saskatchewan Party government. It takes more than 

cheerleading and pompoms to do business in Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. You need to deliver the goods. 

 

To the minister: will he put down his pompoms and deliver the 

goods for the people of Big River? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I understand the NDP are, 

as my colleagues have stated earlier, a little bit grumpy about a 

great many things, and they would like to look at the doom and 

gloom on so many things that happened in our province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We’ve seen recently the investment or the proposed investment 

by Fortune Minerals in Saskatchewan. People are looking here 

for investment, Mr. Speaker. And we know that the forest 

industry has been hurting in our province for a very long time, 

as it has been hurting in a lot of areas, Mr. Speaker. North 

America’s been hit hard. Building starts are down in the United 

States primarily, which is hurting our industry. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, under the NDP, for all of their accusations 

about what our government is or is not doing, five mills closed 

under the NDP’s government, Mr. Speaker. And their answer to 

that was throwing $100 million at the problem right before an 

election, Mr. Speaker. We will not take that approach. We are 

working co-operatively with all of industry to come up with an 

equitable answer to the FMA assignment. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I ask members to come 

to order so we can hear the call of introduction of Bills. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 105 — The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2009 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. I move that Bill No. 105, The SaskEnergy Amendment 

Act, 2009 be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — Order, members. The Minister Responsible 

for Enterprise and Innovation has moved first reading of Bill 

No. 105, The Saskatchewan Energy Amendment Act, 2009. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 106 — The Labour Market Commission Repeal Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 

106, The Labour Market Commission Repeal Act be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: —The Minister Responsible for Enterprise and 

Innovation has moved first reading of Bill No. 106, The Labour 

Market Commission Repeal Act. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 607 — The Public Safety, Security and Protection Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to move Bill No. 607, The 

Public Safety, Security and Protection Act now be introduced 

and read the first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Dewdney has 

moved first reading of Bill No. 607, The Public Safety, Security 

and Protection Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? 



November 4, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3443 

Mr. Yates: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 97 — The Agri-Food Amendment Act, 2009 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, at the end of my remarks today I will move the second 

reading of Bill No. 97, The Agri-Food Amendment Act, 2009. 

 

The amendments to the Act include authorizing a development 

commission to collect a national, non-refundable levy pursuant 

to any agreement entered into under the Act and repealing The 

Cattle Marketing Deductions Act, 1998. 

 

The powers to collect both the refundable provincial and 

non-refundable nationally administered levies on cattle in 

Saskatchewan currently rests with The Cattle Marketing 

Deductions Act, 1998. The repeal of The Cattle Marketing 

Deductions Act, 1998 and subsequent amendments to the cattle 

development plan regulations will allow the Saskatchewan 

Cattlemen’s Association to collect both levies. 

 

The Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s Association will forward the 

national, non-refundable levy to the national agency and will 

use the proceeds from the refundable provincial levy to carry 

out its mandate. Under the current agri-food Act, development 

commissions have the authority to collect refundable levies but 

cannot collect non-refundable levies, including nationally 

administered levies. Amendments to The Agri-Food Act, 2004 

will allow this to take place. Levies collected by a development 

commission for its own purposes will still be refundable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s Association has 

been consulted and supports these amendments. We also have 

the support of other development commissions. Therefore, Mr. 

Speaker, I move that The Agri-Food Amendment Act, 2009 be 

read a second time. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has moved that Bill No. 97, The 

Agri-Food Amendment Act, 2009 be now read a second time. Is 

the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

for Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 

pleased to be able to rise and make a couple comments on the 

Bill that was presented by the minister, the amendments to The 

Agri-Food Act, 2004. 

 

In the Bill, Mr. Speaker, I went through this again this morning 

just before the House started and went through the explanatory 

notes again also, and while I will not claim to be an expert in 

this area for sure, it seems to me that what the minister is doing 

is putting in place the opportunity for the Cattlemen’s 

Association to be self-governing and that the levies that 

formerly went into the revolving fund in the Department of 

Agriculture will now go to the Cattlemen’s Association. I’m 

kind of looking at the minister to see if I’m on the right track 

here. I think I am. 

 

In the discussions we have had amongst my colleagues and 

myself, we had a look at the Bill and had a number of 

comments about the Bill. I guess there was a couple of areas 

that really jumped out at me, and it isn’t the fact that the 

Cattlemen’s Association will be self-regulating or that this levy 

or check-off would go towards the Cattlemen’s Association for 

them to develop marketing and various product development. 

That’s not so unusual. 

 

But there was a couple of questions that popped to mind when I 

first had a look at the Bill, kind of comparing what the money 

was used for previously and what the Cattlemen’s Association 

is looking to do with it in the future and how that will be 

accounted for, or whether it totally turns over to the Cattlemen’s 

Association. And if there is some advantage to going to a 

self-regulating body for the Cattlemen’s Association or does it 

just shift some of the responsibility out of the department and 

make some, ease off some of the pressures there. 

 

There has to be some consideration given, I think when I look at 

the Bill, to the impact of the change and the optics of this 

proposed change. Because when we look at other services that 

come out of the Department of Agriculture, I mean, there are 

many, many. But these fees previously, any fees or levies 

charged for licensing or registration or inspection would have 

gone into the revolving fund. And there’s also a number of 

other organizations and legislation that requires any of these 

monies are deposited into this same fund and in return used for 

a number of projects and processes that are carried out by the 

Department of Agriculture. 

 

So here we are. We’re separating one organization out of a fair 

number that are listed here. The Ag regulations are in this same 

pool, also Saskatchewan Hatchery regulations, also the 

Saskatchewan Poultry regulations, The Animal Identification 

Act, and The Animal Products Act. So all fees charged for 

licensing, registration, and inspecting in these areas goes into 

the same revolving fund. 

 

So what we’re seeing is The Cattle Marketing Deductions Act 

that is being repealed, and also The Cattle Marketing 

Deductions Act, 1998 . . . sorry I’m repeating the same one. 

They’re being repealed. It’s being repealed. And we’re seeing 

the cattlemen’s association rolling into a self-regulating 

organization. So does this cause . . . I guess I’m wondering why 

the change. And that’s maybe an opportunity. I’ll have to speak 

to the minister and ask some questions, what his intent is with 

the Bill, and what’s maybe some of the lobbies that he has 

received. 

 

But I also wonder if egg producers or poultry producers would 

also like this same opportunity to be self-regulating, and if 

there’s some opportunity there that might arise out of this initial 

step being taken with the cattlemen’s association. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, there are still a number of people I am trying 

to contact to get comments. And I know that there are many of 

my colleagues that would also like to make comment on this 



3444 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2009 

piece of legislation, or proposed legislation. And with that being 

said, I would adjourn debate for the day. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Moose Jaw Wakamow has 

moved adjournment of debate. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 98 — The Municipal Financing Corporation 

Amendment Act, 2009 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 

second reading of Bill No. 98, An Act to amend The Municipal 

Financing Corporation Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the 2008-2009 budget our government 

introduced the Saskatchewan infrastructure growth initiative as 

part of our commitment to infrastructure renewal in this 

province. Mr. Speaker, this initiative provides Saskatchewan 

municipalities with interest rates subsidies for up to five years 

on borrowing from private sector financial institutions or from 

the Municipal Financing Corporation. The interest rate subsidy 

is available on $300 million of municipal borrowing, notionally 

spread over four years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to tell this House that a Saskatchewan 

infrastructure growth initiative has been a tremendous success 

during its first two years. Since program inception, $139.1 

million in borrowing has approved which will support 64 

projects in 53 municipalities. With this financing, Mr. Speaker, 

municipalities are building new subdivisions and upgrading the 

necessary off-site infrastructure to service these new 

subdivisions. 

 

Projects approved have contributed to the development of 2,022 

residential lots, as well as 5 commercial lot projects, 3 industrial 

lot projects, and 17 off-site projects to support the new growth. 

Some examples of projects include residential and commercial 

lot development in Weyburn, wastewater infrastructure upgrade 

in Dalmeny, and the intermodal facility in Regina. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the success of this initiative is the reason for the 

introduction of this Bill. To the end of September of 2009, 

municipalities have borrowed $68.6 million of these 

interest-free funds from Municipal Financing Corporation. In 

conjunction with other financing provided by municipal finance 

corporation for municipal capital project, MFC [Municipal 

Financing Corporation of Saskatchewan] has increased its debt 

to 95 million in order to provide this important source of 

financing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with approximately $160 million in financing still 

eligible to be accessed under the Saskatchewan infrastructure 

growth initiative, MFC requires an increase in its borrowing 

limit to enable it to provide financing for future approved 

growth-related projects. 

 

As a result, Mr. Speaker, this Bill introduces an amendment to 

increase the borrowing limit of the Municipal Financing 

Corporation from 250 million to 350 million, Mr. Speaker. I 

move second reading of The Municipal Financing Corporation 

Amendment Act, 2009. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved that Bill 

No. 98, The Municipal Financing Corporation Amendment Act, 

2009 be now read the second time. Is the Assembly ready for 

the question? I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much. I have the privilege of 

rising to make some comments on this Bill. And I have to say 

it’s pretty short and pretty easy to have a quick go through, but 

it does raise a number of areas of concern. 

 

When we look at The Municipal Financing Corporation Act . . . 

and basically what this Bill does, Mr. Speaker, is just raise the 

maximum that’s allowable under the legislation from $250 

million to $350 million. And the minister, while on his feet, 

talked about the needs of communities and the borrowing that 

had been done to build many, many infrastructure projects 

across the province. And, Mr. Speaker, I wouldn’t question the 

need for any of those projects for sure, but what it gets down to 

is, how much more can the communities borrow? 

 

There are many needs across the province, and I know there has 

been a number of years of negotiations with the municipalities 

to look at revenue sharing and how that would be done. And I 

know last year in the provincial government’s budget, it was 

very well received when we saw that point nine per cent, point 

nine of 1 per cent, was directed to revenue sharing with the 

municipalities on an ongoing basis. It was very well received to 

have that consistent funding and for municipalities, towns, and 

villages to know that that money was coming in and that their 

revenue sharing would rise and fall with the fortunes of the 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this year that was committed that this year that 

would go to a full point and there would be an increase again in 

revenue sharing with the municipalities. And my understanding 

is, is that’s where it will remain. Again it was something that 

was highlighted in the Speech from the Throne — pretty 

general terms though. 

 

I have to say, Mr. Speaker, by my count, that was number 46 of 

former initiatives that were highlighted in this year’s Speech 

from the Throne. And it talked about how the commitment was 

to increase municipal revenue sharing by tying those grants to 

the revenue received through the provincial sales tax. It doesn’t 

give an indication as to whether the percentage, the point nine 

will actually raise to a full percentage point. So that will be 

something that the municipalities are looking at this year, 

especially when we’re going into budget time and budget 

deliberations for the government. 

 

So this really ties to it, because the higher the demands on the 

municipalities, the more demands there are on infrastructure 

and them providing the services in their communities. Hence 

the less revenue sharing, the more borrowing that will need to 

be done. But, Mr. Speaker, it truly is a vicious circle in that you 

can borrow the money and you can build the infrastructure. But 

when push comes to shove, it has to be paid back. And that’s 



November 4, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3445 

where my concerns rise on this issue, is what’s acceptable and 

how much debt can municipalities handle. 

 

So I hope the minister is looking at that issue. And I know that I 

do hope that we see the revenue sharing move to the full 

percentage point when the budget is brought down next spring, 

because I know the municipalities need that extra revenue and 

they are looking forward to having that consistent revenue 

coming in so they are better able to do their budgeting. 

 

But I was concerned to see this Bill, when it put forward the 

increased borrowing limits under The Municipal Financing 

Corporation Act. And it just gave me cause to kind of stop and 

think about maybe that money isn’t coming. Maybe the 

province’s finances are worse than what we anticipated. 

 

The Minister of Finance will have some indication of what will 

be coming out in the mid-term financial report which is 

expected within the next couple of weeks. So if this in some 

way is preparing for a little bit of belt tightening, we saw when 

the first quarter financial report was released that there was 

some serious revenue . . . well inaccurate projections on the 

revenue side which has caused the government to do some 

looking at expenditures and doing some belt tightening. I 

understand that there is restrictions on travel. There is also 

restrictions on hiring and filling positions. How long that will 

happen or if it will get worse is something that we will see over 

the next couple of weeks when that mid-term financial report is 

released and we see the actual budget numbers. 

 

And it leads me back to this Bill. The more money that the 

province can support the municipalities with, the less need we 

will see for them to be able to do some of these large borrowing 

that’s required for some of these bigger projects and projects 

that are fundamental to the good operation of these 

municipalities. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think on the whole I understand the 

reasoning for the increase that is being put into the legislation. 

Projects are more expensive. Cities and communities are 

demanding more, and there is a need to accommodate that. But 

there is also a number of other concerns that go along with it. 

 

And with that, Mr. Speaker, there is a couple of people that I 

need to speak to. We need to talk to some of our stakeholders in 

our communities. So with that, I know a number of my 

colleagues would like to make comments to the Bill and I will 

adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Moose Jaw has moved 

adjournment of debate on Bill No. 98. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 99 — The Emergency 911 System 

Amendment Act, 2009 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to give second reading of The Emergency 911 System Act. 

 

A legislative change is required to The Emergency 911 System 

Act for two reasons. First, as Minister of CPSP, the new 

legislation will give our ministry the authority to operate and 

maintain the network. 

 

Second, an amendment to the Act will generate the new radio 

system into the Sask911 system. Prior to amending The 

Emergency 911 System Act, the legislation described the 

Sask911 system as a province-wide telephone system. This 

amendment will recognize that the provincial public safety 

telecommunications network — or the PPSTN for short — is 

part of the 911 system, and therefore all of the authorities 

currently in the Act will extend to the PPSTN as part of the 

Sask911 system. 

 

With the PPSTN now part of the Sask911 system, this will 

strengthen the 911 emergency communication system in rural 

and northern communities and provide a stronger, more reliable 

connection between dispatch and emergency service providers. 

The enhanced system will provide for interoperability links 

between fire services, police services, many government 

ministries, and other emergency responders, and with the large 

municipal emergency services operating independent radio 

systems. 

 

The PPSTN is in the final phases of construction and will 

replace the SaskTel FleetNet system which is scheduled to be 

wound down by the end of 2010. With the ministry’s plan to 

migrate users onto the new system as early as 2010-11, the 

amendment to give us the legislative authority to operate the 

PPSTN system will enable our ministry to migrate users in 

early 2010. 

 

I must stress that it is important for CPSP to continue to be 

responsible for the system. I believe this is necessary as the 

PPSTN will be used by public safety users for public safety 

purposes, and the operation of the network directly aligns with 

the ministry’s public safety mandate. I want to emphasize the 

importance of our provincial interest in this new system. The 

benefits for all users will be a stronger, more reliable 

connection between dispatch and emergency service providers 

along with an affordable province-wide radio system. 

 

Just as important is the interoperability between police, fire, and 

EMS [emergency medical services]. This will not only provide 

communities with a more coordinated response to emergencies 

and enhanced safety for the responding agencies. It will also 

enable the possibility to . . . [inaudible] . . . a regional response 

in greater emergency situations. 

 

Having the public safety users on the new provincial network is 

significant. Many volunteer their time to protect our 

communities, people, and property, and need this tool to 

provide their services. As well as being able to deliver their 

services more effectively, the participation of these users will 

certainly contribute to the network’s overall sustainability. 

Maintaining a sound, effective public safety radio 

telecommunications system over the long term will achieve an 

important obligation — the safety and security of Saskatchewan 

citizens. 



3446 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2009 

Government has already invested significantly in this system — 

more than 130 million — and this ministry has provided 

oversight on all phases of this important public safety project. 

With the authority to operate the network, we will now be able 

to ensure that this valuable public safety tool will aid all of our 

dedicated and professional public safety responders and result 

in an increase in the safety and security of Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of the emergency 911 

systems Act. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has moved second reading of 

Bill No. 99, The Emergency 911 System Amendment Act, 2009. 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 

have to say that it truly is a pleasure to be able to get up and 

make some comments. And I know you’re smiling because I 

may say that a little bit too much, but I also have a bit of an 

understanding of some of the work that has gone on behind the 

scenes over a number of years to put in place the provincial 

public safety telecommunications network. 

 

And when you first look at the Bill, really it just looks like 

some housekeeping, other than a couple clauses in the one 

section in particular that makes some changes and really 

integrates the public safety telecommunications network, or 

PPSTN, into the Saskatchewan 911 system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know the work and the time and effort it took to 

put in place 911. I also know a great deal of the work that went 

on previously with the issues over FleetNet and what would 

replace FleetNet. And how would that all be put in place and 

how would it roll out? And how would it give consideration not 

only for the professional services that are across the province 

but also the volunteer services that are across the province? 

 

And it becomes the age-old problem that we deal with in many, 

many issues in Saskatchewan with our just over 1 million 

population that is spread over a vast geographical area. And 

how do you provide consistent services, and how do you 

provide the same level of service right across the province? 

Because they’re all citizens. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when I look at this Bill, there is a couple of 

questions that I do have and a little bit more work I have to do 

and discussion I have to have with a couple of people. But the 

changes that were in section 2, when there is some discussion 

about the 911 system, of course that refers to the telephone 

system which has always been housed within SaskTel. The fees 

for that are collected on our land line on our phone bills, 

cellphone bills also. We see it on those bills monthly, may not 

notice it. 

 

[15:00] 

 

And as the system has settled in and there was a better 

understanding of the costs and the needs, those costs have 

dropped. But now we’re seeing an amalgamation of the two in 

this Bill. The public safety telecommunications network, I 

would assume, is going to be the title or the name for system as 

a whole which would include the 911 telephone system, but 

also the replacement for FleetNet. 

 

So there is much more to this small piece of legislation than 

what you might first think. The housekeeping — minor, really 

just changing department to ministry to accommodate the 

language that this government uses. And that’s understandable. 

That’s the decision that they have made, so we’ll probably 

continue to see those types of changes over the next year 

anyway while they run across pieces of legislation that will still 

contain reference to departments. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I’ll get back to this section 2. And it: 

 

. . . will enable the Minister to:  

 

enter into agreements with government partners on the 

PPSTN; 

 

So that’s the provincial public safety telecommunications 

network. Not a catchy acronym, I must say, but I’m sure it’s 

one that we will all get used to. They will: 

 

provide programming; and,  

 

access the . . . 911 account for the purposes of 

strengthening the 9-1-1 emergency communication system 

and ensuring interoperability between those emergency 

service providers operating on the PPSTN. 

 

So when I read the words “access the Sask911 account”, I 

would make a bit of an assumption from that. But it sounds like 

where the funding for 911 has always been maintained through 

the billing service at SaskTel, they have accounted for that 

money and covered the costs of the operation which are 

reimbursed by the fees that are charged. So I’m assuming that 

that will no longer be the case, that it sounds like that will be 

transferred to the ministry. 

 

Now I don’t know whether that means billing will be 

maintained the same, whether it will just be an accounting 

procedure, or whether I’m understanding this inaccurately, Mr. 

Speaker. But those are all questions that I need to look into and 

things that I need to ask people that have a little more in-depth 

working understanding of this issue than I do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, otherwise a majority of this looks like 

housekeeping, and like I say, what we’re seeing is the 

adjustment of legislation to go from department to ministry. 

And I don’t think that’s unexpected by anyone. 

 

I do have to say though, it’s going to be an interesting process 

to see this network roll out. And I was interested especially in 

the minister’s comments talking about migrating users as early 

as 2010 because it will be good to have a discussion on what 

exactly is replacing FleetNet and how that will service the 

needs that are out there. 

 

And there also is a big issue — a big issue — when it comes to 

municipalities and to some of the volunteer organizations, 

whether it’s volunteer firefighters in smaller communities. 

There is a need for those communities to be supported in 

whatever technology and hardware is needed for the switchover 



November 4, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3447 

to the new system.  

 

And I’ve also heard some comments — and I don’t know how 

accurate this is — that the new system that we are going to, I 

think it was referred to as PS25, is something that there are 

states in the United States are getting rid of. So I hope that’s not 

the case. And I hope there is clear reasons as to why it may 

work in one place and not work in those states that I’ve heard 

about, and that it will adjust and be suitable to what’s needed 

here in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

But those are all issues that will come as we begin to talk about 

this. And I’m sure once this legislation is in place, we’ll be able 

to ask the minister many, many questions about the system, the 

cost of the system, what the final decisions have been made, 

how it will fit with the RCMP network and SaskPower and 

some of the communication systems they have. Also how it will 

integrate SaskTel and whether it is an overlay onto the towers 

and the hardware that is already there or if we’re going to 

something totally new. 

 

So I’m pleased to see the ministry take over this project. That 

may have been a bit of the problem previously was that there 

were a few too many people passing along opinions on the 

project. It is complicated but, Mr. Speaker, it’s very important. 

 

So I would say, on the surface this looks good to see it all put 

together. And I’m also very pleased to see that work on the 

whole next-generation FleetNet is moving ahead. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I know there are a number of my colleagues 

that would like to have an opportunity to speak on this Bill and 

to make comments of their own. And for now, I will adjourn 

debate so I can have time to speak to some of the stakeholders 

involved and gather some other opinions. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Moose Jaw Wakamow has 

moved adjournment of debate. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 100 — The Doukhobors of Canada C.C.U.B. 

Trust Fund Amendment Act, 2009 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

rise today to move second reading of Bill No. 100, The 

Doukhobors of Canada C.C.U.B. Trust Fund Amendment Act, 

2009. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the history of our province is rich and diverse. It 

incorporates peoples and traditions from around the globe. And, 

Mr. Speaker, an important contribution to our history as a 

province and as a nation comes from the Doukhobor people. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, before I get to the Bill, I want to encourage 

all of my colleagues, if they have a chance next summer to take 

a trip to Blaine Lake, to see the national historic site, the 

Doukhobor Dugout House, Mr. Speaker. I was up there earlier 

this summer early in my tenure in this position, Mr. Speaker. 

And certainly I want to encourage all members to experience 

that for themselves. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Doukhobors of Canada C.C.U.B. Trust Fund 

was established by an Act of the legislature in 1980, after the 

wind-down of the Doukhobor co-operative that operated in 

Saskatchewan, Alberta, and British Columbia. Since there was 

no corporate body to hold and administer the fund that resulted 

from the liquidation of the Doukhobor co-operative, a trust fund 

was required at the time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Act permitted the board of directors to spend 

interest on the trust fund’s investment to further the culture and 

heritage of the Doukhobors in the three western provinces. Mr. 

Speaker, according to the latest financial statements that are 

tabled in the House, there is approximately $290,000 in the trust 

fund with yearly average interest earnings of approximately 

$12,000 per year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government and the Ministry of Tourism, 

Park, Culture and Sport, our current involvement with the trust 

fund is limited to approving the board of directors’ 

appointments as recommended by the Doukhobor Society in the 

three western provinces and also ensuring that the financial 

statements of the trust fund are tabled in accordance with The 

Tabling of Documents Act, 1991. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe at this time that there is any 

compelling public policy reason why government should 

continue to be involved with the trust fund as currently 

constituted. Government’s role in the management of the trust 

fund is negligible, and the trust fund can continue to fulfill its 

intended purpose without a legislative framework in place. It 

will allow for the trust fund to be converted to an ordinary 

private trust or non-profit. Once the new corporate structure is 

in place, the Act then can be repealed on proclamation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Ministry of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

has consulted with the Doukhobors of Canada C.C.U.B. Trust 

Fund board regarding proposed changes to the Act. We have 

been informed by them that they will be proceeding to 

investigate a new corporate structure to administer the trust and 

feel that they no longer need the assistance of government once 

this new entity has been established. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with that I am pleased to move second reading of 

Bill No. 100, The Doukhobors of Canada C.C.U.B. Trust Fund 

Amendment Act, 2009. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and 

Sport has moved second reading of Bill No. 100, The 

Doukhobors of Canada C.C.U.B. Trust Fund Amendment Act, 

2009. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the 

member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 

have to say that I appreciate the comments of the minister just 

giving a little bit of background on where this Bill originally 

came from and a bit of background on the trust fund itself. And 

I have to agree with the minister that Doukhobors of Canada 

really have added a great deal to our country. And I think it 



3448 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2009 

reminds each and every one of us that it’s ever important and 

vigilant — much the same as our proclamation, the Premier’s 

proclamation today to recognize 2010 as the Year of the Métis 

— I think it’s really incumbent on each and every one of us to 

make sure that our culture is maintained and celebrated, and 

that we pass those principles and values and celebrations along 

to members of our family because it is an important piece of 

who we are. 

 

And the comments about the Doukhobors of Canada and 

specifically the trust fund Act, the minister’s comments that it 

was felt that it was no longer needed, that they were looking to 

transition to a private trust fund and are looking at the process 

of winding up this actual trust fund that really was overseen by 

the government, and that they felt that the government’s 

involvement was no longer necessary — those comments really 

speak very clearly to what’s contained in the legislation. 

Obviously this trust fund has been in a bit of a transition and a 

bit of a change over the past number of years because it wasn’t 

that many years ago that there was other changes that were 

enacted. So again we’re seeing changes put forward. 

 

And I think to allow for that transition to occur is something 

that personally most of us don’t have any problems with, but I 

know that there are a couple of folks that I need to touch base 

with. We have calls that have been placed and conversations 

that will happen shortly. And with that, Mr. Speaker, until those 

conversations — and I’ve done some further investigations, my 

caucus colleagues and I — I would move that we adjourn 

debate on this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Moose Jaw Wakamow has 

moved adjournment of debate. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 101 — The Credit Union 

Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2) 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

privilege to rise in the House today to move second reading of 

The Credit Union Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2). Mr. Speaker, 

The Credit Union Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2) is the result of 

co-operative efforts of Credit Union Central and ministry 

officials to complete the first thorough review of The Credit 

Union Act, 1998 since it came into force a decade ago. 

 

The Bill will facilitate a number of credit union initiatives, most 

importantly the creation of a prairie central through 

amalgamation of Sask central with the credit union centrals of 

Alberta and Manitoba. Prairie central will have a larger asset 

and liquidity base in order to ensure that credit unions from 

across the Prairies have access to the liquidity and other central 

services that they need to continue their important role in the 

province’s very competitive financial sector. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has a history of strong leadership 

within the credit union system. The board of directors of a 

credit union plays a key part in the governance and strategic 

outlook for the credit union. This Bill contains an amendment 

that ensures that only people of the highest character and 

integrity are eligible to be members of a credit union board or to 

be an incorporator of a new credit union. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill will assist credit unions to more 

efficiently operate their boards and to interact with their 

memberships by creating a new process for dealing with 

conflicts of interest on material contracts and clarifying the 

process for terminating a person’s membership in a credit 

union. Mr. Speaker, this Bill creates a new process that allows a 

credit union to reapprove a material contract where a conflict of 

interest is discovered after the initial board approval. Without 

this amendment, the credit union’s only option is to seek an 

order of the court confirming the contract. 

 

The new process gives the credit union two options to deal with 

this situation. It can seek the re-approval of the contract through 

a vote of credit union members followed by a new vote of the 

board. The credit union still has the option to make a court 

application if in fact they deem that to be necessary and 

appropriate. 

 

[15:15] 

 

This Bill clarifies the process for terminating membership in a 

credit union while maintaining fairness for the person affected. 

The Act currently allows the former member to appeal to the 

registrar of credit unions at two points. The new provision 

continues to allow the former member to request a review by 

the registrar after exhausting the internal credit union appeal 

process. When the board of directors of the credit union votes to 

terminate a person’s membership, the person may appeal to the 

members. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, while that appears to be a relatively small 

change, it in fact is a shift in that authority from the registrar 

back to the credit union itself, which is where in fact that type 

of authority and decision making should be. The credit unions 

in our province have got a proud history of handling their own 

affairs and dealing with their own members in a strong, 

effective, and efficient manner, and we wish to give them the 

legislative framework in which to deal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the members vote to confirm the termination of 

the person’s membership, the person may request a review of 

his or her termination by the registrar of credit unions. The 

registrar then has the ability to confirm or set aside the 

termination, or in fact return the matter to the board for 

reconsideration, which follows up on the original position that I 

stated earlier, where we want to continue to have as much 

possible control within the individual credit unions’ boards. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill is indicative of the strong relationship 

between the credit union system and government. It maintains 

the balance between flexibility for credit unions in managing 

their business and the government’s ability to oversee this vital 

and integral part of Saskatchewan’s economy. Mr. Speaker, 

credit union movement in our province is part of the prairie 

background, and it’s part of the fabric of prairie life and prairie 

businesses in this province. 



November 4, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3449 

I would like to commend the individuals at Credit Union 

Central for the work and assistance that they’ve given and the 

good co-operation that they’ve given my ministry during the 

last two years. In particular I’d like to mention their CEO, Ken 

Anderson, who’s been very prompt at returning calls and in 

giving us assistance as we were preparing legislation or dealing 

with other routine matters dealing with credit union governance. 

I’ve had the opportunity to meet with Credit Union Central 

members and with a number of the employees and have been 

both pleased and impressed by, not just their co-operation, but 

their professionalism and their level of competence. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the credit union movement in our province deals 

competitively with the chartered banks and a number of trust 

companies that carry on in our province and in our jurisdiction. 

It’s an imperative that the province continue to provide the 

appropriate legislative framework so that our credit union 

system can act competitively, retain their fair market share, and 

deal in an appropriate manner where they’re dealing with other 

financial entities that are regulated at a federal level and have 

the national clout to compete in a very different manner than 

what may have taken place in the past. 

 

The banks have always acted in a professional and competent 

manner. The credit unions have as well. And we just wish to 

ensure that the framework that they operate in continues to 

maintain an appropriate and fair balance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to move second reading of The 

Credit Union Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2). 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved second 

reading of Bill No. 101, The Credit Union Amendment Act, 

2009 (No. 2). Is the Assembly ready for the question? I 

recognize the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Looking 

at the Bill and looking at the explanatory notes and actually 

listening to the minister, I have to agree with him 

wholeheartedly — and I don’t do this very often. I must just be 

having too good of a day today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I have to agree with the minister’s comments right at the 

end of his speech where he talked about the professional 

manner with which credit unions have operated in this province, 

and how important they are to the province as a whole, and that 

they are in a very competitive industry, competing with national 

banks, international banks, and providing services in a very 

demanding situation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve had an opportunity to go through the Bill and 

look at the various aspects of what the changes are. And when 

the minister talked about access to member’s lists, clearly 

defines that and lays out what recourse anyone has if they’re 

accessing a list, what it can and cannot be used for. There is 

also clarification in a number of areas, not only to who and who 

cannot be a director. And also, it lays out some clarification on 

the power of credit unions to provide services to a number of 

entities within the credit union sphere and their affiliates and 

substantial investments. 

 

Now it also comments that there may be requirements for 

further regulations to be provided to add a little more definition. 

But, Mr. Speaker, all in all, much of this you could almost class 

it I think as not only clarifying definition and updating current 

legislation, but also some of it borders on housekeeping where 

we’re looking at the changes to, I think from president to board 

Chair to Chair and from vice-president to Vice-Chair. So a 

number of housekeeping initiatives, a number of clarifications 

on definitio, and qualifications that are required. And also I 

think one of the most important pieces is the clarification on the 

conflicts of interest that need to be declared and what happens 

and how it’s dealt with if that doesn’t work as smoothly as what 

it’s intended to work, what recourse it is. 

 

So there’s a number of areas of concern but, Mr. Speaker, there 

is also a number of people that I need to speak to, and I know 

there are a number of my colleagues that also have a great deal 

of interest in speaking to this Bill, The Credit Union Act. And I 

know that for sure, Mr. Speaker, because I know for each and 

every one of us, I believe all of us pretty well deal with credit 

unions — either have in the past or currently or will at some 

time in the future. They are a major part of who we are in 

Saskatchewan. They have helped build this province, and I, 

along with the minister, am always aware that there needs to be 

an updating in process and procedures and to make sure that the 

credit unions will remain competitive in this industry that they 

are so active in. 

 

But I know my colleagues also believe credit unions are 

important here in Saskatchewan and I know there are many of 

them that would like to make comments on the changes that 

have been put forward in the Bill. So at this time, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I would adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 101, The Credit 

Union Amendment Act, 2009. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 102 — The Personal Property Security 

Amendment Act, 2009 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

move second reading of The Personal Property Security 

Amendment Act, 2009. Mr. Speaker, the purpose of The 

Personal Property Security Amendment Act, 2009 is firstly to 

update the language and procedures in The Personal Property 

Security Act, 1993 to match the improved procedures and 

modern terms now utilized in the land titles registry process. 

And secondly, to address a series of technical, legal issues, 

including simplification of the “conflict of laws” provisions that 

are engaged when people or their personal property cross 

jurisdictional boundaries. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can advise you that this is something that 

happens not just in a technical sense in our legislation. But as 

our province grows and matures, there are increasing number of 

situations where it’s imperative that we have to provide 

financing facilities for corporations that are carrying on 



3450 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2009 

business in a number of jurisdictions. For example, oil wells, oil 

companies that move equipment back and forth between the 

various provinces that have oil and they have to ensure that the 

appropriate documentation filings are done. So this deals with 

the conflict of laws that arise from variations in legislation from 

one province or one country to the other because in fact some of 

the company is carrying on elsewhere. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, The Personal Property Security 

Amendment Act, 2009 will introduce conflicts of law provisions 

that will use the jurisdiction of incorporation of the registered 

head office of a corporation to provide easily determinable rules 

for establishing jurisdiction in conflicts of law situations. It will 

also introduce rules to determine location of general 

partnerships, unlimited partnerships, and trusts for conflicts of 

law situations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Uniform Law Conference of Canada 

recommended that all personal property security Acts be 

amended to define the location of the debtor by reference to . . . 

and in the case of an individual, his or her residence; and in the 

case of an organization, the jurisdiction in which the debtor is 

organized. These conflicts of laws rules are recommended both 

to address an existing gap in the legislation and, secondly, to 

ensure uniformity between the provinces and substantially the 

United States with respect to this important area of secured 

transactions law. 

 

I know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that for a lot of people this seems 

like boring technical trivia, but many people come into contact 

with this type of legislation on a frequent basis. It’s the personal 

property security registry that deals with liens on an 

automobile, if you don’t pay a garage bill, or if you finance a 

new car, or if you lease an automobile. All of those things are 

dealt with through this legislation and through this registry. So 

in fact many, if not most, of the citizens of our province have a 

direct interest in it. 

 

And I might add, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the technology and 

the equipment now being used are such that individuals are 

capable of doing their own searches online. And the technology 

has progressed to the point where a person wanting to buy or 

sell an automobile on the weekend is able to do a lot of those 

searches without having to wait till office hours on a Monday 

morning or later on. These searches can be affected by the use 

of a credit card and an online search. 

 

Mr. Speaker, without these changes and where there is a dispute 

between parties that crosses provincial or national borders, 

determining the location of the debtor and the applicable law 

becomes very difficult. These rules will address that concern. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the current wording of The Personal Property 

Security Act, 1993 contains language that has become outdated. 

The amendments will include language that is consistent with 

the terminology used in the Saskatchewan personal property 

registry. 

 

The proposed amendments regarding corporate authority for 

fees, the elimination of prescribed forms, and the introduction 

of discretionary powers for the registrar are all based on 

processes that have been in place with the land titles registry 

and have been recognized to be effective. 

More specifically, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the technical changes in 

this Bill will firstly eliminate the requirement that forms be 

contained in the regulations. Secondly, provide authority to 

establish or advise certain fees and use registry information 

consistent with public policy, Information Services 

Corporation’s customers service objectives, pricing framework, 

principles and strategy, all of which will be based on similar 

amendments in The Land Titles Amendment Act, 2008. 

 

It will also change the requirement on the secured party from 

providing to the debtor a copy of a financing statement, to 

providing a copy of the verification statement to reflect changes 

in the personal property registry system. 

 

It will also update the language regarding registry searches and 

printed search results to reflect similar language in The Land 

Titles Act, 2000, and it will also introduce discretionary powers 

for the registrar of the personal property registry similar to the 

discretionary power given to the registrar of titles pursuant to 

The Land Titles Act, 2000. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has long been the leader in personal 

property security matters. This is thanks to the leadership 

provided by Professor Ron Cumming at the University of 

Saskatchewan. These changes are made in an effort to ensure 

that Saskatchewan’s legislation will remain model legislation in 

Canada. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can advise that Professor Cumming has 

long been a professor at the University of Saskatchewan and I 

suspect taught the member from Saskatoon Meewasin. He 

taught myself and many of the other people that are members of 

the legal community and the judiciary. 

 

At the time that I was going to law school it was before The 

Personal Property Security Act came into place. We had to 

learn legislation such as The Conditional Sales Act, The Bills of 

Sale Act, and The Factors Act, all which dealt with financing 

and secure transactions. Thanks to the work of Professor 

Cumming we now have one consolidated piece of legislation 

that deals with all of these matters all in one Act. Unfortunately 

at the time I was going through law school, I not only had to 

learn the old system, but the new system as well. It was a 

complex system and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the new changes 

have served our province well since the time that I graduated 

from law school. 

 

It is my privilege to move second reading of An Act to amend 

The Personal Property Security Act, 1993. 

 

[15:30] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved 

second reading of Bill No. 102, The Personal Property Security 

Amendment Act, 2009. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

I recognize the member for Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And it’s a pleasure this afternoon to be able to rise and add a 

few comments to The Personal Property Security Act. I say a 

few, because there’s a number of things that jumped out at me 

when I first went through the legislation. But there was also a 

couple of things that the minister mentioned in his comments 



November 4, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3451 

that I didn’t get quite as clearly as what he made them out in his 

comments. So I’m going to have to do some more work on this 

and look at the further implications. 

 

An Hon. Member: — I’d be pleased to stand up and read it 

again. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — No, no, no, that’s okay. The minister has 

offered to stand and read it to me again. But if it gets to be that 

bad and if I don’t have some good sources to call on to give me 

a better interpretation of the legislation, what I’ll do, I’ll re-read 

it in Hansard tomorrow. So the minister can just relax for the 

rest of the afternoon. 

 

I guess, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what normally happens when I 

see a piece of legislation like this, I kind of wonder what 

situation we are addressing or if something has arisen or some 

incident has occurred that has caused some changes to be put 

forward. Quite often a circumstance will arise where we don’t 

realize the deficiencies of a piece of legislation or what gaps 

may be in the legislation until we do run across an incident that 

brings it to light. 

 

So that was my first thought, but there’s nothing that really 

raises a number of alarm bells. Maybe that’s just my own 

suspicious nature, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’ve had a look at the 

Bill and it truly does . . . I mean the minister made the comment 

that we are clarifying, if moving from province to province, 

conflicts of law and what an issue that can be. 

 

And I would probably be fairly well founded in making the 

comment that there isn’t one of us in our MLA offices, our 

constituency offices in our home communities who hasn’t dealt 

with this at one time or another in some circumstance or 

another. And it is a cause for great frustration when you run into 

these kind of dead ends. They aren’t really brick walls. They 

just kind of stop, and there is no recourse. And it can be a very 

frustrating process, not only for the MLA that’s trying to help a 

constituent, but I know even more so for the person who 

happens to be in this situation. 

 

There have been a number of small steps that have been made 

over the years in a variety of areas, but for sure more needs to 

be done. So when the minister says that this will help clarify 

and help ease some of the issues that can arise in these types of 

cases, not only province to province but country to country, I 

would welcome any of those. 

 

I also see that in the legislation and in this world, I guess, that is 

ever changing when we are going to more online . . . You can 

do all kinds of things from register for classes at the community 

college to registering for university to ordering just about 

anything you could eat, wear, or drive online. So I guess it just 

makes sense that we would eliminate that forms now need to be 

contained in regulation, not in this day and age. I think that’s 

pretty well an acceptable practice that we all work online. And 

if we don’t have an opportunity or have access to a computer in 

our home, or Internet in our home — and I have to say, Mr. 

Speaker, not necessarily for this for sure, but for many other 

areas — many of the communities do have access through 

public libraries and other things, which is important. 

 

But more and more we’re seeing forms and all kinds of 

opportunities and more and more of our information coming 

online. So that’s totally understandable and acceptable. And 

like I say, in this world where things are changing drastically, it 

truly does just make sense to see these types of pieces of 

legislation updated, modernized, to make sure they are kept 

relevant and addressing all of the issues that may arise in 

today’s society. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I know a number of my colleagues want to 

make comments on this piece of legislation also, and there are a 

number of questions that I need to get some better advice on 

and a better understanding of for sure, to get a better feel for 

what the legislation will and won’t accomplish. 

 

And with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow has moved a motion that the debate be adjourned on 

Bill No. 102, The Personal Property Security Amendment Act, 

2009. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 103 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Professional 

Discipline) Amendment Act, 2009 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 

second reading of The Miscellaneous Statutes (Professional 

Discipline) Amendment Act, 2009. Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to 

introduce a Bill that will amend the discipline provisions in 40 

of the province’s professional statutes to allow disciplinary 

actions to proceed against former members for a period of two 

years after they cease to become members. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in Saskatchewan the legislation related to 

over 40 self-regulated professional and occupational groups 

does not contemplate disciplinary members commencing or 

proceeding against former members. Mr. Deputy Speaker, this 

Bill will ensure that disciplinary proceedings may extend to 

former members for a period of two years. 

 

Currently if the legislation for a regulated profession or 

occupation does not contemplate discipline of former members, 

disciplinary proceedings cannot be commenced and any 

proceedings under way terminate upon the individual 

terminating his or her membership in the organization. 

Individuals may currently deliberately terminate their 

membership or fail to renew their licence in order to avoid 

disciplinary proceedings and to thwart proceedings that are 

under way. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the amendments will ensure that an 

individual is not able to stop a disciplinary investigation or 

proceeding by simply terminating his or her membership in a 

professional or occupational group. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 

amendments will ensure disciplinary actions can continue if a 

person ceases to be a member, provided that the action is 

commenced within two years of the time that the person ceases 

to be a member of that organization or profession. 



3452 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2009 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in Saskatchewan six Acts currently extend 

the scope of disciplinary proceedings to former members for a 

period of two years from the date they cease to be members. 

The two-year period provides a fair balance between the ability 

of the organization or regulatory body to enforce and the 

certainty for individuals that proceedings will not be 

commenced years after they cease to be members of an 

organization. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the new provisions will also help to ensure 

that a record exists of all disciplinary proceedings against a 

member or former member which, subject to any restrictions in 

the Act, will be available as public record, so that future 

employers and professional associations seeking to hire or 

license the individual will have access to that. 

 

This is particularly important if the individual being 

investigated ceases his or her membership in Saskatchewan, but 

attempts to secure a licence in another province. If the 

equivalent association in another province inquires with respect 

to a former member’s standing in the association, the 

disciplinary proceeding may be revealed to assist the other 

jurisdiction in determining if licensing the individual is 

appropriate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is imperative that the disciplinary proceedings 

that have been commenced are allowed to continue. In some 

situations it places a cloud over not just the individual, but 

against the entire profession. It gives the professional body the 

ability to clean the air, learn anything that may be instructive or 

beneficial from the disciplinary process which may be of 

assistance to other members. It may, where appropriate, provide 

a public denunciation of misconduct. It is clearly in the public 

interest that this type of action or legislation be brought 

forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to move second reading of The 

Miscellaneous Statutes (Professional Discipline) Amendment 

Act, 2009. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved 

second reading of Bill No. 103, The Miscellaneous Statutes 

(Professional Discipline) Amendment Act, 2009. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member from 

Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

for the opportunity to rise and add a few comments to Bill No. 

103, An Act to amend certain Statutes with respect to matters 

concerning Professional Discipline. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what you are going to get from me is a very, I 

guess, a layman’s view of the legislation. Not having dealt with 

this issue on a first-person basis, I have to say I have run into 

people who have, and had some lengthy discussions. And what 

this Bill will do is help address — I think the minister touched 

on it right at the end of his comments — some of the absolute 

injustice that is done when people, instead of facing discipline 

or facing some type of hearing with the professional body that 

they belong to, that they have the ability just to walk away. And 

everything ends when they terminate their membership. 

 

I have dealt with a couple of people who have had this happen. 

And there really is a sense of frustration, not only from others 

within that profession and within that occupation but also from 

people who may have been affected by whatever the issue was. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, while this extends the length of time, is my 

understanding that a complaint can be investigated or that some 

type of disciplinary action can be taken, that it extends for two 

years after the ceasing of that person being a member. Two 

years does sound like a reasonable amount of time. And I 

wasn’t aware that there were six other Acts that actually extend 

the same type of opportunity for other professions, that they 

have the two-year time limit in it. So I think important to have a 

look at those Acts and see how that works in a number of areas. 

 

Also looking at the Bill, Mr. Speaker, there are over 40 

professions and Acts that are listed within this piece of 

legislation. And I’m wondering if the minister had opportunity 

to do consultation with each of these groups — if there was 

comments that were back, if they were all supportive of the 

changes being introduced, and if there were any concerns. 

 

I think as we move along through this piece of legislation there 

will be probably comments that we will receive. And I know we 

are seeking a number of comments back from a number of these 

organizations to hear what they have to say — if they feel this is 

appropriate, if the two years is too long, too short, if there’s 

something else that needs to be addressed. And it’s always 

important that we make sure that if there are issues that are 

connected to this . . . It may not be this cut and dried. There 

might be some other issues that need to be addressed while the 

legislation is open. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think in general this is something that I think 

most members are comfortable with. We will see as discussions 

continue over the course of the session. And I know as we have 

an opportunity to speak to stakeholders in this area and 

members of the various professions that are listed in this 

legislation, it will give us a clearer light if this is acceptable and 

if the two years is an appropriate amount of time. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at this point in time I would adjourn 

debate on this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 103, The 

Miscellaneous Statutes (Professional Discipline) Amendment 

Act, 2009. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Bill No. 104 — The Summary Offences Procedure 

Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2) 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise 

today to move second reading of The Summary Offences 

Procedure Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2). 



November 4, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3453 

Mr. Speaker, this Act amends The Summary Offences 

Procedure Act, 1990 to allow service of tickets by mail in 

circumstances where the tickets cannot reasonably be served at 

the time of the offence. Some examples are, where charges 

cannot be laid for a moving traffic offence until accident 

reconstruction has been done; where a citizen complains an 

offence has occurred and the police investigate the matter 

before issuing a ticket; where a mistake on a ticket means it 

must be withdrawn and reissued; and also for abandoned 

vehicle charges. Many hunting, fishing, and parks offences 

require additional investigation after initial observation of the 

situation by a peace officer or complaint from a member of the 

public. 

 

Personal, on the spot service will continue to be used in most 

cases. But in situations where a ticket cannot reasonably be 

served at the time of the offence, peace officers must find and 

serve the ticket on the person charged who may live in another 

part of the province or, in fact, in another province or country. 

Currently in these circumstances, peace officers in the area 

where the offence occurred must send the ticket to enforcement 

personnel in the place where the person being charged with the 

offence resides so that the person can be found and, in fact, 

personally served with a ticket. This is time-consuming and can 

be expensive. In the case of hunting and fishing offences, a 

significant number of tickets are issued to out-of-province and 

out-of-country offenders. 

 

The proposed provision authorizes regulations that will provide 

for the specific method of service; that is, either by certified 

mail or by registered mail. This change responds to a request 

from the Saskatchewan Association of Chiefs of Police that the 

province consider allowing service of any ticket by mail where 

on-the-spot service is not possible or reasonable. This change 

could result in a significant reduction of police time spent 

arranging for personal service by or for another enforcement 

agency. 

 

An accompanying change will allow for a hearing after 

conviction where the person was convicted in a trial without the 

person being present, and the person says that they did not 

receive the tickets sent by mail. Providing for a hearing after a 

conviction gives the accused an opportunity to say that service 

did not occur, and thus the person did not have the opportunity 

to be heard at trial or to ask the judge for a lower fine. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The 

Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2). 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved 

second reading of Bill No. 104, The Summary Offences 

Procedure Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2). Is the Assembly 

ready for the question? I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — I’m trying to hurry it along. I apologize, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. I was a little quick to my feet. The members 

are anxious. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure to stand and make comment on the 

summary offences procedure Act. The minister’s comments 

were interesting. And when he talked about the various offences 

and where the difficulties may lie, and also really the better use 

of police officers’ time, could be RCMP too. I know he made a 

couple of comments there that I didn’t quite catch. 

 

But really the big change is, in this legislation, is having the 

opportunity to serve summons or offence notice by mail. And 

there also is a section within the legislation which talks about 

the issue that if no notice is received, I mean, it would be served 

at last known address. And there is an appeal, and I believe it’s 

an alternate hearing process that will occur if that happens to 

occur that you do not receive the notice by mail. 

 

The minister seemed to be quite comfortable with this 

legislation. I guess he would be; otherwise he wouldn’t have 

brought it forward. But I guess there will be a number of people 

that will have more questions amongst my colleagues. We had a 

quick conversation on this the other day, and I know that many 

believe this is the way we need to go, that police time could be 

used much better, resources could be utilized much more 

efficiently if some of these changes were made. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, not all people for sure believe that 

way, so I know we will have a bit of discussion when the 

legislation as it moves through the House. But with that, Mr. 

Speaker, I know there are a number of my colleagues that also 

wish to make comments on this legislation. And at this time I 

will adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow has moved adjourned debate on Bill No. 104, The 

Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2). Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the 

Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

move that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 

moved that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House now stands 

adjourned until 10 a.m. tomorrow morning. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 15:52.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3431 

  McCall ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3431, 3433 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3431 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3431 

  Chisholm .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3431 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3432 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3432 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3432 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3432 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3432 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3433 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3433 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3433 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3433 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3433 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3434 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3434 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3434 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3434 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3434 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3434 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3435 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3435 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Year of the Métis 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3435 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3435 

 Outside City Workers’ Local Celebrates Anniversary 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3435 

 2010 World Junior Hockey Championships 

  LeClerc .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3436 

 Winston Knoll Students Participate in Science Events 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3436 

 Members’ Responsibilities 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3436 

 Montgomery School Makes Top School List 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3437 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 Relevance of Responses and Decorum 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3437 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Public Safety Procedures 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3437 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3437 

 Severance of Public Servants 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3438 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3438 

 Workplace Safety Issues 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3439 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3439 

 Support for Seniors’ Centres 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3440 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3440 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3441 

 Forestry Sector Issues 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3441 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3441 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 105 — The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2009 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3442 



 

 Bill No. 106 — The Labour Market Commission Repeal Act 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3442 

 Bill No. 607 — The Public Safety, Security and Protection Act 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3442 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 97 — The Agri-Food Amendment Act, 2009 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3443 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3443 

 Bill No. 98 — The Municipal Financing Corporation Amendment Act, 2009 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3444 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3444 

 Bill No. 99 — The Emergency 911 System Amendment Act, 2009 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3445 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3446 

 Bill No. 100 — The Doukhobors of Canada C.C.U.B. Trust Fund Amendment Act, 2009 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3447 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3447 

 Bill No. 101 — The Credit Union Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2) 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3448 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3449 

 Bill No. 102 — The Personal Property Security Amendment Act, 2009 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3449 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3450 

 Bill No. 103 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Professional Discipline) Amendment Act, 2009 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3451 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3452 

 Bill No. 104 — The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2) 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3452 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3453 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium Development 

Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

 Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

Government House Leader 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. James Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Capital Commission 


