



















































Hansard: October 26, 2009


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 3A  MONDAY, OCTOBER 26, 2009, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3159 

 October 26, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for SGI 

[Saskatchewan Government Insurance], Provincial Secretary. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you I‟d like to introduce a group of very 

special guests in our gallery today. It‟s a pleasure to introduce 

Major Brad Hrycyna. Major Hrycyna is originally from Swift 

Current. He assumed command of the Moose Jaw 

Saskatchewan Dragoons in 2003. The Saskatchewan Dragoons 

is a unit of the Canadian Forces Primary Reserve. 

 

Also with us is Lieutenant Commander Corey Thiemann, the 

commanding officer of HMCS [Her Majesty‟s Canadian Ship] 

Queen here in Regina. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Major Hrycyna and Lieutenant Commander 

Thiemann are joined today by a group of Saskatchewan 

reservists. I would ask that all reservists please stand so that we 

can recognize you today. 

 

As you know, Mr. Speaker, our government is committed to 

supporting reservists who serve our country within the borders 

of our province and of course those who are deployed for 

service outside our province and outside our country. We join 

everyone in Saskatchewan who‟s proud of the sacrifice and the 

commitment demonstrated by reservists and by members of the 

regular forces as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the people of our province and, if I 

may, on behalf of the families of members serving in 

Afghanistan and around the world, I would like to express our 

appreciation and our gratitude for the work done by reservists. 

And I invite all members of the Legislative Assembly to 

welcome these reservists in their Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure 

to introduce to you and through you to all members of the 

Assembly a number of Saskatchewan health care providers here 

to observe question period. They are represented by the 

Saskatchewan Government and General Employees‟ Union 

president, Bob Bymoen, Service Employees International 

Union West, Barbara Cape, and the Canadian Union of Public 

Employees Heath Care Council president, Gord Campbell. 

 

These health care providers are some of the more than 25,000 

health care workers currently involved in lengthy contract 

negotiations. These vital health care workers include special 

care aids, licensed practical nurses, food service workers, 

laundry, housekeeping, and activity personnel, maintenance, 

administrative, clerical, therapeutic, and recreational workers, 

and medical technologists and technicians. These health care 

workers are critical to ensuring that high quality of health care 

is delivered to Saskatchewan hospitals, nursing homes, and 

other health care programs and facilities each and every day. 

 

I urge all members of the Assembly to welcome these important 

health care providers to the Chamber today and thank each and 

every one of them for the service they provide to our province. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all members, it is also my pleasure on behalf of 

the government to join the members opposite in welcoming the 

members from the health care providers to their honourable 

Assembly. Mr. Speaker, we are pleased to have these health 

care workers with us today. We look forward to the next 

opportunity to ensure that the labour relations environment 

continues to be conducive to collaboration and co-operation, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Would you join me, Mr. Speaker, in welcoming these 

individuals to their Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 

and through you to the House and my colleagues, it gives me a 

great deal of pleasure to introduce in the west gallery five 

young people that are currently involved in the United Food and 

Commercial Workers youth internship program. I had an 

opportunity to meet with them today. And they‟re in 

Saskatchewan spending some time looking at the work being 

done in municipal elections and learning the value of being 

committed and active in your communities. And I was very 

pleased to meet with them this morning and had an opportunity 

to spend an hour or so discussing a number of issues. 

 

So I‟d like the Assembly to welcome Enver Harbans from 

Toronto — give us a wave — Brad Keith from Red Deer, Jamie 

Skinner from Halifax, Kevin Bacon from Hamilton, and Loreto 

Gutierrez from Winnipeg. I‟d like my colleagues to please 

welcome these young people from across Canada and 

encourage them in community service and being active and the 

benefits that it pays. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — Before we move to presenting petitions, I‟d 

just like to also welcome the guests to your Chamber today, but 

just to remind the guests that you‟re not to participate in any of 

the debate from here on in with clapping or in whatever form. 

We appreciate your acknowledgement of the rules of the 

Chamber. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition in support of maintaining quality health care 

services in the province of Saskatchewan and that the 

Government of Saskatchewan ought to recognize the essential 



3160 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2009 

role of all health care providers as valued members of the health 

care team, and that such promotion can only be achieved 

through the commitment of adequate funding and the 

installation of good faith in the provincial collective bargaining 

process. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to commit to maintaining quality health 

care services and job security for all public health care 

providers. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I present on behalf of residents of a variety of 

communities, Swift Current included, but also on behalf of 

citizens right across the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟d like to 

present today a petition calling for wage equity for CBO 

[community-based organization] workers. And we know, Mr. 

Speaker, that the workers in the community-based organizations 

right across this province have traditionally been underpaid, and 

many continue to earn poverty level wages. And we know this 

results in high turnover in this sector, and this affects many 

people who are at their place of work. I‟d like to read the prayer 

today: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

development and implementation of a multi-year funding 

plan to ensure that CBO workers achieve wage equity with 

employees who perform work of equal value in 

government departments. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these folks today I am presenting on behalf 

come from Melville, Weyburn, Saskatoon, and Regina. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

in support of a new long-term care facility in La Ronge. The 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately invest in the planning and 

construction of long-term care beds in La Ronge. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by the good people of La 

Ronge and area. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition in support of fairness for Saskatchewan 

students. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately expand the graduate 

retention program to include master‟s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are 

students here in Saskatchewan. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

yet another petition on behalf of rural residents of 

Saskatchewan who question why the Sask Party government is 

leaving them behind with respect to providing safe and 

affordable water. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to financially assist the town of Duck 

Lake residents for the good of their health and safety, due 

to the exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency, and that this government fulfills its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

These petitions, Mr. Speaker, are signed by the good residents 

of Duck Lake and Prince Albert. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I present a petition today in 

support of the withdrawal of Bill 80. Mr. Speaker, we know that 

the building trades unions have a proud history of union 

certification and that the construction industry at present, the 

present Act has provided a stable environment for labour 

relations. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to withdraw its ill-conceived Bill 80, The 

Construction Industry Labour Relations Amendment Act, 

2009, which dismantles the proud history of the building 

trades in this province, creates instability in the labour 

market, and impacts the quality of training required of 

workers before entering the workforce. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petition is signed by residents of Grandora, Martensville, 

Hepburn, and Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m pleased today to 



October 26, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3161 

rise and present a petition to the Assembly, Mr. Speaker. It‟s 

from residents of The Battlefords who note that area apartments 

have been given notice of rent increases of about 40 per cent. 

Most of the residents feel this is outrageous and suggest it‟s 

time to bring back rent controls. Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads 

as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to call upon the 

Government of Saskatchewan to develop an affordable 

housing program that will result in a greater number of 

quality and affordable rental units to be made available to 

a greater number of people throughout The Battlefords, 

and that will implement a process of rent review or rent 

control to better protect tenants in a non-competitive 

housing environment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures are all from residents of The 

Battlefords. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents as it relates to 

the unprecedented mismanagement of their finances, Mr. 

Speaker. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to start managing our finances 

responsibly and prudently to ensure that it does not 

continue its trend of massive budgetary shortfalls, 

runaway and unsustainable spending, equity stripping 

from our Crowns, and irresponsible revenue setting. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are signed by concerned 

citizens of Regina. Thank you. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Proclamation of Health Care Provider Week 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, the unions, SEIU [Service 

Employees International Union], CUPE [Canadian Union of 

Public Employees], and SGEU [Saskatchewan Government and 

General Employees‟ Union] have been asking the Sask Party 

government to proclaim October 25th to November 1st as 

health care provider week, but their request has been delayed 

and ignored. But, Mr. Speaker, there are 25,000 very good 

reasons for this request to be granted — the 25,000 health care 

providers in our province. 

 

These workers are the people on the front line in our health care 

system who work tirelessly to ensure that the residents of our 

province receive quality medical care. They include dietary, 

housekeeping, laundry, clerical, and maintenance staff, medical 

technologists and technicians, licensed practical nurses, special 

care aids, therapeutic and recreation workers. 

 

They are our family members, our neighbours, and our fellow 

citizens. The public services that they provide improve the 

quality of life and strengthen our communities. Many of these 

workers are here with us today rallying with their co-workers, 

calling attention to the Sask Party government‟s frustrating and 

insulting progress at the bargaining table. The government is 

not recognizing the important role that our health care providers 

play in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a very important issue that must be 

addressed, and I call on the Sask Party government to take 

immediate action in the recognition of these 25,000 employees 

and the pivotal work that they do in our health care system by 

proclaiming this week — October 25th to November 1st — as 

health care provider week. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Safe and Secure Blood Supply 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Mr. Speaker, Ann and Dick Wood have spent 

many hours working to bring awareness in Regina and around 

the province to the important issue of bleeding disorders. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during the ‟80s and ‟90s, thousands of Canadians 

contracted hepatitis C and HIV [human immunodeficiency 

virus] from blood transfusions and other tainted blood products. 

This was the worst health disaster in Canadian history. It‟s 16 

years since Justice Horace Krever was appointed to head the 

inquiry into this tragedy. Lessons learned from the tainted blood 

tragedy are bitter memory for many, and we should never forget 

what happened to those who received the tainted blood. 

 

[13:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, Hemophilia Saskatchewan and the Canadian 

Hemophilia Society are committed to ensuring that Canada‟s 

blood remains safe and secure. 

 

Tomorrow an evergreen tree will be dedicated to the memory of 

those who died because they received contaminated blood 

products. The ceremony will take place at 11:30 a.m. across 

from the Legislative Building. Also a plaque will be presented 

to the CBS [Canadian Blood Services], Hemophilia 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I would encourage every member 

of the legislature to come and participate in this ceremony. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mental Illness Awareness Week 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It was only 

appropriate that people from across Saskatchewan gathered in 

The Battlefords on October the 4th to begin the celebration and 

awareness building that is Mental Illness Week in Canada. They 

gathered in The Battlefords to tell the people of Saskatchewan 

that this province‟s only assessment and long-term residential 

facility for people suffering from significant mental illness is in 

very poor repair. And despite promises and claims of support 



3162 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2009 

from the Saskatchewan Party government, it still has not begun 

construction of the replacement of this nearly 100-year-old 

structure. 

 

Celeste Bridgeman has a brother that has lived in Saskatchewan 

Hospital for 35 years. She is the president of the family council 

and represents family members of other residents in this old 

facility. She says that people with physical, not mental, illnesses 

would never be sent to such a place that today is in such poor 

condition that it is affecting the patients‟ self-esteem and sense 

of worth. 

 

Mental health advocates, psychiatric nurses, family members, 

community leaders, including municipal councillors, attended 

this rally to tell the provincial Sask Party government to get the 

shovels in the ground, provide for a new beginning to those 

whose only world has become or will be the building and 

grounds of Saskatchewan Hospital. This is a provincial facility. 

It serves the people of Saskatchewan. The people of 

Saskatchewan are saying, get at it, get it done, and start 

respecting those who need it the most. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Before I recognize the next speaker, just to 

ask members to give the member on their feet the opportunity to 

speak and to be heard. It‟s difficult, especially for those in the 

gallery, to even hear what‟s being said at times. Respect would 

be appreciated. The member from Estevan. 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The member from Estevan. 

 

Autism Awareness Month 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. October is Autism 

Awareness Month in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, autism 

spectrum disorder affects individuals from all backgrounds. It 

affects their families, their friends, and their caregivers. It is 

estimated the prevalence rates for autism spectrum disorder are 

now 1 in 150. That means there are approximately 1,820 

individuals under the age of 19 in Saskatchewan living with an 

ASD [autism spectrum disorder]. 

 

Last fall our government announced the framework and action 

plan for autism spectrum disorders in Saskatchewan. Developed 

in consultation with stakeholders, parents, and care providers, it 

will promote more individualized and coordinated responses to 

ASD services. Our government provides $3 million in 

annualized funding for intervention and support. This is in 

addition to the supports provided by the Ministries of Education 

and Social Services. Mr. Speaker, health regions are hiring 

additional staff to deal with this priority issue. Our government 

will ensure any future plans to implement service improvements 

will continue to involve the important perspective of parents 

and service providers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, please join me in recognizing the important work 

of everyone involved in this field and by everyone affected by 

autism spectrum disorder. By working together, we will 

improve the lives of individuals and their families. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Persons Day 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, last week was the 80th anniversary of Persons Day. 

October 18th, 1929 was the day where women were recognized 

as persons under the law. Canadian women born before 1929 

were considered by law to be non-persons. In fact, British 

common law states that they were persons in the matter of pains 

and penalties but not in the matter of rights and privileges. 

 

Emily Murphy wanted to become Canada‟s first female senator. 

And between 1917 and 1927, five governments indicated their 

support for such an appointment but said that their hands were 

tied because only qualified persons could be appointed and that 

definition did not include women. Two prime ministers 

promised to change the law, but did not. 

 

Judge Emily Murphy invited four outstanding women to her 

home in Edmonton in August of 1927. They were Henrietta 

Muir Edwards, Louise McKinney, Irene Parlby, and Nellie 

McClung. Together they became known as the Famous Five. 

 

The women campaigned tirelessly for the rights of women to 

vote and serve as elected officials at all levels of government. 

As well, they advocated for the creation of libraries, travelling 

health clinics, distance education, mothers‟ allowances, equal 

citizenship of mothers and fathers, prison reform, and many 

other initiatives that we cherish today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in honouring this 

very special day. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

2009 Achievement in Business Excellence Awards 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

ABEX [Achievement in Business Excellence] Awards was 

established 26 years ago to celebrate the achievements of 

private sector business in Saskatchewan. Each year the awards 

highlight excellence and leadership in business. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to recognize some amazing 

businesses in our province. This year was the first time ABEX 

recognized innovation in the area of health. The health award is 

given to a business that demonstrates excellence in the 

provision of health services, medical technology, or the creation 

of products or services used by the health medical sector. Mr. 

Speaker, this award was given to TinyEYE Therapy Services 

which created a telehealth application that enables a 

speech-language pathologist to treat patients in locations around 

the world. 

 

The Business of the Year Award was given to Wally Mah, 

president of North Ridge Development Corporation. North 

Ridge Development continually practises a common sense, 

down-to-earth attitude where the customer comes first and 

satisfaction to the customer is the goal. 

 



October 26, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3163 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is home to exciting and innovative 

businesses. The 2009 ABEX Awards highlights the incredible 

determination and entrepreneurial spirit of our Saskatchewan. 

Please join me in congratulating all ABEX contestants. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Breast Cancer Awareness Month 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, October is Breast Cancer 

Awareness Month which presents an opportunity to empower 

both men and women to learn about breast cancer and health, as 

well as pay tribute to past victims of the disease. 

 

Breast cancer is a term used to refer to a malignant tumour that 

has developed from cells in the breast. Breast cancer is the most 

common cancer among Canadian women. The Saskatchewan 

Cancer Agency expects one in nine Saskatchewan women will 

develop breast cancer over the course of her lifetime. Moreover, 

older women are statistically more likely to develop breast 

cancer. 

 

Breast cancer is also not exclusive to women. Men can also be 

diagnosed and die from the disease. Indeed it is estimated that 1 

per cent of all breast cancer cases, or 50 men in Canada, will die 

from the disease in 2009. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my husband, Jeff, and 12-year-old daughter, 

Morgan, and I once again had the privilege of participating in 

the Canadian Breast Cancer Foundation‟s Run for the Cure, 

sponsored by the Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce. 

 

Nationwide, the 18th annual Run for the Cure remains the 

largest single-day, volunteer-led event in Canada in support of 

breast cancer. Regina had over 2,100 participants and raised 

over $433,000. Nationally 170,000 Canadians in over 56 

communities raised approximately $26 million. Mr. Speaker, I 

run to pay tribute to my mother, Marianne Grobmeier, who died 

of breast cancer only a few years ago. 

 

To maintain breast health, one needs to know the changes to 

look for, have regular clinical exams and, when eligible or 

recommended, have regular screening mammograms. 

 

I would like to take this opportunity to thank those involved 

with providing care, support, and education regarding this 

disease. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Staffing in Health Care Facilities 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 

member from Swift Current, the Premier. Mr. Speaker, in June 

this year, the Premier would have received written evidence of 

more than 1,300 separate occasions on which Saskatchewan 

health care facilities — that‟s our hospitals and nursing homes 

— had staffing levels below that at which the employers 

themselves had described as essential for the protection of 

public safety under your government‟s essential service 

legislation. 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier is this: when the 

Premier received this clear written evidence that our health care 

facilities across the province were working at less than safe 

staffing levels, what did you do and what action did he and his 

government take? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, thanks very much for the 

opportunity to speak about the value and significance . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Minister of Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

certainly appreciate the opportunity to speak about the 

significance of essential service legislation. It‟s meant to ensure 

that during winter storms, our highways get plowed. It‟s meant 

to ensure that cancer treatment‟s available, Mr. Speaker. It‟s 

meant to help ensure that health care is accessible to people. As 

we saw, Mr. Speaker, during the University of Saskatchewan, 

University of Regina strike, hundreds of people per day were 

being turned away, Mr. Speaker, from valuable health care. 

 

What we wanted to ensure is that Saskatchewan join the rest of 

the country and have essential service legislation in place, Mr. 

Speaker, to ensure that the people of this province had 

legislation that protected them. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 

Premier because the minister obviously missed the point of the 

question. The question isn‟t dealing with the Bill, or the 

essential services Bill. The issue here is written evidence of 

more than 1,300 separate occasions on which the health care 

facilities in our province were operating below, below that that 

the employers themselves describe as essential — 1,300 

occasions. 

 

I‟m not talking about essential services; I‟m talking about 1,300 

occasions when the Premier received clear and written evidence 

of this kind of situation where the welfare of our citizens were 

at stake. I ask to the Premier: what did you do about it and what 

action was taken? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the member 

for the question. This government didn‟t wait for this 

notification about what‟s going on with respect to health care in 

the province of Saskatchewan. The people of this province have 

known for a very, very long time that the issue of human 

resources in health care, the issue of recruitment and retention 

of front-line workers, the issue of training doctors in this 

province and of increasing residencies in this province has been 

around for a very, very long time, unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, 

under the auspices and under the regime of those members . . . 



3164 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2009 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, under the auspices of those 

members opposite. And so this government took immediate 

action to deal with some of the more particular glaring absences 

of adequate health care workers, including the need for nurses 

in the province. We set a bold goal of 800 nurses for the 

province of Saskatchewan — over 570 already within two 

years, Mr. Speaker. We are building long-term care facilities in 

this province. We‟re improving cancer care in this province. 

And we will now move to guarantee wait times of no greater 

than three months, Mr. Speaker, as outlined in the Throne 

Speech. We‟ll do that with the proper resources for health care. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier refuses to 

answer the question about the 1,300 clear indications of unsafe 

levels of care in our hospitals and nursing homes. But I want to 

quote from the letter that the Minister of Health wrote back, and 

I quote, “I do not have the clinical experience to know what 

interests should be collectively bargained or what health 

services should be on essential service list.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier is this: while the 

minister may not have the clinical experience, does he have the 

common sense to understand that when you‟ve got 1,300 cases 

where you have unsafe numbers of staff, that he should do 

something? And what did he do? And did he investigate those 

cases? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, I think all of us, if we have the occasion to go into 

any of our health care facilities around the province, we see the 

great work that all health care professionals do — whether it‟s 

the doctors, the nurses, dietary — all the health care providers 

that work together in a very complex system, Mr. Speaker, and 

provide excellent care throughout the province, from corner to 

corner, from border to border in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, we inherited an issue regarding human resources 

that isn‟t going to be fixed overnight and it won‟t be fixed in the 

first year or two years. But what the people of Saskatchewan 

have a guarantee of from this government is that, first of all, 

we‟ll acknowledge there is a problem — unlike the opposition, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we‟d asked the former minister of Health from North 

Battleford what he thought about all the hospital closures 

around the province because there‟s not enough doctors. He 

said, that‟s just not unusual, Mr. Speaker. Answers like that are 

unacceptable. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the history 

lesson from the minister, but my question again is to the 

Premier. Mr. Premier, you refused to answer the question of 

what you did when you received written evidence of unsafe 

staffing levels 1,300 times. Mr. Premier, other than sit on your 

hands, what did you do? I want to ask through the Speaker to 

the Premier: what did you do with those 1,300 requests for the 

written evidence of unsafe staffing levels? What did you do? 

 

The Speaker: — Before I recognize the Premier, I just want to 

remind all members, including government members, that it 

applies both . . . [inaudible] . . . asking the question or 

responding, if we want our guests to be able to hear what the 

response is. I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will 

apologize if I bore the opposition leader with a bit of a history 

lesson. He hasn‟t been here for the last 10 years, Mr. Speaker, 

and so I think it‟s time that he‟s been brought up to speed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, over the last 17 years, Mr. Speaker, there was no 

psychiatric nursing program in this province. Mr. Speaker, we 

have changed that in the first two years and have 40 new 

participants registering and going through the psychiatric nurses 

program, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we are expanding the seats 

in the College of Medicine, we‟re expanding the residency 

seats, we‟ve expanded the registered nursing seats, LPNs 

[licensed practical nurse], Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we‟re 

going a long ways in dealing with the human resources shortage 

that we‟ve inherited from a former government. 

 

Now I will admit that it can‟t be done overnight. It‟s going to 

take some time, Mr. Speaker, but first you‟ve got to address the 

issue by acknowledging that there is a problem, something that 

that former government never would do — would never 

acknowledge that there was a problem, Mr. Speaker. We‟re 

moving in the right direction. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, both ministers and the Premier 

seem to be in this group abdication of duty but at least the 

Minister of Advanced Ed sent a letter back to some of the 

employees on July 13th. And I want to quote from the letter, 

and it says: 

 

I appreciate you taking the time to articulate your concerns 

on the staffing levels in the various facilities throughout 

the Province. I would note, though, that the staffing 

decisions made at the local level are not a contravention of 

the Public Service Essential Services Act as there has not 

been a work stoppage! 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it seems that no one did anything with the 

information that was provided to them and the minister‟s 

colleague has actually made the point. So I have a question for 

the Minister of Health. Will he confirm that his government 

doesn‟t care about whether health care staffing levels are safe or 

not on a day-to-day basis, they only care about trampling the 

rights of workers? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I want to start by saying 



October 26, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3165 

that I think people in Saskatchewan, people on this side of the 

Legislative Assembly, certainly know that the most important 

person within the health care system is the patient themselves, 

Mr. Speaker. And that is why we contracted a Patient First 

Review that looks at the whole system to see what is needed 

from a patient‟s perspective, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I realize that there are issues from facility to facility at 

times where we don‟t have enough health care professionals. 

We‟re certainly working on it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I can tell you, we‟re far further ahead dealing with patient 

care and safety by addressing the issue, unlike the former 

government that had the nerve to close 52 hospitals in this 

province, Mr. Speaker. How many people did those hospitals 

employ? Unfortunately after the closure, they looked for jobs in 

other places — oh, like Alberta. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s pretty tough to give 

patient-first care if you don‟t have staff to do it with. So, Mr. 

Speaker, the minister obviously has ignored the letter that was 

sent to him and the information, so we‟ll give him an example. 

 

So one of the more recent examples of unsafe staffing levels 

that has come to our attention is the lab and radiology 

department at the Wakaw Hospital. The employer has said that 

to maintain a safe level of health care during a work stoppage, 

all lab and X-ray technologists employed there are deemed 

essential. But on eight separate occasions this summer and fall 

when there was vacations or leaves taken, what happened at the 

Wakaw Hospital? Well they just closed down the lab, Mr. 

Speaker. That‟s all they did. 

 

So my question is to the minister: how can these workers be 

designated essential during a possible labour dispute, but not 

essential for the rest of the year? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, as I answered in my previous answers is that 

absolutely the health and well-being of people throughout the 

province, in all corners of the province, is of the utmost 

importance. Unfortunately we don‟t have the full complement 

of health care professionals that we need, and that is why we‟re 

addressing the issues, Mr. Speaker, with recruitment and 

retention grants, Mr. Speaker. We are addressing it with bursary 

programs, Mr. Speaker. We are working to try and get out of a 

deficit that was left by the previous government. To think that 

this is a . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Minister of Health. 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we are working to try 

and attract as many people. And I guess the nice part is, is we 

see an influx of people into this province like we have never 

seen before in the history of this province, Mr. Speaker. And 

many of them will be working in the health care field. Mr. 

Speaker, what was happening for many years — and we‟re 

feeling the effects of it — is out-migration for year after year 

after year under an NDP [New Democratic Party] government, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this is a current Minister of 

Health who had all the answers when he was in opposition. And 

two years into their term of government and billions of dollars 

to invest in the system, and the minister is still is using old 

excuses. I mean over and over and over again. He hasn‟t done 

anything. But, Mr. Speaker, lab and X-ray technologists at the 

Wakaw Hospital report to us that on 46 days during the past 

five months, the Wakaw Hospital lab and radiology department 

worked with staffing levels below what the employer said was 

the minimum to protect public safety. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is important for the people of Wakaw. 

To the minister: when will he do what a minister of Health is 

supposed to do and protect the public from unsafe staffing 

levels 365 days of the year? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is 

more or less implying that we haven‟t done anything over the 

last two years, and nothing could be further from the truth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‟ve increased the number of medical seats . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Well they say we haven‟t. I would 

honestly believe that if they were still in government, we would 

still be at 60 medical training seats in the city of Saskatoon — 

totally unacceptable. 

 

It‟s decisions that that former government made that puts us in 

the position that we are in today that we‟re trying to dig out of 

by increasing the number of medical seats, by increasing the 

number of residency seats, by increasing the number of 

registered nursing seats, by increasing the number of psychiatric 

nursing seats, Mr. Speaker, as well as starting an occupational 

therapy program in Saskatchewan which was never done under 

the former government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[Inaudible] . . . training your own, Mr. Speaker, which they 

failed to do, and we‟re digging out of, Mr. Speaker. We can 

continue to try and attract from around the world, which we are 

doing very well, Mr. Speaker, but some of the solution starts at 

home and that‟s what we‟re doing. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Contract Negotiations for Health Care Workers 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — [Inaudible] . . . an answer out of the 

minister as to the questions for the people in Wakaw, but I also 



3166 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2009 

have a question for the Minister of Health. And I want to 

remind the minister that the employers‟ association has said at 

the bargaining table numerous times that it gets its marching 

orders from the Premier and the cabinet. In addition to an 

insulting wage offer that is less than the cost of living, the 

employers‟ association, at the government‟s direction, has 

demanded a series of concessions from these 25,000 health care 

workers. 

 

One, Mr. Speaker, that is particularly odious would see disabled 

workers lose their right to re-employment. So a health care 

worker who is injured on the job and goes on disability would 

be terminated if they do not fully recover within three years, 

Mr. Speaker, three years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, can the minister explain how that proposal 

displays respect for injured workers and gives them a renewed 

sense of dignity. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, certainly we know that 

negotiations are being conducted right now between the service 

provider unions and the Saskatchewan Association of Health 

Organizations. 

 

The Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations was set 

up under the former government. It was a negotiating tool for 

the former government — at least I think it was. Now if any of 

those former cabinet ministers interjected themselves into those 

negotiations, it would be very interesting to hear that because 

the negotiator for the former government was SAHO 

[Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations], as it is 

with us, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member opposite said something about cost of 

living. Well this year, right now, Mr. Speaker, from September 

to September, the cost-of-living allowance increase in 

Saskatchewan is at point two per cent, Mr. Speaker. Not that 

I‟m going to get into the negotiations, but I do believe that the 

SAHO initial offer was much greater than that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, today at the legislature we have 

hundreds of health care workers who are wondering why the 

Sask Party government has failed to treat them with the same 

dignity and respect that they have provided to other health care 

workers on the health care team. 

 

Can the minister explain, Mr. Speaker, how his government 

thinks that a wage offer of nine and a quarter per cent over four 

years is anything more than an insult when it‟s compared to the 

35 per cent increase offered to other health care workers just 

last year? What does this disrespect say to the rest of the team? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said from the outset, 

all of our health care providers are absolutely important to have 

the system work correctly, Mr. Speaker. And as I said, I will not 

get into the negotiations between SAHO and the service 

providers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what is most important is that we have 

competitive wages, and we attract and retain the health care 

professionals that we have right now, Mr. Speaker. I would 

think that if you looked at the rest of the provinces across the 

Dominion who are struggling deeply with . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I was just saying that if 

you look at the rest of the provinces across the Dominion that 

are struggling mightily with their finances, Mr. Speaker, we‟re 

in a very good position in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

An offer was made by SAHO. I believe it was the initial offer. I 

would call on both parties to get back and to come to some 

common agreement as to what the final contract will look like, 

Mr. Speaker. But I will tell you that people are looking at 

Saskatchewan with envy right now. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — They won‟t be looking at us with envy for very 

much longer if we don‟t have health care workers who have a 

contract. We‟re looking at a pandemic. What‟s going to happen 

to our health care team? What‟s the message that this 

government‟s giving to people that need to work together to 

help deal with the issues that face the health care system? The 

wage offer that the minister‟s government approved for these 

25,000 health care workers is one-quarter the increase provided 

to nurses just last year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: is his government not creating two 

classes of workers within the health care system by proposing 

such a disparity? Is it the government‟s contention that these 

25,000 health care workers are somehow only one-quarter as 

important as the other health care workers on the team? How 

does this keep our health care team working together, and how 

on earth does that make us competitive? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — I have said from the outset that all 

health care providers are absolutely important, Mr. Speaker. 

And you know, it‟s interesting to hear the doom and gloom 

come from the other side. She‟s saying, how will people be 

attracted to the province? Well, Mr. Speaker, I can see under 

their mandate and their mantra and their philosophy when 

people left the province for better opportunities — some went 

to Alberta; some went to other provinces because the grass 

looked an awful lot greener on the other side of the fence. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that‟s not the way it is now, as people are coming 

back to Saskatchewan. We want to provide fair and competitive 

wages, competitive wages across Western Canada. That‟s what 

we need to do. 

 

[14:15] 

 



October 26, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3167 

Now the member opposite is talking about the Saskatchewan 

Union of Nurses. There‟s no secret to that. It was the fact that 

they had fallen so far behind under the previous government, 

and quite frankly maybe even under her leadership as the 

president of the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, that some 

ground had to be made up, Mr. Speaker. We want our wages to 

be competitive across western Canada, and SAHO is working to 

do that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister needs to 

hear how the government‟s decision to treat certain health care 

workers as second-class citizens is hurting the health care 

system. In the words, Mr. Speaker, in the words of Annette 

Kinaken, a special care aid from The Battlefords: 

 

They make you feel like you‟re not wanted. So if I‟m not 

wanted as a health care worker and I‟m not providing a 

worthwhile service, what do they think of our seniors and 

our residents or sick people that are in the hospital? 

 

Mr. Speaker, what does the minister have to say to Annette 

Kinaken? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Well, Mr. Speaker, what I would say 

to Annette, as I would say to all health care providers: they‟re 

extremely important to have the system work. It doesn‟t matter 

whether it‟s from the physician or to the nurse or whether it‟s 

dietary or physiotherapy — every health care professional, to 

make a very complex system work, are important. Absolutely 

they are. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we go through negotiations every two years, 

three years, and four years, depending on the length of the 

contract, and at those times emotions are certainly heightened 

as we try and hammer out an agreement and try and find some 

common ground. That is done between the service provider 

unions and the Saskatchewan Association of Health 

Organizations, Mr. Speaker. I am very confident that an 

agreement can be struck, that we‟ll find some common ground 

that respects all of our health care workers across this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, my question is again to the 

Minister of Health. This minister needs to hear again how this 

government‟s unfair treatment of these health care workers is 

hurting the health care system. 

 

In the words of Rose Isbister, an LPN from Prince Albert who 

is on disability leave: 

 

You just know that they have no respect for you at all. 

You have no value to them. I never could understand that. 

 

Can the minister please explain the government‟s actions to 

Rose Isbister? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To Rose and all the health care providers throughout the 

province, whether they work in special care homes, whether 

they work in acute care settings, whether they work in public 

health, each and every part of that health care chain is extremely 

important, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Whether it‟s in the long-term care facilities that we‟re working 

to try and rebuild after many years of neglect, 13 new long-term 

care facilities . . . Because it‟s people‟s homes; that‟s what this 

is, Mr. Speaker, and we‟re trying to improve on that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‟re working through the public health, and right 

now H1N1 is certainly dominating their workplace. And we‟re 

ensuring that we have the proper complement of health care 

professionals there. 

 

But you can see that each piece of the health care chain is 

important. Any one piece taken out causes problems, Mr. 

Speaker, and I will tell you that from our government of 

Saskatchewan, we dearly value all health care providers. We 

want to see these negotiations come to a conclusion as quickly 

as anyone. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I want this government to know 

how damaging your approach has been to the health care 

system. In the words of Debbie Hubick, a lab services worker 

from Weyburn: 

 

I think the current offer is insulting to us. You can‟t expect 

to recruit and retain staff. You can‟t expect to make health 

care a desirable place to work. 

 

Can the minister explain the government‟s actions to Debbie 

Hubick, and why he just explained that there is either a chain or 

a hierarchy depending upon which question he‟s asking at any 

given moment? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, once again, you know, 

we‟re in the middle of negotiations, absolutely, between the 

health care providers and the employer, the SAHO. And those 

negotiations can be very difficult at times. 

 

I remember standing in this House a couple of years ago, or a 

year and a half ago, answering questions regarding negotiations 

with other unions and health care employers that were very 

tense at the time. And an agreement was struck. I would say 

that I would call all parties back together and continue to work 

on a negotiation that allows for a competitive wage across 

Western Canada. 

 

I was heartened to see recently a group of nurses in, for 

example, Alberta that weren‟t very happy with their 

government and when asked, where would they go, where 

would be the best place in Canada to go, they said 

Saskatchewan. 

 



3168 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2009 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Weyburn. 

 

Lottery Proceeds Distribution Agreement 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

rise in the House today to tell members about the new and 

unprecedented five-year agreement for the distribution of 

lottery proceeds. 

 

Last Friday I had the pleasure of signing the agreement along 

with representatives of the Saskatchewan Lotteries Trust Fund 

for Sport, Culture and Recreation. Those representatives were 

Dale Holmes, president of Sask Sport, Randy Kinnee, president 

of Saskatchewan Parks and Recreation Association, and Peter 

England, president of SaskCulture. And I also had the pleasure 

of addressing delegates this past weekend at the SaskCulture 

and SPRA [Saskatchewan Parks and Recreation Association] 

annual conferences to bring this outstanding news to their 

attention. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our lottery-funded system supports 1,200 

organizations and more than 12,000 community groups across 

the province. Through them more than 600,000 Saskatchewan 

people take part in sport, culture, and recreation activities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the new agreement, a five-year agreement, the 

first agreement of its kind in the 35-year history of our lottery 

system, runs until March 31st, 2014, and directs more lottery 

revenues going into sport, culture, and recreation into every 

corner of our great province. These new measures will provide 

stable funding so organizations can plan for the longer term 

rather than project by project. An overall increase in funding 

will help to address inflationary and operating pressures which 

in turn will allow for increased investment in programming. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‟ve also enhanced accountability and oversight 

measures to the benefit of all Saskatchewan residents. 

 

The Saskatchewan Lotteries Trust Fund is administered through 

Sask Sport Inc., Sask Culture Inc., and the Saskatchewan Parks 

and Recreation Association. This lottery system will fund . . . 

sport, culture, and recreation is indeed the envy of every 

province and will be all the more so now with the new 

agreement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with the new lottery agreement in place and the 

active family benefit that this government announced in 

December 2008, we expect that more Saskatchewan citizens, in 

particular our young children, our young people will be able to 

participate in sport, culture, and recreational programming 

across the province. And I‟d like to thank the members of each 

of these groups for the work that they do to foster culture, sport, 

and recreation in our communities. 

 

The thousand of volunteers within the 12,000 groups are truly 

the backbone of the entire lottery-funded system that delivers 

excellent programming throughout Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, 

this agreement is another example of how partnerships 

strengthened by this government enhance our way of life and 

make Saskatchewan a great place to make a living and an even 

better place to make a life. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s a pleasure to rise today on 

behalf of the official opposition just to make a few brief 

comments. And I want to thank the minister for providing me 

today with a copy of his statement just before the House. 

 

As the minister noted, Sask Sport, SaskCulture, and the 

Saskatchewan Parks and Recreation Association and their 

member organizations do important work on behalf of 

Saskatchewan communities. They help Saskatchewan people to 

live more active, more fulfilling lives, and contribute to the fact 

that our province is such a wonderful place to live, work, and 

raise a family. 

 

Anything that provides these organizations with additional 

resources and promises to help more people participate in sport, 

cultural, and recreational programming is good news. On the 

face of it, this announcement seems promising. However with 

these kinds of announcements, the devil is always in the details. 

I will be consulting widely with these organizations in the 

coming weeks and months to see whether or not this new 

agreement delivers everything that the minister promises. 

 

And I can‟t help but remember that this government is the 

government that increased camping fees in provincial parks. 

This is the government that wants to spend more than $7 

million in taxpayers‟ money on a vanity pavilion at the 

Vancouver Olympics. And this is the government that 

announced its plans to fully examine the future of Blackstrap 

Provincial Park — most recently on October 16th — but so far 

all they‟ve done is close down the ski hill. 

 

And this is the government that touts its active families benefit 

as evidence of its support for recreational opportunities for 

families. But just over a week ago, they announced that this 

uptake on the program was going to be 10 per cent less than 

previously budgeted. And I don‟t know anyone, Mr. Speaker, 

who can now afford to put their kids in hockey or dance lessons 

now who wasn‟t able to do so before. 

 

So the jury is still out on this government‟s commitment to 

sport, recreation, and cultural opportunities for Saskatchewan 

families. But the opposition is hopeful that this new five-year 

lottery agreement will deliver everything the government and 

the minister promises. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I 

request leave to make a statement with respect to the reserve 

forces in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. The minister may proceed. 

 

 



October 26, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3169 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

 

Proclamation of Reserve Forces Day 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I‟m very pleased and honoured to see so many of our 

reservists in the gallery here today. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I‟d also like to say that I‟m very proud that 

for the first time in our province‟s history a premier has named 

a Member of the Legislative Assembly as the military liaison 

for the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, there are only 

three other provinces in the country that have designated one of 

their members to do this most worthy position. Also, Mr. 

Speaker, I feel incredibly honoured and blessed to be appointed 

as Saskatchewan‟s first military liaison and to be able to 

represent our province in this way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the reasons Canada is the best country in 

the world is because of those who are ever willing to protect 

and defend the freedom of our citizens. And that is why in April 

of this year the Government of Saskatchewan recognized the 

courage and sacrifice of Saskatchewan‟s military personnel by 

displaying tribute decals on all government vehicles. The 

Support Our Troops decals were designed specifically for the 

provincial government, incorporating the symbolic yellow 

ribbon with green from the Saskatchewan flag, the 

Saskatchewan coat of arms, and a red maple leaf. 

 

And that is also why, Mr. Speaker, the Government of 

Saskatchewan created the Scholarship of Honour. This 

scholarship is available to returning soldiers and to the spouse 

and children of permanently disabled or fallen soldiers. Since 

announcing the scholarship in March of this year, 11 have been 

awarded and more will be awarded in the coming year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the important groups that works so hard to 

protect and defend our way of life is the reserve forces. Since 

1855, our reserve forces have worked to defend Canada and 

contribute to international peace and security. Reservists 

increase not only the quality but the quantity of our military 

forces. They are everyday citizens who voluntarily devote their 

time to military service. 

 

Internationally, reservists have served on Canadian Forces 

missions in the Middle East, Cypress, Bosnia, Haiti, Africa, and 

Afghanistan. At home, reservists have responded to shorter 

term domestic emergencies such as floods, forest fires, and they 

have assisted with search and rescue missions and relief 

operations. 

 

In Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, we have eight reserve force 

units. Five are located in Regina, two in Saskatoon, and one in 

Moose Jaw. Mr. Speaker, approximately 700 reservists train 

and serve in these units, some of whom are here today in the 

gallery. 

 

These reservists represent a long tradition of dedication and 

excellence. They specialize in the fields of artillery, medical, 

support services, infantry, armoured reconnaissance, and 

communications and signals. And they have demonstrated the 

skill, professionalism, and teamwork befitting of their 

reputation and importance to our nation‟s defence. 

As we heard last week in the Throne Speech, over 20 

Saskatchewan reservists were preparing for a duty of 

Afghanistan while the members of this Assembly were 

preparing to return to this session. I was very pleased and 

honoured to be part of the ceremony that said farewell and bid 

the troops a safe journey and a safe return that was held at the 

RUSI, the Regina United Services Institute a week ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we owe a debt of gratitude for the contributions of 

Saskatchewan reservists who serve our country. And that is 

why, Mr. Speaker, I‟m proud to announce — in order to further 

express our gratitude and to recognize the contributions of those 

that selflessly protect the ideals and freedoms we all enjoy here 

in our province and our country — the Premier will sign a 

proclamation designating today, October the 26th, as Reserve 

Forces Day in Saskatchewan immediately following these 

proceedings. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I encourage everyone to take a moment today to 

reflect on the dedication and commitment of our reservists and I 

invite them to join the Premier later in the Legislative Library to 

proclaim Reserve Forces Day in Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[14:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟d like to 

thank the minister for providing a statement, a copy of a 

statement earlier this afternoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we should take every opportunity we can to thank 

the men and women who wear the uniform of the Armed Forces 

on behalf of all of us. Mr. Speaker, many men and women in 

this country give of themselves day in and day out to make sure 

that Canada is the great country that it is. And at every 

opportunity, we should all stand and give our appreciation to 

those very brave men and women throughout our country and 

around the world who are working to make Saskatchewan and 

Canada the great place it is to live. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to join with the minister as well in special 

recognition of our reservists and their role in making Canada a 

safe place to live, making our province a better place for each 

and every one of us on a daily basis. And, Mr. Speaker, we in 

the official opposition join with the minister in congratulating 

the men and women of our reserve forces and thanking them for 

the services they provide on behalf of all of us, and many times 

facing very difficult situations, facing dangerous situations, and 

doing it on behalf of all of us. 

 

We‟d also like to thank their families because their families also 

give a great deal in allowing them to undertake their duties and 

protecting people around the world and helping make this world 

a better place. It‟s not only the reservists themselves or the men 

and women of our Armed Forces, but their families, their 

children make sacrifices. They don‟t have their mom and dad 

with them when they need their mom and dad home sometimes. 

They don‟t have that brother or sister when they need that 

support. They don‟t have that husband or wife when they need 

that person to lean on most. 



3170 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2009 

So we in the official opposition join with the minister in 

thanking the members of the reserve today that are with us, and 

in the proclamation of today as reservist day. Thank you. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Hon. Mr. McMorris, seconded by 

Ms. Ross, and the proposed amendment to the main motion 

moved by Mr. Lingenfelter.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I had the 

pleasure to begin my remarks on Thursday of last week when 

we first entered into the debate on the Speech from the Throne. 

And I‟m very pleased to be able to continue those today. 

 

But there is a couple things, just to recap from last Thursday, 

Mr. Speaker. I sat down and had a look through the actual 

Speech from the Throne. I‟d done a bit of a rough tally when I 

was sitting, first in the Assembly listening to the speech and 

then sat down actually to make sure I had things right and that 

I‟d actually been listening to the way things were laid out. And 

it gets down to there are about 52 — well over 50 anyway — 

old initiatives that are talked about quite glowingly in the 

Speech from the Throne and about 14 or 15 new ones. 

 

And I‟m being rather, I think, lenient and generous in saying 14 

or 15 new ones because, Mr. Speaker, if we look at things that 

the government and government members have spoken about 

and announced at other various times . . . But I thought I‟d be 

generous with this because after all a Speech from the Throne 

really is to look ahead to the year ahead and beyond, Mr. 

Speaker, about the government‟s vision for the province, what 

they plan on doing, and the direction that we plan on going. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I have to say, after only two years in 

government, they seem to be spending an awful lot of time 

looking in the rear-view mirror and enjoying some past 

successes. 

 

Now I guess governing is easy when you‟ve got billions of 

dollars in the bank. And the Premier made the comment on 

Thursday that he was quite pleased with having $800 million in 

the rainy day account, but he forgot to tell us that it was well up 

over 2 billion within the last year. So 800 million could be a 

stretch to say that that‟s going to do this government in the 

rainy day fund until the end of their term, which is a short two 

years away. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it‟s not all that rosy. And like I say, this 

government seems to be spending an inordinate amount of time 

looking backwards instead of looking towards a future for the 

province and putting forward a vision for the province. They‟ve 

blown the money and now they have to start making some 

difficult decisions and putting in place some actual priorities. 

And I have to say, they don‟t seem up for the challenge at this 

point in time. 

 

There was a number of areas that I think the Speech from the 

Throne was extremely short on. There isn‟t a lot of issues, or 

hardly anything that we could find, that really spoke to the 

people‟s priorities across the province. And, Mr. Speaker, I, like 

many of my colleagues, we were across the province going in 

smaller tours in certain areas, spending time in our 

constituencies, having an opportunity to sit down and speak to 

constituents and listen to their concerns. 

 

And there really isn‟t a lot in this Throne Speech that addresses 

or even speaks to or acknowledges the rising cost of living that 

we heard from many of our constituents is a problem and is 

getting to be a growing concern right across the province. Many 

people are having trouble making ends meet. 

 

We just have to look at the cost of housing, the cost of rent 

increasing substantially over this past year. Utility rates, the 

government has put forward utility rate increases right across 

the board. And we should be expecting more soon with our car 

insurance continuing to rise — just one more area where the 

costs are going to increase again. Camping fees, I mean, really 

put a dint in some people‟s holidays, not being able to spend the 

time camping and enjoy Saskatchewan‟s parks. And also for 

seniors and many other families, the cost of prescription drugs. 

 

And I think overall when you look at the announcements that 

have been on a regular basis about the inflation rate here in the 

province of Saskatchewan, that our province now has the 

distinction of being the province with the highest inflation right 

across the country. So that‟s not good, and it‟s not good for 

addressing the issues that people have. 

 

There wasn‟t any commitment in the Speech from the Throne 

about overcrowded foster homes or the recruitment of more 

foster families. 

 

And the distressing part is, Mr. Speaker, is that this 

government, they will touch on something once and then figure 

it‟s over and done with for the next four years. And every time 

there‟s a question, the response from whatever department, the 

minister stands up and said, oh well we did this back when we 

were first elected. 

 

Well that‟s two years ago. Situation changes. Circumstance for 

families changes. Communities have changed. The needs have 

changed. And these are issues that need to be addressed on a 

continual basis, not just once every four years or worse, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And a growing concern across the province truly is the number 

of unemployed, and the minister keeps pointing to the fact that 

actual job numbers have gone up. But what we have to realize 

and what the minister needs to realize is that they also count 

part-time jobs as a job, so we are looking at unemployment 

rates rising. 

 

It‟s pretty difficult to live on unemployment insurance if you 

have ever tried it. Sorry, I‟m calling it by its old title. It should 

be referred to as employment insurance. But it‟s pretty meagre 

to sustain a family on employment insurance rates, and we‟re 

seeing the numbers continue to grow across the province. And 



October 26, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3171 

all you had to do was listen to the news over the weekend, Mr. 

Speaker, and we heard more bad news for potash workers and 

for workers in Saskatoon that work at the Case New Holland 

factory. 

 

And the minister can stand up and in kind of rebuttal or 

response to that he‟ll say, well we‟ve got the highest number of 

people working in the province. Well whoop-de-do, Mr. 

Speaker. That‟s cold comfort for the families that are trying to 

live on employment insurance and looking for new jobs after 

they have been somewhere for a number of years. 

 

Sears call centre, I mean we‟ve seen a number of the people that 

were out of work after being there 12, 16 years. It‟s pretty 

difficult to replace jobs in current economic condition the way 

it is. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there‟s also been some really bad choices and 

some misplaced priorities in this budget, the past budget, and 

we‟re seeing the effects of that, I believe, in this Throne Speech. 

The Premier said the other day they made a mistake on the 

potash. Well oops, that‟s 20 per cent of our budget that was 

relying on potash, so we will see what happens out of these 

budget adjustments that have to be made. 

 

And of course the silliest thing ever was now we‟re blaming it 

on the budget process. It‟s not that they‟ve got rid of a lot of the 

senior civil servants who had the experience in this area. It‟s not 

that they may have taken the advice from the wrong people, or 

it‟s not that they may have adjusted the advice they took and 

thought they knew better and made their own projections. But 

now they‟re claiming that we need a new budgetary process, 

that somehow that is going to fix this, and that it‟s never going 

to happen again. 

 

So I guess if you can‟t take the blame . . . Now isn‟t that what 

the Minister of Health just stood up and said in the question 

period? He said well at least if they have made a mistake, 

they‟ll stand up and take the blame for it or they‟ll admit it or 

. . . Well now all of a sudden it‟s the budget process that 

screwed up 20 per cent of the revenue from the budget 

projections that we‟re all going to be seeing cutbacks from and 

delays in some pretty major health projects. 

 

So that‟s a real problem. And I guess you can blame the process 

if you like, but we‟ll just have to keep tabs on them when the 

budget comes down next spring and have a look at the numbers. 

And when the mid-term financial report comes out this fall . . . 

Actually the mid-term financial report should be out this 

November, so we‟ll see what the actual numbers are. 

 

I know the Leader of the Opposition was up asking questions 

the other day. And the Premier and minister of industry — sorry 

I can‟t remember the rest of the title — and also the House 

Leader were having a big chuckle when the Leader of the 

Opposition stated the fact that potash revenues had dropped 69 

per cent. And they all busted out laughing like it was a big joke. 

And actually they said, well, ho, ho, ho, it‟s not 69. We wish it 

was 69. It‟s considerably higher. And someone says, well it‟s 

up to 95 per cent now. Well it‟s not really funny, not when . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — The deficit‟s going to be even bigger. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — That‟s right. We‟re going to end up in a deficit 

for sure, and we are going to see some changes in the debt of 

the province. And I mean it has all kinds of financial 

implications right across the board, so there‟s a number of areas 

that are of concern. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many other areas that we could address 

in this, and I know many of my colleagues are anxious to get up 

and make comments. 

 

But I just have to comment on the musical choices at the end of 

the Speech from the Throne, all very good songs . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . No, they were. They were very good songs. 

But I almost wonder if there wasn‟t a message in there for the 

government. Because when you look at the words from those 

songs, “The Man in the Mirror”: 

 

I see the kids in the street 

With not enough to eat 

Who am I to be blind 

Pretending not to see their needs 

 

A summer‟s disregard 

A broken bottle top 

And a one man‟s soul 

They follow each other 

On the wind ya‟ know 

‟Cause they got nowhere to go 

That‟s why I want you to know. 

 

And then it goes into the chorus. Kids on the street, poverty, 

homelessness — these are issues that Saskatchewan people are 

dealing with, Mr. Speaker. And there are many, many other 

lines in the song. 

 

And I know the first song that they sang was “Let‟s Call the 

Whole Thing Off.” And that also has a number of options when 

we look at this Throne Speech and look at the options that are 

open to the government. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it‟s going to be an interesting fall to see 

where the mid-term report comes down on the financial 

situation of the province, and hopefully it was some poor 

revenue projections, not just poor management by this 

government. But, Mr. Speaker, I wholeheartedly will support 

the amendment put forward by the Leader of the Opposition, 

and I look forward to the vote being held. 

 

[14:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

it‟s a pleasure to rise today to be able to respond to the Speech 

from the Throne. As I look at the front page of the Speech from 

the Throne, it says, the third session. Mr. Speaker, it seems like 

only yesterday that we were elected to be the Government of 

Saskatchewan and have the opportunity to present speeches 

from the throne to this legislature. 

 

I know it‟s only been two years, that it has been two years, but 

it seems to have gone very fast, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, gone 

very fast because we‟ve had so many things to do. We‟ve had 



3172 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2009 

so many initiatives to drive forward and, Mr. Speaker, I will get 

into talking about some of them. 

 

But there was so many problems left by the members opposite 

when they were the government that it has been an 

action-packed, work-filled two years, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, just to get a small handle on the problems that they left 

for the people of Saskatchewan has taken us two years, Mr. 

Speaker. But we are starting to get a handle on them, Mr. 

Speaker. We have new programs and new initiatives that are 

coming forward to deal with them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But before I get into those, I would like to talk a little bit about 

my constituency of Cannington, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a pleasure to 

be able to represent the people of Cannington in this legislature, 

and I would thank the people there for having had the 

opportunity to represent them for the last 18 years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while the members opposite are all about doom 

and gloom, Mr. Speaker, about the sky is falling . . . We hear 

the members opposite always talking about how the sky is 

falling. It‟s the Finance critic, the member from Regina . . . I 

can‟t think of the name of his . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Rosemont. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Regina Rosemont that is always 

concerned about the disaster that is the finances of the province, 

Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we have one of the best if not the 

best budgetary systems in Canada and indeed, Mr. Speaker, the 

world. We have the financing in place, Mr. Speaker, the 

finances to support this province. 

 

And yes, there is an issue with potash, Mr. Speaker. The issue 

is, Mr. Speaker, that the prices have dropped from their historic 

record, Mr. Speaker, of over $1,000 a tonne. But, Mr. Speaker, 

they continue to be three times what they were in 2005. The 

price in 2005 was roughly $125 a tonne. Now they‟re 

estimating because it‟s fluid right now. It hasn‟t been 

completely settled. But the contracts seem to be coming in at 

between 4 and $500, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, all we are 

awaiting, Mr. Speaker, is some sales. And that will be 

happening because around the world there were reasonable 

crops. Mr. Speaker, people, when reasonable crops are 

harvested, they need to put fertilizer on the soil, and they will 

be purchasing potash, Mr. Speaker. 

 

However unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, potash is not mined in my 

constituency. But we have other resources, Mr. Speaker, in the 

Cannington constituency. Agriculture is probably one of the 

largest employers in my constituency, and while we don‟t need 

to use potash, we certainly do use other fertilizer products, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we had an excellent crop in our area this year. 

There is a challenge in getting, in some of the areas, in getting 

the crop off — particularly flax is still out there. But even 

though everyone would wish to have their flax in the bin, it‟s 

not unusual that we would be harvesting flax in late October or 

November, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I do know that in a 

number of the other areas of the province it‟s more of a 

challenge to harvest a crop this year because of the inclement 

weather.  

The member from Moose Jaw Wakamow was talking about 

camping, Mr. Speaker, and fewer people were going camping 

according to her. According to the minister, that‟s not the case. 

But it was a cold summer, Mr. Speaker. It was a cold summer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people . . . The minister, the former minister 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, the member opposite wants 

to correct me in referring to the individual as a minister. Former 

minister, Mr. Speaker. I‟m giving the member the benefit of her 

long history in the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the current minister, Mr. Speaker, says that there 

was the largest number of people utilizing the parks this 

summer, even though it was a cold summer, Mr. Speaker. And 

that in part was the reason why the harvest is late this year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other segment of the economy that is very 

prevalent in Cannington is the oil industry, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the oil industry in Cannington is doing very well. It 

did slow down for a short period of time, but the drilling is 

renewed. And what it also allowed, that short slowdown period, 

was for the service industries to catch up and get the work that 

they had in the system completed. 

 

They are still very busy, Mr. Speaker. I was talking with some 

of them over the weekend, and they have all their employees 

working, Mr. Speaker. They‟re keeping up with the current 

projects. But as I drive back and forth to the constituency I see 

many rigs working just from the highway, Mr. Speaker, and 

there‟s lots of other areas that I can‟t see from the highway as I 

drive home, Mr. Speaker. So there are lots of rigs working 

throughout the area, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, and the good 

part of it is, at least for Cannington, is that a good number of 

those rigs are situated and their homes and their employees‟ 

homes are in the Cannington constituency, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there‟s a lot . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well 

my colleague says some of them are from Weyburn. Yes, Mr. 

Speaker, there are a few of them from Weyburn — employees 

and rigs. The Leader of the Opposition was concerned. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other part though is that there‟s many new 

businesses going up in the Cannington constituency to service 

this growth in the oil industry. You drive 33 Highway. You 

drive 13 Highway. You drive 18 Highway, Mr. Speaker. In 

every one of those communities you will see large new 

buildings going up to service the oil industry, Mr. Speaker. So 

we‟re having a construction boom throughout the Southeast, the 

same as we have a boom in residential, Mr. Speaker. Many, 

many of the communities are not on their first subdivision, new 

subdivision, but they‟re on their second new subdivision. 

 

And this is something that hasn‟t happened, Mr. Speaker, in this 

province for a good many years. There was no growth like that 

when the former members were government. It‟s been many, 

many years, Mr. Speaker, since there has been growth in our 

constituency. And fact is, Mr. Speaker, I‟m actually looking 

forward to the next census and redistribution because every 

time in the past my constituency has got larger and larger and 

larger. If we were to have that census and redistribution today, 

Mr. Speaker, my constituency would be shrinking, Mr. Speaker, 

because there are more and more people living there — 

shrinking in a geographic sense, Mr. Speaker. 



October 26, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3173 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate the new members, the 

Leader of the Opposition and the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale, on their election. I wish them well in the House. 

Certainly the Leader of the Official Opposition is an 

experienced member, has spent many years here in the past. The 

new member from Saskatoon Riversdale, I would like to 

welcome her especially, Mr. Speaker, because this is a new 

experience for her and I am sure she will do very well. 

 

The candidates who opposed those two new members for the 

Saskatchewan Party did a very good job in the campaign, and I 

would like to congratulate them as well for well run campaigns, 

Mr. Speaker. I know they ran a very good campaign, and I 

would suggest that they also frightened the members opposite 

somewhat, and made them get out there and do perhaps a little 

more work than they had expected to have to do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some of the issues that the member from Moose 

Jaw Wakamow was saying that we were ignoring, Mr. Speaker, 

in fact, if she thinks we‟re ignoring them, she has her head in 

the sand. 

 

Mr. Speaker, health plays a prominent role in this Speech from 

the Throne. And that is certainly an issue, Mr. Speaker, that we 

have been concentrating on. Mr. Speaker, there are many 

initiatives taking place. And fact is the Minister of Health, my 

seatmate, has set targets, Mr. Speaker, targets — something the 

members opposite absolutely refused to do. And fact is the 

former minister of Health I believe it was, said, well if we set 

targets, we might not make them, so you can‟t set targets. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this government is prepared to set targets, 

and to set ambitious targets, Mr. Speaker, in reducing waiting 

lists down in four years to no more than 90 days, Mr. Speaker 

— no more than 90 days. 

 

But yet, Mr. Speaker, over the years in opposition, I don‟t know 

how many people I had from Saskatchewan that contacted me 

because they were on a waiting list for a year, two years, three 

years. And fact is, I remember one individual, Mr. Speaker, 

from the community of Carlyle who was a good supporter of 

the members opposite who, in a rink full of people, talked to me 

about how long it was taking to get knee surgery. This 

individual had been on the waiting list for over three years to 

get knee surgery done, and she was disgusted with it. And fact 

is, Mr. Speaker, the individual, as I walked away after talking to 

her, waited until I got about 20 feet away and hollered so 

everybody could hear, I‟ll be supporting you in the next 

election. She had abandoned the NDP because of the lack of 

health care and health care concerns that were being 

demonstrated by the members opposite. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Have you talked to her in the last year? 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Yes, actually I have talked to her in the 

last year. And she has had her surgery; and she still supports me 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Thank you. And she does realize 

that we have made changes, that we are moving ahead, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we‟ve increased the number of training 

seats for doctors, almost double the number of seats, Mr. 

Speaker, from 60 to 120. Mr. Speaker, we‟ve doubled the 

number — not doubled, Mr. Speaker. We‟re moving the 

number of training seats for nurses, I believe, up to 700- 

and-some. This was from a low under the NDP when they were 

in government of 160 — 160. 

 

But I can understand why, Mr. Speaker, the NDP would have 

had such low expectations or such low needs for recruiting and 

retaining and training medical staff because they believed and 

supported the fact of shrinking Saskatchewan. One of the 

former ministers who‟s no longer in the House said the more 

that leave, the more there is left for the rest of us. I guess that 

would have included the Leader of the Opposition. When he left 

for Alberta, that meant there was more for Eldon Lautermilch, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite continued to ignore health 

care. And fact is, Mr. Speaker, when you look at what happened 

with long-term care . . . The member from Cumberland raises 

the issue about long-term care. Well, Mr. Speaker, his 

government was the government for 16 years, his party, and 

didn‟t build the La Ronge long-term care, Mr. Speaker. And 

fact is through the ‟70s, the NDP froze construction of 

long-term care. Through the ‟90s, they didn‟t build any 

long-term care, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP during their times as government ignores 

seniors. They talk a lot about it, Mr. Speaker, but given the 

opportunity to do something about it, they ignore the issue. 

 

Today the former minister of Health from North Battleford 

stands up with a petition calling for this government to build a 

new long-term, new Battleford health centre, Mr. Speaker, 

provincial centre. And yet one of the other members stands up 

in her speech and says, but we left you over $2 billion. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, if they left over $2 billion in the bank, why did the 

minister, the former minister of Health not build the Battleford 

health centre, Mr. Speaker? Why was that? Why was that? 

 

He didn‟t build the facility in his own constituency, the 

provincial hospital there. He didn‟t build the long-term care 

facility in La Ronge. Mr. Speaker, he didn‟t build facilities 

anywhere. And yet they claim to have all this money in the 

bank. They want to claim poverty when it comes time to fixing 

health care, but yet they want to claim a largesse of money 

many other times, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Official Opposition on Thursday 

during question period was commenting across the aisle, be 

fair; be fair. Well, Mr. Speaker, I would like to remind the 

member from Regina Douglas Park who‟s the Leader of the 

Official Opposition about something he said many years ago 

during a debate about Rafferty-Alameda in this House and the 

fact that the dams had filled up with water, and yet the 

government of the day, the NDP, continued to talk about the 

dams would never fill. 

 

The member from Regina Douglas Park, the current Leader of 

the Opposition said, and I quote, Mr. Speaker, this is what he 

said to the former premier, Grant Devine: whoever said it was 

going to be fair? That‟s what his comment was, Mr. Speaker, to 

the former premier. Whoever said it was going to be fair? You 

know, and I can understand if he doesn‟t recall that. That was a 

heckle across the floor. 



3174 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2009 

You know, but, Mr. Speaker, I think perhaps the former leader 

of the NDP, Mr. Calvert, after hearing some of the commentary 

this past week, might think about fairness, about how fair was it 

that the current leader of the NDP was giving advice to Mr. 

Calvert‟s opponents on how to defeat him. You know, Mr. 

Calvert and his former supporters in caucus and his former 

supporters out in the party may have been having an “Et tu, 

Brute?” moment last week, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can certainly understand why the members 

opposite in the NDP party don‟t believe in the death penalty for 

treason because, Mr. Speaker, the actions of the current leader 

of the NDP might be considered treasonous in some quarters, 

Mr. Speaker, when you‟re talking about trying to defeat their 

own leader, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite, I think, need 

to give some thought and consideration to how their current 

leader dealt with their former leader in the past. How did he 

respect him, how did he deal with him, and why was he trying 

to get rid of him while he was the leader, Mr. Speaker? Mr. 

Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member from The Battlefords on 

his feet? 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, to ask for relevancy. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Members are well aware 

of the fact that over the years the Throne Speech has a broad 

interpretation. In fact the motion brought forward and then the 

amendment certainly allowed for broad interpretation in regards 

to the opportunity to speak. And while I take the member from 

The Battlefords‟ words under advisement, I just want to 

acknowledge the fact that members have the ability to comment 

in regards to all of the debate in the Throne Speech. So I 

recognize the member from Cannington. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. You know, over the past number of years, there 

have been members of this House who have been challenged 

legally, you might say. And, Mr. Speaker, from time to time 

there have been members of the Assembly that have been 

investigated for various and sundry reasons. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, to my knowledge, there‟s only currently one 

member in that situation today. That is the member from Regina 

Douglas Park, Mr. Speaker, whose involvement in his 

leadership race membership scandal, Mr. Speaker, is being 

investigated by the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police]. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it seems that approximately 1,000 

memberships showed up at the NDP party, with small 

denomination bills, but were not necessarily signed by the 

people whose name was on them. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to talking about what a person 

recalls or doesn‟t recall, Mr. Speaker, it seems to be an ongoing 

theme with the member opposite. You know, the members 

opposite talk about how much money is available and how 

much money isn‟t available. They keep asking, where did the 

money go, Mr. Speaker. You know, the members on this side of 

the House asked the same question, Mr. Speaker. We asked, 

where did the money go when they were government? 

 

You know, I recollect an issue around Channel Lake, Mr. 

Speaker, which lost over $10 million, Mr. Speaker — over $10 

million in Channel Lake. The president of SaskPower was 

removed because of that, Mr. Speaker. But it seems that in this 

loss and then the subsequent sale of Channel Lake, there was $5 

million disappeared; $5 million just disappeared into thin air 

while they were government, Mr. Speaker. And in fact is, it was 

the Leader of the Official Opposition who was the minister in 

charge of CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan] at the time who was responsible, Mr. Speaker, 

for those sales. 

 

Mr. Speaker, $5 million just up and disappeared into thin air, 

and it didn‟t even seem to be particularly bothersome for the 

members opposite. And fact is, it didn‟t look like they even put 

much of an effort into trying to find that money. 

 

And something else I recall, Mr. Speaker, was about that same 

time, just a little bit after that, I was walking up to the front of 

the legislature one day and a former member from the NDP was 

walking up to the steps at the same time — Walter Jess. And 

the evening before we had both been out to the . . . later the 

official opposition house, his house north of Regina. He had 

invited all the members of the legislature to come to his house 

for a barbecue. So we went out because he had a brand new 

place. We wanted to have a look at it. 

 

And we‟re walking up to the front of the House — the 

legislature — Mr. Speaker, and Walter Jess says to me, you 

know if you or I had a house like that in our constituency, we 

couldn‟t get elected. Well you know, Mr. Speaker, I agreed 

with him because that 7,000 square foot mansion would have 

certainly caught the attention of all of my voters. He was saying 

it would have caught the attention of all of his voters in 

Redberry. But it seemed that for the Leader of the Official 

Opposition who represented Regina Elphinstone — one of the 

poorest ridings in the province — having a 7,000 square foot 

mansion wasn‟t a problem, Mr. Speaker. But I‟m not sure if he 

recalls that particular barbecue, Mr. Speaker, or the fact that we 

had the opportunity to visit out there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some of the other issues that are taking place 

across the province scene is about education, Mr. Speaker. 

Education is an important component to our . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . You know, it would be nice if the member 

from Regina Walsh Acres would actually listen to what I have 

to say and perhaps gain some knowledge and understanding of 

what happened in the past . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The member is aware of the 

fact that they‟re not to draw other members into the debate. All 

members will have an opportunity to debate at some point in 

time. I recognize the member from Cannington. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

education is very important to this province so I‟m very pleased 

to be able to thank the Minister of Education and the 

Government of Saskatchewan for building a new school at 



October 26, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3175 

Oxbow. 

 

It‟s been on the books, the B-1s have been there for a dozen 

years, and finally we had a Minister of Education who 

recognized the need. We‟re combining three schools into one, 

Mr. Speaker, and it‟s certainly going to be a benefit to a 

community that‟s growing. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank again the people of 

Cannington for their support, for allowing me to represent them 

in this constituency. I believe this Speech from the Throne 

provides a framework and a way forward that‟s going to be 

very, very beneficial to both the people and the province of 

Saskatchewan. I will not be supporting the amendment, but I 

will be voting in favour of the Speech from the Throne. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s once again 

my privilege to rise and speak in support of the Speech from the 

Throne. In keeping with the practice here, I will be making 

some comments about my constituency, some thanks to people, 

and offering some personal comments. 

 

I would, Mr. Speaker, like to take this opportunity to thank the 

citizens of Saskatoon Southeast for their continuing support. 

My constituency continues to see rapid growth in a number of 

areas — in particular, Mr. Speaker, in the area of Stonebridge. I 

am very pleased that my nephew Curtis Morgan and his wife 

Cara and their new baby have chosen to take up residence in my 

constituency. And while I hope that my election support is 

never that close that I need one or two votes, it‟s always good to 

know that there‟s one or two or three that you can count on, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would also like to recognize my constituency 

assistant Rita Flaman Jarrett, who continues to grieve for her 

son who passed away unexpectedly last December. She‟s on 

extended leave and probably will be for some continuing time, 

so I would ask all members to keep her in their prayers. 

 

I also would like to recognize the fill-in that I have in the office, 

Gordon Rutten. He has done fill-in work in a number of 

different constituencies and is now going to be acclaimed as the 

mayor of Martensville. When he learned that he was going to be 

acclaimed as the mayor of Martensville, he came into the office 

and informed me of that. I asked him whether it would be 

mandatory that I call him your worship. He thought about it for 

a minute and he said, does that mean that I have to call you 

minister? And I said, well probably. And he said, well then we 

won‟t be doing any of that. I respect his informal manner and 

appreciate his continuing good work. 

 

He is assisted by Laine Goertz, who is a student in the 

legislature during the summer and she‟s a university student in 

Saskatoon, and I want to thank her for her contribution. 

 

I would also ask members to keep Denise Batters, my chief of 

staff, who lost her husband under very tragic circumstances 

earlier this year, and would ask all members to keep her in their 

thoughts and prayers. 

 

In my office here I‟m very ably assisted by Lara, Michelle, 

Judy, and Jean who do very good work, and I thank them for 

that and hope to see it continue for a very long time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, over the summer months Saskatoon lost two of its 

finest citizens, Helen and Garth Swan, long-time residents and 

good citizens, owners of United Cab. These two people worked 

in elections going back to the first election of the Right 

Honourable Ray Hnatyshyn. These people came and worked for 

me in both the 2003 and 2000 election. They put up signs, 

answered phones, and worked tirelessly in spite of the fact that 

both of them were well into their 70s. They wanted nothing 

more, they wanted no other thanks and recognition other than 

peace, order, and good government. And, Mr. Speaker, that‟s 

something that this government intends to give their memory, 

that memory. 

 

I would like to offer my sympathy to their daughter Laurie 

Suppes and her husband Scott, and their stepson Robert 

Crichton, good people who have sustained a significant loss by 

losing both parents within a matter of weeks. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I comment as well, very briefly, on the municipal 

election and would like to urge all members to get out and 

exercise their franchise. Saskatoon is currently under the 

direction of Mayor Don Atchison, a very hard-working 

individual, somebody that I cross paths with several times a 

week at social events, and somebody that is doing very hard 

work and doing a lot of benefit for the city of Saskatoon. 

 

In my constituency there was an acclamation for city councillor 

Tiffany Paulsen, and my neighbour Kevin Waugh is the 

Saskatoon public school board ward trustee. So I thank them for 

their continuing good work. And I‟m pleased that they don‟t 

have to go through an election but want to ensure that 

everybody is aware that the election is this week and want to 

ask them, all members, to get out and vote. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would be remiss if I did not comment on the 

by-elections held this last few weeks in Regina Douglas Park 

and in Riversdale. In the Douglas Park election, the Sask Party 

candidate was Kathleen Peterson, a good, hard-working 

individual — a lawyer, and I forgive her for that. Mr. Speaker, 

Ms. Peterson was a very good candidate, very hard-working and 

has indicated that she plans to run again. So I would like to urge 

the member from Regina Douglas Park to keep an eye over his 

shoulder because there is somebody else that is going to be 

watching him to make sure that he holds himself accountable. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Similarly in Saskatoon Riversdale, the Sask Party was 

represented by Corey O‟Soup, a hard-working teacher that went 

out and lives in the area, very committed. And to the new 

member from Saskatoon Riversdale, I would like to urge her as 

well to keep an eye over her shoulder because there‟s somebody 

there that will be holding her accountable. 

 

I would like to welcome both the new members from Saskatoon 

Riversdale and Regina Douglas Park to the legislature and look 

forward to working with them in their role as opposition 

members, and hope that the role as opposition members 

continues for an extended period of time. 



3176 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2009 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the outgoing MLAs 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly] for those constituencies 

and recognize their contributions to the province. Harry Van 

Mulligen was a long-time MLA, worked hard, and I enjoyed his 

dry wit. Mr. Speaker, the former Premier Lorne Calvert was 

also a long-time member of the legislature, was somebody that I 

crossed paths with many times in the city of Saskatoon at 

various civic events. And while our political differences were 

very deep, I have to recognize his hard work and thank him for 

his contributions to the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on a more personal note, my mother-in-law 

Mildred Simpson continues to reside in Rosetown. And as I‟d 

indicated in the spring, she is now dating a retired lawyer, 

Morley Aseltine. I forgive my mother-in-law for involving 

other lawyers in our family. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have been asked by some of the other members 

whether this is a good speech and I want to assure the members 

on both sides of the House that this is not merely a good speech, 

this is an excellent speech. And I continue to do it. 

 

I would like to conclude my personal remarks by thanking my 

wife Sandy for standing by me through a number of elections 

and election campaigns. Mr. Speaker, during the first election 

when I ran, we had a large billboard put up in Saskatoon. I went 

out . . . And it‟s a little unnerving when you see your face on a 

billboard 25 feet high. We stood at the foot of the billboard and 

looked up at it. My wife Sandy looked first at the billboard and 

looked over at me, then looked back and forth, and then turned 

to me and said, do you suppose they could airbrush your real 

face like that? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to turn to the Speech from the 

Throne. Mr. Speaker, we find ourselves in a somewhat different 

position from a year ago. When I made my reply to the Speech 

from the Throne last year, this was still a fairly new government 

still putting its election platform into action. Today, Mr. 

Speaker, we are at the mid-point of our mandate and I think we 

can look over the accomplishments of the past two years with a 

sense of satisfaction. This government has kept over 100 

election promises and is moving forward to fulfill the rest of our 

commitments. We are 70 per cent of the way towards our goal 

of recruiting 800 new nurses over four years. The final report of 

the patient-first review has been received and we are moving 

forward with its recommendations. We are taking a bold 

initiative to reduce surgical wait times and clear the backlog. 

 

Our province‟s debt has been reduced by nearly 40 per cent. 

Mr. Speaker, this is truly an accomplishment. These are 

challenging times but this government is meeting the challenge 

with prudence and fairness and careful planning. Saskatchewan 

is not immune from the economic downturn in Canada and 

around the world, but we are managing far better than many 

jurisdictions. We are growing and still managing to post the 

lowest unemployment rate in the country. 

 

Speaking for one of my portfolios, Justice, we continue our 

commitment to making Saskatchewan a safer place to live. Our 

goal to add 120 police officers in the province over four years is 

on track, and we are increasing courts and prosecution capacity 

to deal with the increased number of arrests. We are working 

throughout the province and with our colleagues across Western 

Canada to fight drug trafficking and gang crime. Our crime 

statistics are steadily improving and I think we must recognize 

the efforts of our police services, prosecutors, judiciary, and the 

many people who work in crime-prevention programs, either as 

employees or volunteers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the causes of crime are complex and will not be 

resolved overnight and with one single approach. However, we 

are seeing declines in both the crime rate and the severity of 

crimes. Since forming government we have created the northern 

gang and drug enforcement unit to address these issues in the 

North of the province. We have expanded the safer 

communities and neighbourhoods program to reduce illegal 

activity. We have put 60 more police officers on the street and 

hired three more prosecutors to handle the increased caseload. 

We have made substantial investments in new and expanded 

courthouse facilities. 

 

We are working with our colleagues across the country, and 

particularly in Western Canada, to address common issues. One 

of these is ending the practice of giving people in remand 

custody double credit for time served. Mr. Speaker, today we 

commend the federal government for passing and proclaiming 

this legislation which will end this outdated practice. And we, 

along with our western counterparts, have made representations 

to the Senate on this legislation. 

 

We would like to highlight some of the legislation that our 

government intends to introduce. There has already been a fair 

amount of publicity around our plan to ban the use of hand-held 

devices while driving. I must confess, Mr. Speaker, my own 

BlackBerry use is at the high end of the scale. My staff have 

been known to call it the crack berry which gives you some idea 

of my attachment to this device. With the drive between Regina 

and my constituency of Saskatoon, it is tempting to make a few 

calls on the road. But I have invested in a Bluetooth earpiece, 

and I will do my part to make Saskatchewan‟s highways safer. I 

encourage all drivers to do the same without waiting for the 

legislation to come in force. 

 

Our government intends to introduce legislation to regulate 

ticket sales in the province. Mr. Speaker, I wish to make it clear 

that we have no intention of interfering with the free and open 

marketplace or to tell event venues and promoters how to run 

their businesses. We do want to prevent individuals who may 

make . . . who have tickets they can‟t use, we want to prevent 

individuals who have tickets they can‟t use from selling them 

and recouping their money. We do not want to see people lose 

money on that. We simply want to make sure that customers 

have a fair chance to buy event tickets when they are released 

for sale. 

 

We will also introduce legislation to prevent members who are 

profession from disciplinary proceedings by merely resigning. 

Mr. Speaker, we have dozens of professions in Saskatchewan 

and the organizations that govern these professions all have 

disciplinary proceedings. Their purpose is to protect the public 

and the reputation of their professions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when a person is accused of professional 

misconduct and resigns to avoid the disciplinary process, 

several problems are created, the first being that the issue is 

never resolved. In other words, the air is never cleared. Mr. 



October 26, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3177 

Speaker, many people will remember the recent case of a judge 

who resigned before disciplinary proceedings were taken. There 

have been other cases in recent years where a person in a 

position of trust has resigned rather than face professional 

discipline. And most importantly, it is important for the person 

to move on to another jurisdiction with what looks like a clean 

resumé. Particularly in the case of professions such as teaching 

and health care, this is an alarming prospect. 

 

Some of these people have resigned for a sincere reason such as 

to spare their loved ones embarrassment. But the privilege of 

belonging to a profession means upholding the standards of that 

profession. Where a person falls short of those standards, they 

should be willing to shoulder the consequences. This legislation 

will ensure that they do so. 

 

Mr. Speaker, speaking from my other portfolio, SaskTel, I‟m 

pleased to report that the rural infrastructure program that will 

expand cellphone and Internet coverage across the province is 

on tap. This is an ambitious three-year program, Mr. Speaker. 

SaskTel‟s staff will be working very hard to meet its deadlines. 

It is a major investment in infrastructure but we need to make 

these type of investments to move our province forward. 

 

I would like to mention, Mr. Speaker, that we have done a 

number of things over the last year in SaskTel to ensure greater 

transparency, greater accountability with bookkeeping 

processes and practices. We have taken significant steps to 

ensure that we have done everything that we possibly can to 

expand infrastructure, and understand full well that good 

Internet and good bandwidth is imperative for the rapid growth 

and continuing growth of our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to end by saying that our 

government‟s Throne Speech sets out a plan for maintaining our 

balance and momentum and for moving our province forward. 

Saskatchewan has come a long way in two years. We‟re one of 

Canada‟s most notable success stories and, Mr. Speaker, we 

intend to continue. I will be voting against the amendment and 

in favour of the Speech from the Throne. 

 

I would like to encourage the members opposite to reflect on 

the content of that speech and to consider supporting it and 

show their support for the people of Saskatchewan. I would also 

like to encourage them, Mr. Speaker, that when they speak to 

the Throne Speech that they address the individual items in that 

Throne Speech and I‟d like them to address whether or not they 

support those individual items. I would like to give them the 

opportunity, when they rise from their seat to comment on the 

Speech from the Throne, to say whether or not they‟re in favour 

of reduced wait times, whether or not they‟re in favour of 

paying down the debt. I would like them to comment 

individually on each of the aspects of the Throne Speech. And I 

would like to give them the opportunity to support those items. 

 

If they do not vote for the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, I would 

like them to stand in their place and comment favourably on the 

items that they do support. If they disagree with things, let them 

speak specifically to what they disagree with and why. Let them 

say that they do not disagree with reducing wait times. Let them 

say why they don‟t disagree with that. Let them talk about 

what‟s wrong with reducing wait times. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can imagine nothing better than to have 

everybody in this House vote in favour of a Speech from the 

Throne that will continue to reduce debt, that will continue to 

promote and move our province forward. Thank you very 

much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s a pleasure to enter into the 

debate on the Throne Speech, but before starting my remarks on 

the Throne Speech I would like to congratulate our two new 

members of the legislature. First, the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale who I‟ve come to know as a tireless worker and an 

advocate on behalf of her constituents, and I welcome her to 

this legislature and I know she will do a fine job in the future. 

 

I also would like to comment on our leader, the member from 

Regina Douglas Park, who is also the second member that we 

elected and who brings not only experience, enthusiasm, and 

energy but also wisdom and a vision which our province so 

desperately needs during this time of budgetary problems and 

constraints. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to point out what is obvious, that 

there are now two New Democrat members here in the 

legislature but, Mr. Speaker, I think what‟s important to look at 

here is what occurred. And that is that after the recent victory in 

2007 by the Saskatchewan Party and all their bravado about 

how popular they are, they were still unable to make any 

inroads in these two by-elections. Now unlike . . . Mr. Speaker, 

if they would listen, if they would listen perhaps they will learn 

something here. They‟ll learn something here if they just listen, 

if they just listen. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, unlike Nova Scotia, Mr. Speaker, unlike 

Nova Scotia where the victorious NDP party recently took a 

seat from the Conservatives in the by-election, a seat which 

they never held and, Mr. Speaker, this was immediately right 

after the election. Now some members in this House will also 

remember what happened in the 1982 election in P.A. [Prince 

Albert]. Now there the Conservatives, Mr. Speaker — and some 

members here will remember — they won that first by-election 

after winning the election. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this is good news for the New Democrats here, 

Mr. Speaker, because what this says is we won two clear 

majorities in the recent two by-elections. And let‟s not forget 

the Cumberland; let‟s not forget the Cumberland constituency, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So what this says is that the NDP have won the last three 

by-elections in the province of Saskatchewan and I think this is 

good news for our New Democrats in Saskatchewan. Now 

before proceeding further I‟d also like to acknowledge the 

former member from Douglas Park, Harry Van Mulligen, and 

his time spent here in the legislature, Mr. Speaker. We miss him 

and I wish him all the best in his future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to thank my constituency assistant, 

Tracy Goodheart, for the work that she does for the constituents 

of Saskatoon Fairview and for the support and organization she 

provides to me. As we all know and I‟m sure every member has 



3178 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2009 

said, that we cannot always be in our constituencies and it‟s so 

important to have someone like Tracy in my office. I would 

also like to thank, Mr. Speaker, the constituency executive who 

work and assist in the constituency in making the constituency a 

better place for all to live. And particularly I‟d like to thank Ben 

Medernach, Arnold Zazula, Lily Olson, Jason McLeod, Blair 

West, and Doug and Danita Hingston. 

 

[15:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I recently had the opportunity to attend the official 

opening of the Shaw Centre, which is located in the Saskatoon 

Fairview constituency. And this is, Mr. Speaker, a great 

example of local governments — both school board, municipal, 

and provincial government — working together, Mr. Speaker, 

working together to create, getting together to achieve this 

world-class swimming facility. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Shaw Centre will be a place for swimmers 

from Canada and the United States and, no doubt, the world 

will come to compete. And, Mr. Speaker, you probably heard 

me commenting on the Shaw Centre before, but just to further 

say that this swimming complex will have a stainless steel 

bottom. And, Mr. Speaker, this will allow swimmers from all 

over North America, and no doubt the world, to come to 

improve their times. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this of course was all put in place by the 

former government. Mr. Speaker, the Shaw Centre also sits 

between two high schools, and it is an example of a community 

working together. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all know the importance of our support system 

at our workplace. And we all take personal pleasure in our 

accomplishments, but truly this cannot occur without our base 

being there for us — our family. 

 

Ann Riley, my partner, whose selfless support and contributions 

brighten not only my day but my life; my daughters Tasha, 

Jerry and Austin; daughter Alecia, Dave, Robin Drake; Ann‟s 

daughter Jaclyn are all there for me so I can make my 

contribution to Saskatchewan; and finally, Mr. Speaker, my 

mother who, whenever she is not interrupted by friends or 

relatives, watches the legislative channel and offers advice, 

solicited and unsolicited. I thank all of my family for this, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the Throne Speech the government claims to be 

moving forward but it truly doesn‟t seem that way if you‟re a 

resident of Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party government 

has blown the biggest surplus in Saskatchewan history — 2.3 

billion. And the rainy day fund — a fund to be used in times of 

trouble — is simply, Mr. Speaker, a shadow of its former self. 

 

And now, Mr. Speaker, that they have to balance the books, that 

they have to balance the books, Mr. Speaker, and sadly, you 

know — they talk about balancing the books — and where are 

they coming to, Mr. Speaker? Mr. Speaker, it was sad to read in 

the paper in Saskatoon that in fact they were coming to 

Saskatoon to balance the books. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatoon is a growing city, a city growing on the 

foundations set some time ago — the economic and social 

foundations. And it is unfortunate, as I have said, that we had to 

read in a local newspaper that the academic science building 

and the children hospital receive funding cuts, Mr. Speaker. 

Unbelievable, Mr. Speaker. After continually talking about 

funding to these projects, they announce it in the paper, as we 

looked in the paper, looked in the paper, and there it was. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the member from Saskatoon Eastview talks 

about the day after the sod . . . But let me tell you, this is 

interesting. As I would say, to add salt to the wound, the 

Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour and 

the member from Saskatoon Greystone, he was at a sod-turning 

of the academic health science building only a week prior to the 

announcement of the cuts, calling it a “key element in meeting 

the government‟s goal to providing patient-centered services.” 

 

An Hon. Member: — Isn‟t that something? 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, as the member from North 

Battleford said, isn‟t that something. And Mr. Speaker, this is 

what he called it. He called it a “key element in meeting the 

government‟s goal of providing patient-centered services.” And 

we see from these members, talking about what they‟ve 

accomplished in two years, what have they accomplished, Mr. 

Speaker? What have they accomplished here other than 

sod-turning and then cutting, Mr. Speaker, cutting funding to 

the very things that they are turning sod for? I‟m not sure if that 

minister is so out of touch or if somebody forgot to send him an 

email on what was happening. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is unbelievable. So I can tell you that we were 

all taken aback in Saskatoon. And I think perhaps this whole 

issue in the thoughts of Saskatoon, I think these thoughts are 

best summarized in a press release by the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview. And I would like to put that into the record 

here, Mr. Speaker, because I think that this is very good. And 

referring to the minister and his sod-turning and being there and 

all that, she said: 

 

Was [the minister] . . . so incompetent as to not know that 

his own government was about to cut funding . . . or was 

he so arrogant as to think Saskatoon people wouldn‟t 

notice? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this is amazing. This is amazing. And I 

think in speaking to people on the street and in the coffee shops, 

this is what, after telling them that, to those that hadn‟t read the 

front page news, they couldn‟t believe it. And, Mr. Speaker, 

there was a lot of shaking of heads over this issue as to why 

Saskatoon would be treated. 

 

Now all of this comes about, Mr. Speaker, the amount and 

percentage that this turns out in the amounts of cuts, they were 

balancing the books on the backs of Saskatoon to the tune of 54 

per cent — 54 per cent of those cuts are coming right out of the 

city of Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. And how could you miss it? 

There it was on the front page, Mr. Speaker. It made the front 

page of The StarPhoenix. We all read about it. We all talked 

about it. 

 

And you‟re right, maybe the feeling was, how could the 

government do this? What have we done? But maybe they don‟t 

like Saskatoon. Now the Minister of Finance might think that 



October 26, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3179 

this is funny but, Mr. Speaker, it wasn‟t comical to the people 

of Saskatoon to have heard and listened to those members 

opposite continually in chorus say how they‟re going to move 

ahead on these projects. 

 

And now what? And now where are we at, Mr. Speaker? We 

can only shake our heads along with the rest of the people in 

our city. And, Mr. Speaker, but despite that, despite that, 

Saskatoon, Saskatoon residents will move ahead and move 

ahead, but they will consider next time when they listen to those 

members and they listen to their promises that they make, that 

they will take them for what they are worth, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the former NDP left the Sask Party 

government a huge surplus which they have now spent. They 

have now spent and now they‟re coming to Saskatoon to take it 

back. There is no vision. You know, all we‟ve heard so far is 

about, it‟s only two years. Well we are getting it right; here‟s 

what we‟re going to do. There‟s a lot of re-announcements, Mr. 

Speaker, as we‟ve heard in the Throne Speech — no vision in 

the Throne Speech, no direction, and where are we coming? 

 

I‟ll tell you what is happening, Mr. Speaker, other than the 54 

per cent cut to Saskatoon to balance the books, to balance the 

books on the backs of the city of Saskatoon. Now there‟s also, 

Mr. Speaker, they also, the government says they‟ve turned the 

province around. They‟ve turned the province around. Two oh 

seven, we‟ve heard, or two oh eight are some of the best years 

in the history of Saskatchewan, and now they‟ve turned it 

around. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they say that, and at the same time when faced 

with criticism, they say, well we haven‟t been here long enough 

for things to take effect. Now you can‟t have it both ways. You 

either turned it around, or things haven‟t had time to work. Mr. 

Speaker, I think the reality is, is that the factors or the strategies 

were put in by the former New Democrats and now we‟re 

bearing the fruits of that until, Mr. Speaker, they spent the 

surplus. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, just some of the facts that were recently 

mentioned by the Leader of the Opposition were housing starts 

are down by 50 per cent. Now how is that turning it around? 

Again, the potash, the miscalculations around the potash and 

now they hide. It truly is, Mr. Speaker, something to amaze 

when we watch this. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we hear the Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Labour talk about the numbers. Every day 

there‟s some new numbers that he grabs onto, every month. 

But, Mr. Speaker, we‟ve lost 10,000 jobs last month, 10,000 

full-time jobs. And Saskatoon, let alone taking the 54 per cent 

hit in cuts, just lost 300 workers at the Case New Holland plant. 

And more potash . . . Every time we open the newspaper there‟s 

more potash layoffs. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, those kinds of numbers and that kind of . . . 

When you take that much money out of the economy, there will 

be things that we will have to consider. There will be problems 

in the future here, Mr. Speaker. And yet all we hear from the 

other side is that we are turning the province around; things are 

better than they used to be. Mr. Speaker, they were handed a 

silver platter and it‟s getting tarnished, and it‟s getting tarnished 

quickly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, along with that, along with what the minister of 

advanced employment and education also talks about, how 

about the numbers of people who are now collecting 

employment insurance? Fourteen thousand people, 14,000 

people are now collecting. And yet, and yet they have turned 

the province around. What must those people think when they 

turn on their TV sets, when they turn on their radios, when they 

read the newspapers and hear what this government is 

peddling? The province is fine. The province is shining. The 

province is turned around. And they are sitting at home 

collecting employment insurance, sitting at home collecting 

employment insurance. And, Mr. Speaker, I haven‟t gotten to 

the rising costs of rent and some of the other and the utilities 

and SGI . . . those things that, to these members, obviously 

don‟t mean very much. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the things that I‟ve heard today talking 

about somehow that there‟s these new targets and that they‟re 

going after new targets . . . And they promised to reduce 

surgical waiting lists and recruit doctors over the next two 

years. Now, Mr. Speaker, it‟s only two years. In fact, it isn‟t 

two years, but we‟ve heard this song and dance before. They 

announced a surgical waiting list. That‟s all they‟ve been 

talking about, a surgical waiting list. They‟ve been talking 

about recruiting doctors. Well where is it? The Health minister 

today couldn‟t answer any questions. The Health minister 

couldn‟t answer any questions. 

 

We had the advanced employment and education minister 

writing a letter back with something that was simply a 

no-brainer, Mr. Speaker, simply a no-brainer. I‟m not sure 

where the thinking that that was . . . He obviously wrote that 

one himself. I think he wrote that one himself. Normally he‟s up 

there and he reads what‟s written, but I think he wrote that one 

himself. So I think he‟s going to have to wear that one into the 

future. 

 

I mean, Mr. Speaker, when we go through that one, I‟m sure the 

people went away shaking . . . well not shaking their heads. I‟m 

sure they‟re out there bent over in laughter. I‟m sure they are, 

because when you have a closer look at what was said there . . . 

and I equate this same thing. Mr. Speaker, how many times can 

you say you‟re going to reduce surgical waiting lists? How 

many times are you going to say you‟re going to recruit 

doctors? We want to see, we want to see the results, Mr. 

Speaker. They talk about targets, well we want to see results. 

And the targets should be prior, prior to the next election — not 

after, Mr. Speaker — prior to the next election. Because that‟s 

another two years that‟ll pass. And what will they say? Nothing 

happened. It‟s only two years. I wait another two years after the 

next election, and we‟ll tell you what‟s happening. 

 

Now how about that, Mr. Speaker. Could you actually imagine 

that that was actually put down in writing? I mean imagine — 

we haven‟t done anything for two years. Give us another two 

years and they‟ll say nothing happened. Now wait till after the 

election, another two years, and then we‟ll do that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people like that probably could go out but I don‟t 

think they‟d be successful in trying to sell, sell some products. 

Wait two years. Wait another two years and then we can say it‟s 



3180 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2009 

only been two years. And you know what? We‟ll wait another 

two years after the next election. The people of Saskatchewan, 

the people of Saskatchewan are not going to buy that. They‟re 

simply going to see through that. It doesn‟t take very much. I 

think we‟ve already seen through this. And in fact what‟s 

unbelievable is they actually put this in writing. They put it in 

writing. And this is . . . They call the vision of the Throne 

Speech. And one of the main points, one of the points that they 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Thank you, yes. One of the main 

points of the Throne Speech. 

 

Mr. Speaker, is it really all about the two years? They used the 

money they got from the NDP. They rode on the structural 

changes we made to the economy. And they think they can fool 

everyone by taking credit and saying they created a new 

Saskatchewan, created a new Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they used the hard-earned dollars for the media 

spin. But I don‟t think any media spin on this one is going to 

save them this time. I don‟t think this media spin is going to do 

this. They‟re cutting and they‟re cutting and they‟re saying the 

cuts don‟t really matter. Well I‟ll tell you — the front page on 

The StarPhoenix and what the people were talking about, about 

the 54 per cent of the budget that came out of Saskatoon — I think 

it matters. I think it matters a lot. I think these cuts matter. And 

they sit there smiling. 

 

Now ask the people in Saskatoon associated with St. Mary‟s 

school project in Saskatoon, if the scaled-back project doesn‟t 

matter. Go ahead and ask them. In fact I would go out and I‟d say 

to them, you know, they say it doesn‟t matter. They say it‟s only 

two years, and just wait to see what we‟re going to do in the next 

two years. Just wait. You know? And then if that doesn‟t . . . If we 

get there, then we‟ll wait until after the election in two years, and 

we‟ll tell you again what we‟re going to do. 

 

And why are these folks picking on the most vulnerable? Why did 

they cut Station 20? Why did they cut Station 20? What does that 

say about a government when they do that to the most vulnerable? 

And then they cut back and scale back the project. And again, 

again the Premier was out there saying what a great project this 

is, how much they‟re giving back to the community. And where 

did it go, Mr. Speaker? What happened? 

 

[15:45] 

 

Well I‟ll tell you what happened over there. We have a new 

member from Saskatoon Riversdale sitting on this side of the 

House, sitting on this side. And the best, and the best they can 

do, the best they can do to make themselves happy is say it was 

a strong NDP seat. 

 

Well let me tell you, you‟re on the way down. Mr. Speaker, that 

government, they‟re on the way down. That‟s where they‟re 

going. Three by-election victories on this side, Mr. Speaker. 

Three by-elections, three by-elections. And it‟s 3-0, 3-0, Mr. 

Speaker. In any kind of sport that means trouble. That means 

trouble — 3-0. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government does not care about people 

having trouble making ends meet. People are struggling, Mr. 

Speaker. People are struggling, and they smile. They‟ve lost 

three by-elections, and they smile. They‟re about the only ones 

in this province that don‟t know what‟s going on. They quote 

statistics except they forget about the 10,000 lost jobs. They 

forget about the 14,000 people on employment insurance, but 

they‟ll quote some statistics. They‟ll pull something out and 

then they‟ll make themselves feel happy over there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, what about the people struggling? 

What about the rising rents? How about the rising utilities? And 

maybe they don‟t feel it. Maybe they are all cushioned from 

this. Maybe they‟re all not listening because, Mr. Speaker, they 

lost Riversdale, they lost Douglas Park, they lost in 

Cumberland. But that doesn‟t matter to them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what about the things, what about the nuts and 

bolts, what about the things that matter to people in Saskatoon? 

What about the things that matter to people across this 

province? Rising rent, rising utilities, rising car insurance, rising 

camp . . . Mr. Speaker, increase in camping fees — increase in 

camping fees to the families that need to go and want to 

experience the great outdoors in Saskatchewan — rising 

camping fees, and, Mr. Speaker, finally, the costly prescription 

drugs. 

 

And they do nothing about that. They post statistics that are 

really irrelevant and they talk about two years, what we‟re 

going to do in two years. And wait, if we didn‟t do it in two 

years because this happened, just give us another two years to 

the election; we‟ll tell you this didn‟t happen. 

 

But in fact we‟ve got plans to go beyond 2011, and because, 

just in case we haven‟t done anything in four years, we can say 

again, well in two more years, just wait and see what we‟re 

going to do, Mr. Speaker. And they expect the people of this 

province to buy into that. Well, I don‟t think they‟re going to, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now if things weren‟t bad enough, in terms of rising costs we 

have the highest rate of inflation in Canada, Mr. Speaker — the 

highest rate of inflation. And that seems to go over their heads 

as well, over their heads as if it doesn‟t matter. We‟re cutting 

and the Premier‟s talking about domed stadiums, nuclear 

reactors. An idea a day, Mr. Speaker, an idea a day. And then 

once it doesn‟t work, well we won‟t talk about that anymore. 

That‟s all gone. 

 

But you know, the insurance rates that are rising, Mr. Speaker, 

the rise in camping fees and the cost of prescription drugs, those 

are the things that the people in my constituency, door to door, 

that they‟re telling and that they‟re talking about. That‟s what 

they‟re talking about. They have their families, Mr. Speaker, 

and they have to get by on a month-to-month basis. And these 

costs are rising, and the budget is gone and there‟s no money 

going out there. And they‟re asking, what happened, Mr. 

Speaker? And all we get is the flavour of the week or flavour of 

the day. And where are we going with this? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, who of us here, who of us here would not 

want a domed stadium for Saskatchewan? Who wouldn‟t want 

that? I would want that too. But, Mr. Speaker, that is the kind of 

rushing headlong into something without the proper discussions 

that gets us into trouble. And maybe they don‟t think that that‟s 

good, but we spent a lot of time digging out of a debt that was 

left by those members across. And now they‟re back at it again, 



October 26, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3181 

Mr. Speaker. They‟re back at it again and people are coming 

and saying, what‟s happening? What‟s happening? Mr. 

Speaker, people are busy with their lives, but they‟re coming 

and now they‟re saying, 54 per cent cut in Saskatoon, and 

what‟s happened? What‟s happening? 

 

Mr. Speaker, governing is not an easy job. But to ignore, Mr. 

Speaker, to ignore like that government did all the signs, all the 

economic signs, warnings from the opposition, Mr. Speaker — 

all you have to do is check back to the speeches last year — 

warning from the opposition experts about projections, Mr. 

Speaker. What was that? What was that when they were told 

that their 2 per cent plus growth was out of line? Well they 

scoffed at that just like they‟re scoffing right now. They did the 

same thing, Mr. Speaker. They said let‟s just wait two years and 

we‟ll tell you, we‟ll tell you what we‟re going to do. But what 

do we find now? Well oh, well now we sit in a little, you know 

that . . . Wait for two years, we‟re going to do this and here‟s 

our new vision in the Throne Speech. And yet there‟s nothing in 

there, Mr. Speaker. There‟s nothing in there, but wait two years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government, I think what is coming through is 

this government‟s, the lack of experience — lack of experience 

on budgetary items and their lack of experience in governing, 

Mr. Speaker. And there are dark clouds gathering. There are 

dark clouds gathering and we can see those, and we again are 

trying to tell them there are dark clouds gathering, Mr. Speaker, 

but again they‟re not listening. And we hear, in two years we‟ll 

tell you. We‟ll tell you what‟s going to happen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, governing — they have to understand that it‟s 

hard work. Tough decisions and things are not built in a day. 

You can‟t have an idea a day, Mr. Speaker, and run a province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t know if the opposition 

members will ever admit this, but we were witness to a 

tremendous speech here given by the new Opposition Leader. 

And, Mr. Speaker, maybe the members . . . this is right up their 

alley because they‟re denying everything else. But certainly, 

they‟re in denial as to how they spend the money. They‟re in 

denial as to where the money came from, and they‟re certainly 

in denial that their budget forecast was a complete mess. 

 

And they‟re certainly in denial . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

The member says they were wrong. The member says they were 

wrong. Yes, the member says he was wrong. He was wrong. 

Just give us another two years, and you‟ll sit there again and say 

wrong. Yes. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, maybe we just work two more years, and 

then we‟ll see if we can get it right. We‟ll see if we can get it 

right. Well we‟re telling you there‟s dark clouds on the horizon. 

We‟re telling you that things are not going good, that there‟s an 

art to governing, that there is an art to governing and that they 

should take heed of those . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech is certainly without vision, a 

vision for a growing province. And, Mr. Speaker, again I 

mention our leader. He gave a speech the other day. And, Mr. 

Speaker, for those that were listening . . . And everybody is 

talking about that speech, Mr. Speaker, because it was a speech 

about vision, Mr. Speaker. It was a speech about vision, a 

wonderful speech. And it was a speech about vision and you 

could tell. And I see that the member from Regina South is 

agreeing with me, and I thank him for that, yes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you have to, as the Opposition Leader said, have 

all things in order, particularly strong unions. And I want to just 

comment briefly on that because from the experience earlier on 

today in the legislature . . . is that we truly see that these folks 

are no friends of labour, no friends of labour whatsoever. And I 

think that they, if it was up to them, they would have no labour 

laws. 

 

And that‟s what would make them happy because that would be 

the free market system which they secretly believe in, Mr. 

Speaker. But it comes out every once in a while, comes out 

every once in a while. They don‟t want to admit it because 

they‟d have to say, oh we‟re in favour of the Crowns, Mr. 

Speaker. They‟d have to say they‟re in favour of the Crowns. 

They sneak around, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it‟s quite clear that they would like to see the 

unions destroyed, decimated in this province. And to what 

effect? Because they don‟t understand. They don‟t understand 

collective bargaining. They don‟t understand rights. They don‟t 

understand respecting the workers of this province because they 

think they created the wealth, because they say that every time: 

well we created the wealth. In the last two years, we turned the 

province around. We turned the province around, and you don‟t 

need the people that work. All you need is no unions and that‟s 

solved. 

 

And then, Mr. Speaker, you know, there‟s a history with them 

on this. Remember the great one, unions are job killers? You 

know, unions are job killers. If you think that, if you hold those 

beliefs, why not just put them out there. And I think they do. 

They sneak something out in legislation and attempt to destroy 

unions. But why don‟t they just say it, just say it, you know, and 

then let the people judge as to what your position is? 

 

Now I can‟t remember the last time that a minister of Labour 

was not at the SFL [Saskatchewan Federation of Labour] 

convention. I can‟t remember when that happened. But I think, 

when I asked, that was happening in the ‟80s, and I think we 

know who that might have been. And isn‟t it interesting? Isn‟t it 

interesting that we might very well be back, back — they call 

that the future — back to the future here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Job killers, legislation, war on workers — I mean how many 

more things do we need here to do that? In fact the Minister of 

Labour called the Opposition Leader‟s speech, or in talking 

about how you build a good economy, as 19th
 
century thinking. 

Can you imagine that — 19th century thinking? 

 

I think it‟s him that doesn‟t understand, and I think everybody 

knows that that minister does not understand anything about 

collective bargaining. He has no idea in terms of constitutional 

things and what that means, how collective bargaining fits with 

the economy, and where we‟re going. Mr. Speaker, it‟s a sad, 

sad day. It can be quite comical but in fact the damage that he is 

foisting on workers in this province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, this government and this 

minister simply do not understand that Saskatchewan got to 

where it was in 2007 and 2008 with the laws, with strong labour 



3182 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2009 

laws in this province. They got there with that. And the 

argument simply that somehow we have to do away with these 

laws and then all of a sudden things will be a bit better, the sun 

will shine in Saskatchewan, we just have too strong labour 

laws. Can you imagine that, Mr. Speaker, what that means to 

those people when they hear that — residents of Saskatchewan 

who work in this province, work in the health care system as we 

saw here today, provide the services — when the Premier, when 

the Premier of this province utters things like that, let alone 

things like too much red tape and all the rest of it. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we have to understand that labour and the 

work of working people contributes to this province . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Mr. Speaker, I would just say to that 

minister that he should quit listening to the spin. Maybe today I 

think we saw him on his own there, but he has to quit that and 

quit reading what is written for him. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Saying what you think. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Yes, say what he thinks and let the people 

of this province decide. Mr. Speaker, I would like to end with 

this because I think . . . People, it‟s a question of trust, a 

question of trust that in two years, just give us two years . . . 

Mr. Speaker, what we heard from the Premier and the Minister 

of Health was, prior to the election, that they wouldn‟t need 

essential services. They wouldn‟t need essential services. They 

sat down, and they told the people who were involved in that 

they wouldn‟t need essential services. After the election, they 

brought in essential services. 

 

What would happen, Mr. Speaker, if they went to any other 

sector in the economy and said to them, we‟re going to not do 

this, and a week later they did that? What reaction would they 

expect from that sector, Mr. Speaker? Mr. Speaker, and I was 

speaking to someone the day after the Throne Speech, and they 

told them that labour was not mentioned in the Throne Speech. 

This person told me that unfortunately their fears were not 

subsided, as the working families well know the history of this 

government when it comes to labour relations and promises. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I just talked about the Minister of Health and the 

Premier changing their minds the day after the election. Mr. 

Speaker, it‟s no wonder. It‟s no wonder, Mr. Speaker, that the 

Minister of Labour is uninvited to a labour convention. Mr. 

Speaker, this lack of direction, this lack of vision contained in 

the Throne Speech, and the continual attack on working 

families in this province leaves me no choice but to say that I‟ll 

be voting for the amendment and against the Throne Speech. 

Thank you. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from Wood River. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

It‟s definitely my pleasure to enter into the debate on the 

Throne Speech. And it‟s especially warming to follow the 

previous speaker because listening to his speech, it just left me 

with the impression of an army of pompous ideas moving over 

the landscape in search of an idea. So it‟s very, very nice to be 

able to follow somebody like that. 

 

[16:00] 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, first I‟d like to talk a little bit about my 

constituency and thank my constituents again for all of their 

support and backing for me to be here again for another session. 

We have a very diverse constituency of Wood River. I‟d like to 

thank my CAs [constituency assistant] that work for me down 

there, in Assiniboia and in Glentworth, and also my 

constituency executive who do an awful lot of work because 

there‟s times when I don‟t get home all as often as we would 

like to. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my constituency is expanding. It‟s expanding in a 

different way than under the NDP. It was expanding under the 

NDP because people were moving out of the province so the 

constituency actually got bigger and bigger, to the point, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that other than the two constituencies of the 

high North, Wood River is now the largest constituency in this 

province. That is thanks in total to the policies of the socialists 

on the other side. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we now see growth in our constituency. 

We see jobs created in our constituency, the constituency of 

Wood River. We see people moving back. We see other people 

moving back from Alberta that have some opportunities here in 

this province. We have houses in our small towns that are filled 

now. Rather than the vacant signs and the for sale signs on, 

they‟re being filled. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there‟s another item that I‟d like to 

talk about, is in the last two years since we‟ve been 

government, we‟ve even seen progress in the road structure 

down there. We have 16-year-old young men and women in my 

constituency that for 16 years never saw a paving machine. 

They had no idea what a paving machine was for 16 years. And 

now they‟re very, very surprised and happy to see a paving 

machine in our constituency. And I‟m very, very proud to say 

that Highway 13 now is one of the best roads in southern 

Saskatchewan, and that has been completed in this last summer. 

So I‟m very, very pleased to see that. 

 

This year has been a trying time as we know in the weather. 

We‟ve had issues with a cold spring, crops being put in late, 

hay crops not being what they have been in the past. But the 

results, the results have been pretty positive. With our policies 

of this government, we‟ve got a pretty positive attitude 

throughout my constituency and, I must add, throughout the 

province. So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, all of that is to say that 

we‟ve got a very, very positive constituency of Wood River. I 

think there‟s 4 or 5 per cent maybe that aren‟t happy, but we 

know who those 4 or 5 per cent are. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I‟d also like to talk a little bit about the 

Ministry of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. We get 

asked through rhetoric from the now Leader of the Opposition 

about where did the money go, and I‟m going to come back to 

that a few times, a few times today in my talk I‟m going to 

revisit that. 

 

But in Corrections, Public Safety and Policing, I would like to 

advise members opposite that we have 60 new police officers 

on the streets, making our communities safer. That‟s where 

some of the money went. Northern communities can feel safer 

knowing that there‟s now a northern drug and gang enforcement 

unit in place to focus on offences in the North. That‟s where 



October 26, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3183 

some of the money went. Witnesses in Saskatchewan can now 

feel safe to appear in court because of our new witness 

protection legislation. That‟s where some of the money went. 

 

We funded much expansion, needed expansion to our safer 

communities and neighbourhoods program, the SCAN program 

which will allow Saskatchewan citizens to take back their 

neighbourhoods and help reduce illegal activities. That‟s where 

some of the money went. Millions of dollars have been spent on 

safety and security upgrades to our secure correctional facilities. 

That‟s where some of the money went. 

 

Now I do want to make a slight comparison. When I say slight, 

I‟m doing it a little bit tongue and cheek, because I want to talk 

about infrastructure in Corrections and Public Safety under the 

record of the previous administration. And I would like them to 

. . . 2002 the NDP denied, denied funding of 1.125 million for 

the design of the RPCC [Regina Provincial Correctional Centre] 

replacement project; they denied it. 

 

In 2002-2003, while inmate counts were increasing, the only 

capital spending in corrections facilities that year was spent on 

— what? — a $30,000 tractor, a $30,000 tractor on 

infrastructure for Corrections and Public Safety and Policing. 

And I am going to revisit that $30,000 tractor. 

 

In 2003-2004, NDP denied, denied security enhancements at 

the SCC [Saskatoon Correctional Centre] for a second 

perimeter fence and an upgraded control room and video 

surveillance equipment. They denied that. Why would they 

deny that? 2004-2005, the NDP denied the same security 

enhancements at Saskatoon Correctional Centre. In 2005-2006, 

the NDP denied the same security enhancements again at the 

Saskatoon Correctional Centre. Mr. Deputy Speaker, there 

seems to be a bit of a process there with them in denial, total 

denial. 

 

Also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have started work on a brand 

new remand centre in Saskatoon which will help increase bed 

space in our currently overcrowded facilities. That is where the 

money is going. The construction of a new radio 

telecommunications network that will allow users more 

accessibility and better communications — that is where the 

money is going. Over the past year, the crime rate in 

Saskatchewan fell by 4 per cent, and the crime severity rates fell 

by 5 per cent. That is where the money was going. 

 

Now I think more of the question back to members opposite is, 

what out of this would have they cut? What would have they 

not done? We know what they wouldn‟t do because they denied 

so much in the past. What would they take out of this, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker? What would any one of them stand up here 

and say, we would not have done that. I would like to see them 

go outside and tell the public what they would have cut out of 

this particular budget. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, again, again I would like to just reiterate a 

little bit about what the NDP have done or didn‟t do in the past. 

Is there any of us on this side of the House that remember their 

1999 and 2003 election promises to hire 200 police officers? 

And what did they do? They didn‟t do it. They did not get 

around to it. 

 

Over the past decade ending in 2006, crime in Saskatchewan 

increased by a whopping 17 per cent, while on a national basis 

it dropped by 11 per cent. Now can anybody on that side of the 

House explain to me why national crime rates were dropping 

during that decade, that decade, and here they went up by 17 per 

cent? There is something missing. Maybe the lack of the 200 

police officers had something to do with that. 

 

They ignored infrastructure, security, and overcrowding 

problems for years at the correctional facilities. It was ignored. I 

just explained that what they denied. And they left a gap in the 

federal witness protection program between the federal, and 

there was nothing in the province, and we‟ve fixed that problem 

also by introducing our witness protection program. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we talk about gang issues. And gang 

issues is something that we‟re all, we‟re all very, very much 

aware of. And we wish to put efforts toward curbing the gang 

and drug issues in this province. And it‟s kind of a shame, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, because we had the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana a few years ago that said gangs are not a problem; that‟s 

the Saskatchewan Party fear mongering — fear mongering. 

Now who knows the . . . Fear mongering, fear mongering. It 

was the member from Saskatoon Nutana. Now we have 43 

positions funded by the province dedicated to addressing 

organized and street gangs. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Order. Members, I 

didn‟t believe I‟d be put to the test quite this early in my career. 

I couldn‟t hear the conversation behind the dais, let alone what 

was going on out here. So would you please pay attention to the 

rules of the House and give the member an opportunity to 

speak. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can 

definitely understand their vocal position when they did nothing 

for so many years, and they‟re finding out now what‟s being 

done. If I was them, I would be totally embarrassed also. And 

so when they‟re totally embarrassed, all they can do is holler 

because they have no plan, no idea whatsoever. So they do it by 

being more vocal in the Assembly. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, again some initiatives that we‟re working 

on within my ministry is working with the RCMP and the 

Saskatchewan association of police chiefs to develop a 

long-term provincial policing strategy that clearly identifies the 

current and emerging needs of local police services and guides 

the provincial government‟s support for crime fighting 

initiatives in the coming years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we can go on and on about what our ministry is 

doing. Some of that I will save. Suffice to say we are moving 

forward, and we listen to what goes from the other side, and 

they‟re being grumpy and moving backwards. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to now just go into the 

Throne Speech and address some of the Throne Speech. And I 

can understand a little bit why members opposite are grumpy. 

This province grew by 16,000 people, grew by 16,000 people. 

And under their watch, we lost thousands and thousands of 

people. I can see that‟s why they are grumpy. 



3184 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2009 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the debt has been reduced by $2.7 billion 

or nearly 40 per cent. What do they have against reducing the 

debt? Everybody in this province except maybe 20 members 

and a few odd of their other close-knit group are in favour of 

the debt reduction, and here we have 20 members plus a few 

that are against it. I just can‟t see why they are against debt 

reduction. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we move to health care. I have it on good 

authority that the salt water sheik of Shaunavon was in cabinet 

when that group closed 52 rural hospitals plus the Plains — 52 

rural hospitals. And here we have the now leader of the NDP 

coming back and saying we want to connect with rural 

Saskatchewan. I know in my area it‟s very difficult for a 

socialist to connect in rural Saskatchewan strictly because of all 

the stuff they‟ve closed there. They closed hospitals. They‟ve 

closed schools. They‟ve pulled railroads. Gosh almighty, when 

they were in government, it was back like it was the turn of the 

century. We‟re about at the same level as we were in 1905. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know time is going to run out, but I do 

want to talk about agriculture. I want to talk a little bit about 

agriculture. I have a very agrarian base in my constituency, and 

I want to have people hear what the NDP record was. 

Off-loading costs to rural Saskatchewan. They cut the GRIP 

[gross revenue insurance program] program. And I‟m sure that 

the Leader of the Opposition was part of that when they cut the 

GRIP program — and very surprisingly because he touts to be a 

big agriculture producer — but cutting the GRIP program. 

From 2001-2006, they increased crop insurance premiums and 

decreased coverage. That is really connecting with rural 

Saskatchewan, let me tell you. In 2003 they closed 22 rural 

service centres — 22. Now that is connecting with rural 

Saskatchewan. I don‟t know how they will ever live that one 

down. 2003 to 2005, they did not and would not fully fund 

CAIS [Canadian agricultural income stabilization program]. 

 

I also would like to address that my constituency was 

drought-plagued in certain areas for five years, and what did 

they do, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Let me tell you what they did. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Nothing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — That‟s exactly what they did — 

absolutely nothing. 

 

Now I would like to advise members what we have done in this 

government. We have the AgriStability administration move to 

Saskatchewan. Currently it costs $15 million for the feds to 

administer. Why would people on that side of the House be 

against this? Moving jobs to Saskatchewan, and yet I heard 

comments the other day, oh well this is not a big deal. 

 

[16:15] 

 

The southwest drought, we talked about it. The Minister of 

Agriculture really did yeoman‟s work in getting the farm and 

ranch water infrastructure program established. This was a 

saviour for some of the people — the ranchers and farmers — 

in the southwest of this province. Contrary to what I just talked 

about, what did the NDP do? We moved forward; they would 

do absolutely nothing. The gopher rebate program — that was 

something that they wouldn‟t even consider, wouldn‟t even 

consider it. What did we do? We got it done. AgriStability is 

now fully funded, the hog program, included the hog program. 

Hog and cattle loans as requested by the industry, we did. 

Extension services, we did. 

 

And how about, how about the education portion of property 

tax? That‟s one that people on that side of the House, I think 

since Tommy the comic talked about that that this was a good 

initiative in 1944, and he did not do it then, and it hasn‟t been 

done until now. A Sask Party government brought the education 

portion of property tax under control. We have increased 

revenue sharing to the RMs [rural municipality]. 

 

So all that said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have no problem in my 

constituency or around this province comparing the dismal 

performance of members opposite when they were in 

government compared to what we in fact are doing today with 

our government. Are we going forward? I believe we are. I 

believe we‟re really going forward, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Now I want to turn my attention just quickly to the member 

from Douglas Park‟s speech. He had talked quite a bit about not 

an awful lot, but I haven‟t heard Tommy‟s name mentioned so 

much for quite a while, so here we are looking backwards 

again. We‟ve got members opposite that are just continually, 

continually looking backwards. I thought when the previous 

member from Douglas Park left this House we wouldn‟t hear 

about the ‟80s quite as much. Well it must be something within 

the genes of the NDP members from Douglas Park because now 

we‟re right back to the ‟80s again. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

personally don‟t have a problem with that because they are 

going back and back, and it‟s not doing them any good. It sure 

is helping us. But I will be going back a little bit. I‟m going to 

go back to the ‟90s before I am done speaking here, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

And I know, I know the Leader of the Opposition talked about, 

he had toured the province. The question we had on this side of 

the House sitting around where we were is, I wonder what 

province he really toured because some of his comments sure 

didn‟t come from constituencies like mine, unless what he had 

done is done the plant again — take a car and put it out in front 

of you and have them greet you when you get off of the bus. 

And then they can say, oh this is what we‟re doing. That would 

be the only way that he could come up with some comments 

like he had in his speech. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I really want to talk on an item about 

where the money went because in the Leader of the 

Opposition‟s speech, he kind of got zeroed in by a comment 

that was made across the floor. And the comment is not in 

Hansard, but his reply is, his reply. And I do remember hearing 

the comment that went across the floor. He was talking about 

mistakes. He was talking about mistakes. And some wise 

individual from this side of the House said, how about 

SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 

Company]? Was that a mistake? And here is the answer: 

 

Yes, that‟s right. It was a mistake, and we paid for it. And 

we paid for it . . . Yes. No. And we did too. And we did 

too. And we did too. 

 

Well that is the first time I have ever heard a socialist say 



October 26, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3185 

they‟ve made a mistake. 

 

So I have some questions for the Leader of the Opposition. I 

have a number of questions for the Leader of the Opposition. 

Was tappedinto.com a mistake? And where did the money go 

— $6.7 million? Was Persona a mistake — $9.4 million? And 

where did the money go? Was Navigata a mistake — $90 

million? Where did that money go? Retx.com, $26 million, was 

that a mistake? And where did the money go? Craig Wireless, 

$10 million, was that a mistake? And where did the money go? 

NST, $16 million, was that a mistake? And where did the 

money go? Clickabid, that was only 1.9 million. Was that a 

mistake? And where did the money go? Soft Tracks, 2.2 

million. Was that a mistake? And where did the money go? Ag 

Dealer, 8.9 million loss. Was that a mistake? And where did the 

money go? SPUDCO we‟ve talked about, and the member 

admitted that was a mistake. 

 

Now I want to go back. I talked briefly about the corrections 

system, and the only infrastructure spent one year was for a 

tractor. I‟m wondering if the tractor was Corrections and Public 

Safety‟s contribution to SPUDCO because Corrections and 

Public Safety, I‟m not sure what they‟d use a tractor for except 

with the infrastructure deficit that was left, they might use the 

bucket to cover the hole in the fence, so there‟d be no more 

escapes. That‟s the only reason I could see a tractor in 

Corrections and Public Safety at that time, so I‟m wondering if 

that was hand-off to SPUDCO. 

 

I think the Leader of the Opposition was around when Channel 

Lake lost $15 million. And I would ask him outright if that was 

a mistake? And where did the money go? Was Guyana a 

mistake for $2 million? And where did the money go? Was 

Coachman a mistake? Sixteen million dollar loss. And, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, everybody knows my all-time favourite; was 

mega bingo a mistake? Eight million dollar loss, where did the 

money go? Eight million dollar loss, was that a mistake? 

 

And we know that ISC [Information Services Corporation of 

Saskatchewan], ISC had $100 million-plus spent, is that a 

mistake? And where did the money go? And how about, how 

about the pulp mill? Eight hundred million dollars, was that a 

mistake? And where did the money go? 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you can see there‟s an awful lot of 

issues that the member tried to bring forward. But let me tell 

you, those men and women on that side of the House have 

nothing, nothing to be very proud of because out of all of those 

items that I just listed is over $1 billion — $1 billion . And I 

would ask anyone on that side of the House if they‟re very 

proud of that, if they can stand up and say, yes it was not a 

mistake. And we‟ve only heard from one person on that side of 

the House that has ever admitted that one item was a mistake. I 

would like to see somebody from that side of the House get up 

and say these were all a mistake. And I don‟t see anybody really 

moving to get up. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there‟s an awful lot of other areas we could cover. 

When we talk about some items of the Throne Speech, when we 

talk about tourism, parks, we are moving forward. We are 

moving forward in our parks, electrifying sites. 

 

And I always like to remind members opposite, when I have the 

opportunity, about their movement in the parks industry when 

they tried to shorten summer. Do we all remember when they 

tried to shorten summer? And the infamous wiener roast tax, do 

we remember the wiener roast tax? I believe that really 

identified the NDP government when they put on a wiener roast 

tax. I think the people of the province were just so upset . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Members, I hope you 

show as much enthusiasm for your own speeches as you‟re 

showing for this one, but you‟ll get your turn sooner or later. So 

if we may continue, I would give the floor to the member from 

Wood River. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

appreciate that. I think I may have touched a couple of nerves 

on that side of the House. That‟s very strange for me to be able 

to do that, but maybe I said something today that they didn‟t 

really believe in or didn‟t really like. But it‟s nice to see a bit of 

a response from members opposite. And it actually makes me 

feel quite good because I enjoy being able to respond to some 

of their insidious comments. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in closing — I see my time is slowly, 

slowly running out, but I would like to just close by talking a 

little bit about what we talked to today. We gave tribute today 

to our reservists, and I‟m very pleased and honoured that we 

included that in our Throne Speech because we are the best 

country in the world, and we are because it‟s largely due to our 

military forces who, over a century or so, have put their lives on 

the line to defend our rights to be able to do what we do today. 

And as I mentioned earlier, I was very pleased to be part of a 

send-off to our troops going to Afghanistan. And it‟s very 

heartwarming and touching to see some of our young troops 

that are going over for the fifth time. 

 

And I know we have people in this province that are against the 

war. That is not for us to decide, but we need to support our 

troops to the nth degree. And so when we debate in the House 

issues around the military, it doesn‟t come down to what their 

job is. They will do the job they are asked to do by the federal 

government. Our job here is to support our troops and give 

them all the support that they need. 

 

I am very, very pleased — and I don‟t think we can over 

announce it — that we have 11 Scholarships of Honour that 

have been awarded, and there will be more to come. And I think 

this is just a tremendous thing that we have done from this 

government through the Minister of AEEL [Advanced 

Education, Employment and Labour]. The Premier was very, 

very supportive. And in fact it might have even been his idea. 

But I‟m very pleased to say that our scholarship award has been 

finalized, and we have 11 recipients and more to come. 

 

I just want to close again by saying how pleased and proud I am 

of not only our reservists, but all of our forces that are doing so 

much to defend our rights and freedoms in this country that we 

sometimes forget. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I will 

be supporting the Throne Speech. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Northwest. 



3186 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2009 

Mr. LeClerc: — Mr. Speaker, it is with great enthusiasm for 

the task, great humility, a heart pumping with sincerity and a 

full measure of gratitude, that I rise in my place to deliver 

which will be my third address and reply to the Speech from the 

Throne. My feelings of enthusiasm are kindled by the 

tremendous, advantaged position we find ourselves in here in 

our Saskatchewan. My sincerity is engendered by my steadfast 

belief in the correctness of the policies, the priorities, in the 

correctness of the policies and the decisions and the sound 

judgement of our cabinet and our Premier. 

 

My gratitude is built on a foundation of support from the people 

of Saskatoon Northwest who have expressed their continued 

faith in my ability to represent them, the support of my tireless 

constituency office staff who work so many long hours 

addressing the needs and concerns of our constituents back in 

Saskatoon, plus the support of the many, many people who 

work behind the scenes in our caucus office here at the 

Saskatchewan legislature. 

 

My humility is born of the self-awareness that comes from 

knowing that you are simply unworthy of the tremendous faith 

and tireless support that others have invested in you. I‟m sure 

members on both sides of the Assembly would wholeheartedly 

agree with the proposition that I have much to be humbled 

about. 

 

I am reminded of the former British prime minister, Winston 

Churchill, who dined in 1896 with the Prince of Wales, later 

King Edward VII. Writing later, Churchill said, “I realize that I 

. . . [must] be on my best behaviour — punctual, subdued, 

reserved — in short, display all the qualities with which I am 

least endowed.” Today I will attempt to follow in Sir Winston 

Churchill‟s footsteps and demonstrate to members an example 

of my best behaviour. I will endeavour to be subdued, reserved, 

punctual whilst expressing my thoughts on the important 

matters on hand. 

 

[16:30] 

 

I need to talk just a little bit about an English lesson between 

disingenuous and ingenuous. It seemed to me some time ago 

that the Leader of the Opposition had some difficulty on the 

John Gormley show understanding the difference between the 

two, so I would like to just bring to his attention what is 

disingenuous. 

 

The NDP oppose nuclear power, and I‟m quoting from Jason 

Warick‟s Saskatchewan News Network, September 2009: “He 

[Lingenfelter] said a proposal by private company Bruce Power 

to build a reactor in the province is a bad idea.” But 

disingenuous really means that in October 2005 he said, quoted 

by James Wood in The StarPhoenix, 2005: “Lingenfelter 

recently called for the provincial government to start 

encouraging the private sector to build a nuclear power plant 

. . .” Now that is disingenuous. 

 

Ingenuous is, quoted by Murray Mandryk this past September 

25, 2009: “Lingenfelter further blasted Wall . . . as a „pretender‟ 

who has never run a successful business . . .” That is 

disingenuous when you have the Leader of the Opposition from 

a party that looks at . . . The leader of their parties . . . Tommy 

Douglas was a preacher. Allan Blakeney was a civil servant. 

Roy Romanow was a lawyer. Lorne Calvert was a preacher. 

And of course the current leader was a border guard. 

 

The difference between disingenuous and ingenuous, Murray 

Mandryk reported in the Leader-Post, October 26, 2005: “„If 

[the first CCF Premier] Tommy Douglas were here, it would be 

exactly what he would be doing‟ said Lingenfelter”, 

campaigning for a nuclear plant. Today he says the opposite; 

that‟s disingenuous. CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] 

news, November 9th, 2005, quoting Mr. Lingenfelter: “The 

opportunity is big. The only question is can we reach out and 

grab it? . . . It‟s got to do with what‟s best for the economy and 

the environment at this moment,” in regards to the nuclear file. 

That was the statement then. Now his statement is 

disingenuous. 

 

I would like to quote from CBC Radio Saskatchewan, May 8th, 

2008. He said: 

 

But what I would like to say is congratulations to my 

friend and former colleague, Bill Boyd, for stepping up 

and making positive statements about the importance of 

this industry for our province because it is really, really a 

huge opportunity, not only for the province but for Canada 

and for North America because nuclear will continue to be 

a huge part of the global solution to our energy problems. 

 

Quoting Murray Lyons, quoting Lingenfelter, “Lingenfelter 

urges debate on nuclear power. Province to consider export 

possibilities, former cabinet minister says.” 

 

Former NDP cabinet heavyweight Dwain Lingenfelter 

says the case for nuclear power generation in 

Saskatchewan is greater now than when he delivered a 

major speech on the subject in Saskatoon more than two 

years ago.” 

 

The difference between disingenuous and ingenuous. Well let‟s 

see, disingenuous. The Leader of the Opposition was the 

minister behind Channel Lake, which saw the taxpayers lose 

over $15 million. That‟s disingenuous. He was involved with 

the $25 million loss in the SPUDCO. He was the minister of 

Economic Development when the AECL [Atomic Energy of 

Canada Ltd.] closed the Saskatoon office doors in 1996. He 

defended the government in taking over the potash industry in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And I won‟t go on to speak about the Shaunavon general 

election in 1982. In fact I think I will. Quoting Murray 

Mandryk, Leader-Post, May 30th, 2009: “Lingenfelter: a 

political brawler”: 

 

At issue is how amateurish this membership padding truly 

was. The old Link simply wouldn‟t have gotten caught, 

theorize long-time NDP insiders, who recall how he won 

the Shaunavon riding during the 1982 Grant Devine sweep 

because of a right-wing split with the Western Canada 

Concept candidate who, unbeknownst to most at the time, 

was a Lingenfelter friend. 

 

It is no wonder, quite frankly, when Neil Scott in the 

Leader-Post, March 24, 1988, said “Lingenfelter denied 

Wednesday that he bought party memberships for people so 



October 26, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3187 

they would be eligible to vote at the nomination meeting.” 

Quite frankly, I find that behaviour all disingenuous, and it 

points out to the ingenuous reality of an RCMP investigation of 

vote buying that is currently being held against the member. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne delivered by His 

Honour spoke at the privileged position Saskatchewan now 

finds itself in. We are, quite frankly, the envy of all other 

Canadian jurisdictions. We truly are like Einstein‟s bicycle, 

maintaining our balance and moving forward. Like other 

jurisdictions around the globe, we have felt the effects of the 

economic turndown of course. However compared to those 

other jurisdictions, we have weathered the storm very well. 

 

We are well placed to take advantage of the coming economic 

recovery as it begins to take hold. Our population is growing at 

its fastest rate in 50 years. Saskatchewan has the lowest 

unemployment rate in Canada. Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatoon 

— the city I represent — has the lowest rate of unemployment 

of any urban city in the country. Here in Regina, we have the 

second-lowest rate of unemployment in Canada. 

 

Major economic forecasts are predicting great things for our 

future. RBC‟s [Royal Bank of Canada] latest provincial outlook 

states that the growth in Saskatchewan economy will reach 3.6 

per cent in 2010, the highest rate in the country. The 

Conference Board of Canada is in full accord. It‟s predicting a 

3.5 per cent growth in Saskatchewan‟s economy for 2010. 

Because of the sound judgment and fiscal probity demonstrated 

by our Minister of Finance, the Dominion Bond Rating Service 

has upgraded Saskatchewan‟s credit rating, a move that will 

further strengthen our economy and lower the cost of borrowing 

on world markets. We have received this bond rating upgrade in 

large measure because of the continuing commitment to debt 

reduction demonstrated by our Premier and our Minister of 

Finance. And I salute them for their steadfast commitment. 

 

Saskatchewan debt has fallen by 40 per cent since we have 

taken office, and this accomplishment is even more remarkable, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you consider that this government 

has been able to do in two short years the largest, single tax 

income cut in Saskatchewan‟s history, education property tax 

relief in the excess of $150 million this year, 80,000 

low-income Saskatchewan people taken right off the tax polls. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, as you‟re quite aware of my background, 

having been born a product of rape in an abandoned building, 

brought up in poverty in the inner city, I am focused, as an 

MLA, on the issues that affect those further left behind, those 

further left behind by the pretend socialist opposition. Let me 

say further what we have done in our government. It‟s currently 

working with four Métis and seven First Nation housing 

providers for the delivery of over 120 units in 12 communities. 

Coming from a Cree mother, I think this is important that for 

the first time in our province we are beginning to deal with the 

issue of Métis and First Nation people. 

 

We have provided 2.3 million forgivable loan to the Prince 

Albert Community Housing Society to provide seniors‟ housing 

for Métis in Prince Albert. Our government has provided 12 

million for the renovation of Milton Heights in Regina, 

providing rental units for moderate-income seniors. In January 

2009, our government doubled the benefit under the seniors‟ 

income plan, the first increase since 1992. Our government has 

provided a $15 million grant to the University of Saskatchewan 

to provide a 400-unit student housing project on campus. 

 

In May 2009, construction started on a large family student 

project in La Ronge. Our government has provided a one-time 

$1 million grant for Habitat for Humanity, a Christian charity in 

Saskatchewan for 20 affordable housing units across the 

province. We have earmarked 8 million for affordable rental 

housing in the Pleasant Hill community. 

 

Support under the Saskatchewan assistance program and 

transitional employment allowance in February, it will increase 

again in October, and to keep pace with the average rental 

markets in this province. Assistance for families and children 

and peoples with disabilities has increased this month in 

October 2009. The supplement covers 30 per cent of the 

average market rent for families and up to 40 per cent with 

people with disabilities. 

 

Since November 2007, our government has made $38 million in 

enhancements to income support programs. We are the first 

jurisdiction in the country to index social assistance shelter 

rates. In the Throne Speech, our government promised to 

re-establish a separate addictions agency. We provided close to 

$3 million in annual funding to support families with substance 

abuse issues. Support for these families include transitional and 

respite housing for young people and adults, day programming, 

in-home support services, cultural activities, and community 

detox programs. 

 

Just over $6 million in capital funds and over 1 million in 

operational funds have been provided to support the 

development of a 45-bed integrated detoxification facility in 

Regina. We are providing over $3 million to build and operate 

six youth stabilization beds in the Calder Centre in Saskatoon, 

and work will be completed in April of next year. Our 

government has provided over $5 million to build and operate a 

youth treatment centre in Prince Albert that will open in the 

winter of 2010. 

 

When the pretend socialists led this country — this province 

and our country — with child poverty and child addiction rates, 

child prostitution rates, they mouthed in disingenuous rhetoric 

what they were doing about it as a pretend socialist party. 

We‟re actually doing something about it. 

 

We have the highest family base income tax exemptions in the 

country, meaning that you earn more in Saskatchewan before 

paying taxes than in any other province or territory in Canada. 

In two short years in government, more than 500 low-income 

housing units have been opened in our province. Five hundred 

and thirty new units are under construction right now. Another 

621 low-income units are in the development and staging 

programs. The combined federal and provincial investment for 

the building of new affordable housing and renovations existing 

over the next two years stands at $61 million. Mr. Speaker, that 

is something to be proud of. 

 

In two short years, we have increased income support for 

seniors and made more seniors eligible for that support. My 

caucus colleague, the member for Humboldt who also serves 

with distinction as the Minister of Social Services, has 



3188 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2009 

significantly increased the level of support offered under the 

Saskatchewan assistance plan. Under that previous government, 

a family of four living in Regina and in Saskatoon would have 

received $980 a month. Now that same family under our 

government is receiving $1,108 a month. 

 

Because of the efforts of the hon. member from Humboldt, 

those receiving money under the Saskatchewan rental housing 

supplement have seen substantial increase in their benefits. In 

Regina and Saskatoon, it‟s gone up 91 per cent; in Estevan, 120 

per cent; in Moose Jaw, 81 per cent. 

 

And what about support for child care, Mr. Speaker? In the past 

two years, this government has increased the number of 

licensed child care spaces by 31 per cent. They have funded 

2,700 new licensed child care spaces. And by the end of March 

2010, the number of funded child care spaces will total 11,400 

— yet another accomplishment that we can be truly proud of. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to highlight even more 

evidence of Saskatchewan‟s privileged place in Canada‟s 

economic position. A few short days ago, the second annual 

Financial Post Canadian Federation of Independent Business‟s 

survey of top business-friendly cities was released. The survey 

evaluates cities across the country on three key measures: tax 

and regulatory policies, the concentration of business start-ups 

plus the overall level of optimism, and, perhaps more 

importantly, the level of success of actual small-business 

owners. Five of the top 10 centres in Canada are located in this 

province. Prince Albert placed 10th. Regina took eighth. 

Lloydminster ranked fifth. Moose Jaw placed fourth. And the 

number one city, the best place for business in Canada —

Saskatoon, the city I call home. 

 

I need to tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, under that previous 

government we slipped to 96th place on those rankings. Oh 

dear, now that‟s disingenuous. 

 

And why is it that while others have suffered so grievously 

within our country, why is that Saskatchewan, its peoples, its 

economy has shown such remarkable resilience? Part of the 

reason is — as the Premier often alludes in his speeches — is 

simply this. Saskatchewan has in Biblical proportions the 

resources that the world wants and needs — our potash, our 

uranium, our barley, our peas, our lentils, our mustard seed. 

These things keep our economy moving. They keep 

Saskatchewan families working. They put food on our table and 

allow this government to provide the quality services they have 

grown to expect by this government. 

 

Part of the resilience seen in Saskatchewan in the past few 

months can be traced back to an attitude, an attitude that came 

with the election of a new government. Gordon Ashdown, the 

owner Can-West Agencies Ltd. in Saskatoon — it‟s a wholesale 

distribution company — Mr. Ashdown was quoted in several 

national newspapers about why Saskatchewan did so well in the 

CFIB [Canadian Federation of Independent Business] survey I 

alluded to earlier. He said, “Just the business-friendly 

environment has made a huge difference in Saskatchewan.” 

 

It is a simple change in outlook that imbued Saskatchewan with 

the added measure of resilience during this tough economic 

times. Can we — say — simply will ourselves to doing better 

just through changing our outlook and attitude? Some might be 

sceptical. The other side is sceptical. They are disingenuous 

about the attitude of the new Saskatchewan. 

 

But I read a very interesting article in the September 13, 2009, 

edition of The New York Times Sunday magazine, and I will 

conclude, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with a few observations from 

that very important magazine article. It seems that happiness is 

in fact contagious. Two scientists named Nicholas Christakis 

and James Fowler used respected scientific data to make some 

remarkable new discoveries. The data is found in the famous 

Framingham heart survey. That study tracked about 15,000 

people and their children for decades. The study was 

instrumental in helping doctors understand the root causes of 

heart disease. 

 

However they were after something totally different and they 

found it. They used the survey results to establish a solid 

scientific basis for a theory that has been talked about for quite 

a while. The theory is that good behaviours like quitting 

smoking, losing weight, and being happy pass from friend to 

friend in a way very similar to a contagious virus. The 

September article states that there is much evidence to support 

the proposition that good health is also a product of your sheer 

proximity to other healthy people. The reason people are happy 

comes from having daily exposure to small moments of 

contagious happiness. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I need you and the members of this Assembly 

to ponder the virtual cycle we are developing in our province. 

We have changed our attitude over the last few years, and that 

has allowed us to be more prosperous. With more prosperity 

comes increasing happiness and with that comes more 

prosperity. There are truly no limits to what we can accomplish 

now, Mr. Speaker. And given this, can you disagree with what 

our Premier so often notes? Is there absolutely any place in the 

world you‟d rather be than right here in Saskatchewan? And I 

say no, especially under this government. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 

indeed an honour and a pleasure to speak . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is an 

honour and a pleasure to speak this afternoon in terms of 

responding to the Throne Speech that was delivered last week. 

 

It is a privilege to represent, all of us feel that, when we come 

back to the House — because we have been elected in elections, 

and of course I‟ll talk a minute about the by-elections but — it 

is a special privilege and we represent all the folks in our 

ridings. And I have to tell you . . . And of course our code of 

ethics talks about how we represent the people of 

Saskatchewan, and that‟s a very important thing to remember as 

we move forward. 



October 26, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3189 

My riding of Saskatoon Centre is a diverse riding. It has some 

of the wealthiest folks in the province of course in some of the 

condos and some of the houses we have. Of course some of the 

poorest people who live in the core communities and we have 

the challenges that we wrestle with and this government is 

faced with. And so when we come here to hear the Throne 

Speech, it is very, very important for us. 

 

And I note that the member from Cannington mentioned earlier 

today that he couldn‟t believe it was the third Throne Speech 

they had delivered and how time is moving so quickly. And of 

course from our side and from far too many people in this 

province, time is moving way too slow especially with the type 

of leadership that‟s exhibited by this government. 

 

I want to take a moment and just talk about the two new 

members we have on our side of the House. Of course we were 

victorious in the by-elections, and the people worked very hard. 

I can tell you the member from Riversdale worked tirelessly 

over the last several months to make sure she won that riding, 

and she comes from a strong, strong family who believes in 

social democracy, and this is a place where we need to talk 

about those issues. This is very, very important. 

 

And I also want to talk about our leader, the new member from 

Regina Douglas Park, and I am delighted and very happy to be 

part of his team. He brings true leadership, true experience to 

this House. He knows what it takes to get the job done and done 

well, and that‟s what we really need to do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to take a minute to talk about the new 

cabinet ministers that we have. We have, I think there are five 

new cabinet ministers, and I‟m looking forward to hearing them 

on their feet. We‟ve heard one and I‟ll talk a minute about the 

new minister, the member from Wood Mountain, but I do want 

to say that I am looking forward to it. 

 

Unfortunately we didn‟t hear the minister from Culture, Youth 

and Recreation talk about the Vancouver Olympic Games. I 

think that was a missed opportunity. These ministers need to get 

on their feet right away and show what they‟re made of and this 

is really, really important. It‟s all about being accountable. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t know if many people know this but, 

you know, one of the things I was looking for was, I was 

looking at the Minister of Culture‟s website. I wanted to see his 

mandate letter to see if it‟s changed. And I don‟t know if that 

minister knows his mandate letter‟s not there, so we don‟t know 

what his responsibilities are. In fact when I look around to see, 

the other new ministers, if their mandate letters are there, and 

they‟re not there. So I don‟t know if the new ministers have 

mandates or what they‟re all about. But I know in the old 

ministers, they do have mandate letters, and I‟ll talk a little bit 

about that later. 

 

I do want to just relate one interesting story that happened on 

Saturday actually. It was an interesting time. The member from 

Wood Mountain and I and several members were at the . . .  

 

An Hon. Member: — I was there. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Yes, the member from Cannington was there as 

well and talking about the things that government‟s have done 

for the reservists. And I do want to take a minute and say that 

today‟s a good day for the reservists, and it was a good thing 

the government recognized. 

 

But it was an interesting thing that happened, the general — 

General Walker I believe — recognized the legislation that was 

passed to protect jobs for reservists. That was passed about two 

years ago. In fact I remember, I remember a phone call I made 

to . . . At that time, I made a phone call to the leader of the 

opposition then, the now Premier. In fact I remember that phone 

call and I remember the guy. I remember it was on the direction 

of the premier that I should phone the leader of the opposition 

at his constituency office in Swift Current to see what we could 

do together. 

 

And you know, we did talk about that, and talked about how we 

could work together to make this a better piece of legislation for 

the reservists. And it was a good thing. And I think even the 

member from Weyburn will recognize this because the member 

came out of his, reservist came out of his riding. That was really 

a big push for this legislation. 

 

So here we have an opportunity, I think, that sometimes we can 

put ideology aside and do the right thing. And there was an 

opportunity for us to do the right thing. Phone calls did happen 

back and forth those weeks, and things happened fairly quickly. 

And so I think I‟d just like to put that on the record, that I have 

made a phone call to the member of Swift Current. And I feel 

pretty proud of that and I‟m not getting into too much trouble 

about that. 

 

But you know, I want to say — and I probably will talk a little 

bit later after 7 o‟clock — about this Throne Speech, about the 

Throne Speech and this idea of moving forward. 

 

And you know, I remember the member from Swift Current, the 

Premier, last year talking about his affection for cartoons. He 

has this thing. He really likes to watch cartoons, and many of us 

do. And I think that this frame, this title, “Moving Forward” is 

very interesting. When I think about this, I get this image of the 

Road Runner, right? And all you see is this Road Runner, and 

then you see a cloud of dust. And you don‟t know, which way 

did they go? Did they go forward or did they go backward? All 

you know is they‟re gone. 

 

And I‟ve got to tell you, Mr. Speaker, all I feel is that the 

money is gone. There was a huge mistake. Something is 

missing in this picture when they say moving forward. What 

ever happened? And so when they try to frame this as a positive 

thing, I have some real concerns. 

 

And of course there‟s not much new in this speech. And many 

people have talked about it. In fact The StarPhoenix has talked 

about it. And what is there is not there for working people. It 

represents ideology, bad choices, misplaced priorities, and real 

missed opportunities. And I‟ll talk more about it later — real 

missed opportunities. 

 

But this is what The StarPhoenix said, October 22nd. It says 

“Throne speech,” and I quote, “Throne Speech sets the stage to 

repeat history”: 

 

For a party still so relatively new at the task, the 



3190 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2009 

government‟s speech from the throne spends an inordinate 

amount of attention looking back. 

 

And everybody knows that this speech has not much substance, 

not really talking about moving forward — looking back. And 

in fact I know the Deputy Leader talked about the lack. Some 

50 items and only 15 items are new items there. 

 

I want to talk just for a minute about the needle exchange. And 

here‟s a quote from The StarPhoenix. The StarPhoenix in the 

same editorial said, and I quote: 

 

A government proposal to change Saskatchewan‟s needle 

exchange program is also bound to draw friction, 

principally because it is wrong-headed and could 

ultimately lead to disaster. To be sure, a needle exchange 

that simply provides an endless supply of free needles is 

flawed. 

 

If the government is serious about tackling this health 

issue, it would be far better to follow the peer reviewed 

literature and push for safe injection sites, such as the one 

in Vancouver that has a proven track record, than to bend 

to those who believe reducing free needles will reduce 

abuse. 

 

Clearly the government is working from ideology and not from 

evidence. And we will support evidence-based procedures. 

 

The Speaker: — Being now 5 p.m., this Assembly will recess 

until 7 p.m. this evening. 

 

[The Assembly recessed until 19:00.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3159 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3159 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3159 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3159 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3159 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3160 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3160 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3160 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3160 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3160 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3160 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3161 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Proclamation of Health Care Provider Week 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3161 

 Safe and Secure Blood Supply 

  LeClerc .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3161 

 Mental Illness Awareness Week 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3161 

 Autism Awareness Month 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3162 

 Persons Day 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3162 

 2009 Achievement in Business Excellence Awards 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3162 

 Breast Cancer Awareness Month 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3163 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Staffing in Health Care Facilities 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3163 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3163 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3163 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3164 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3164 

 Contract Negotiations for Health Care Workers 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3165 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3166 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3166 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3167 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3167 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3167 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Lottery Proceeds Distribution Agreement 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3168 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3168 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

 Proclamation of Reserve Forces Day 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3169 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3169 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3170 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3171 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3175 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3177 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3182 

  LeClerc .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3186 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3188 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium Development 

Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

 Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

Government House Leader 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. James Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Capital Commission 


