




















































Hansard: November 09, 2009


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 11A  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 9, 2009, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3487 

 November 9, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s truly an 

honour for me today to stand and introduce someone in the west 

gallery who is no stranger to this Assembly. He is presently a 

city councillor in the city of Saskatoon, but he used to be the 

Social Services minister for the province of Saskatchewan. I 

would like everybody to join me in welcoming Mr. Bob Pringle 

back to his Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 

would like to join the minister in welcoming Mr. Bob Pringle to 

the legislature today. There was a big announcement, and I’m 

sure he’s here to hear more about that. And I would ask all 

members on the opposition and throughout the House to join in 

welcoming him here. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to this 

Assembly, I’d like to welcome my CA [constituency assistant], 

my right arm who helps me run our constituency office in 

Saskatoon Northwest, and his girlfriend of a famous name. Her 

last name is Hutchison; her first name is Stephanie. And I’d like 

to welcome both of them to their Assembly today to watch us in 

action. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker: 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in German.] 

 

So I would like to ask all of my colleagues to welcome Olga 

and her family to Canada, to Regina, and in particular to 

welcome Olga to the legislature today. She’s here to witness a 

members’ statement about the fall of the Berlin Wall, which of 

course is an important occasion for all Germans everywhere in 

the world. And Olga is going to be hopefully partaking in one 

of the parties to celebrate the fall of the Berlin Wall that are 

happening all over Saskatchewan today. 

 

So I’ll ask all my colleagues to welcome her heartily to the 

legislature today. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose, the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you to this Assembly, I’d like to introduce in 

your gallery, Mr. Speaker, some good friends of mine. I’d ask 

them to just give a quick wave when I introduce them. 

 

The young lady, Michelle McQueen, she’s my former assistant 

at the RM [rural municipality] of Marriott and Pleasant Valley 

in Rosetown and now is a very able administrator. And with her 

are my former employers, Councillors Glen McNally and Byron 

Siemens and Reeve Blake Jeffries. And they’re here for the 

SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] 

mid-term convention, Mr. Speaker, which I look forward to 

speaking to later today. And I’d ask all members to please give 

them a warm welcome. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

rise today to present a petition on behalf of concerned citizens 

of Saskatchewan who are concerned over the condition of 

Highway 310. The petition states that Highway 310 has 

significantly deteriorated and that the condition of the highway 

is a potential safety hazard for the residents who drive on this 

highway each and every day. Mr. Speaker, I’ll read the prayer. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to commit to providing the 

repairs to Highway 310 that the people of Saskatchewan 

need. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 

Ituna, Foam Lake, and West Bend, Saskatchewan. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for wage equity for CBO 

[community-based organization] workers. And we know that 

workers in community-based organizations have traditionally 

been underpaid, continue to earn poverty-level wages. And this 

results in high staff turnover and the subsequent lack of 

caregiver continuity. It has a negative impact on the quality of 

care clients receive. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

development and implementation of a multi-year funding 

plan to ensure that CBO workers achieve wage equity for 

the employees who perform work of equal value in 

government departments. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 



3488 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2009 

And, Mr. Speaker, these folks come from Prince Albert. Thank 

you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. There’s just too 

much debate, especially too close to the Speaker, to hear the 

presenter. I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

in support of a new long-term care facility in La Ronge. The 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately invest in the planning and 

construction of new long-term care beds in La Ronge. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by the good people of La Ronge and area. I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition in support of fairness for Saskatchewan 

students through the necessary expansion of the graduate 

retention program. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately expand the graduate 

retention program to include master’s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are from 

the city of Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present yet another petition on behalf of rural residents 

of Saskatchewan who question why the Sask Party government 

is leaving them behind with respect to providing safe and 

affordable water, and who have yet not had any commitment of 

assistance. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to financially assist the town of Duck 

Lake residents for the good of their health and safety due 

to the exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency, and that this government fulfills its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good residents of 

Duck Lake, Saskatchewan. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition in support of maintaining quality health care services. 

Mr. Speaker, we all hope that the Saskatchewan government 

realizes that in terms of addressing retention and recruitment 

issues that the best way to achieve this is its commitment of 

adequate funding and installation of good faith at the provincial 

bargaining process. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to commit to maintaining quality health 

care services and job security for all public health care 

providers. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the petitions are signed by people from Govan, Nokomis, 

Semans, Rosetown, and Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

a petition in support of affordable rents and housing in The 

Battlefords. Mr. Speaker, the residents who have signed the 

petition note that rent increases of 40 per cent are outrageous 

and the vacancy rate for rental accommodations is very low. 

The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to call 

upon the Government of Saskatchewan to develop an 

affordable housing program that will result in a greater 

number of quality and affordable rental units to be made 

available to a greater number of people throughout The 

Battlefords and that will implement a process of rent 

review or rent control to better protect tenants in a 

non-competitive housing environment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by residents of North 

Battleford, Cochin, Delmas, and Glenbush. I so present, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents of 

Saskatchewan as it relates to the unprecedented 

mismanagement of their finances by the Sask Party. The prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to start managing our 

provincial finances responsibly and prudently to ensure 

that it does not continue its trend of massive budgetary 

shortfalls, runaway and unsustainable spending, equity 

stripping from our Crowns, and irresponsible revenue 

setting. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by concerned citizens of Regina and 



November 9, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3489 

North Battleford, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

20th
 
Anniversary of the Fall of the Berlin Wall 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker: 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in German.] 

 

Mr. Speaker, the 20th anniversary of the peaceful revolution 

and the fall of the Berlin Wall are significant events that 

triggered drastic changes around the world, marking the end of 

the Cold War. For Berliners in particular, November 9th, 1989 

will remain the happiest day in their recent history. Finally what 

belonged together could grow together. 

 

In the summer of 1961, the stream of refugees leaving East 

Germany had grown to proportions that threatened the very 

survival of East Germany. On August 13th, 1961 East 

Germany’s leaders closed the border to West Berlin. The Berlin 

Wall was the symbol of Germany’s division and the East 

German leadership’s disregard for human rights and basic 

freedoms. It is estimated that hundreds of people were killed 

while trying to cross the border, and I’ve seen the monuments 

in Berlin that were erected in honour of those that were known 

of. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the features of the Festival of Freedom 

celebrating the fall of the Berlin Wall will be over 1,000 plastic 

foam dominoes which were painted by pupils from Berlin 

schools, which will be set up along the route where the Berlin 

Wall once stood. They will be knocked down to mark the 20th 

anniversary of the crumbling of the Cold War barrier. 

 

Mr. Speaker, sections of the Berlin Wall are now on display at 

various points along the 160 kilometres of the former border. 

They are beautiful works of art that are appreciated much more 

now that they are cause to bring individuals together to reflect, 

to give thanks, and to admire their powerful statements. 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in German.] 

 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, today, November 9, 2009 marks 

20 years since the fall of the Berlin Wall and the beginning of 

the fall of the Soviet Union. From 1961 to 1989, the city of 

Berlin was divided into East and West Berlin, and literally 

divided friends and families from each other throughout the 

city. This symbol of oppression pitted Europe against itself and 

came to represent much of what the Cold War was about. 

People literally gave up their lives attempting to cross over 

from East to West Berlin, and this wall came to be known as the 

death strip. 

 

When news broke that the East German government would 

allow its citizens to visit West Berlin and West Germany, 

millions of East Germans rushed the barriers that previously 

separated them from freedom and liberty. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let us commemorate this important date in our 

shared history. The collapse of the Berlin Wall paved the way 

to German unification, as well as the collapse of the Soviet 

Union. Now freedom and prosperity reigns supreme in 

Germany. This anniversary offers hope to all those desiring life 

and liberty. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

McNab Community Association 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with great 

pride that I recognize the good work of the McNab Community 

Association. The association offers family, adult, and children’s 

programs and social events to a small community located within 

my constituency. Its Chair, Ms. Hazel Whippler, their board, 

and volunteers work hard to bring the community together. 

 

The McNab Community Association has been working with the 

city of Regina to revitalize McNab Park. The association has 

been instrumental in planting 31 new trees in the park. Dundee 

Developments graciously donated 20 trees. The city of Regina 

planted seven spruce trees and residents paid for four memorial 

trees. Families in the community have lauded the improvements 

to the park, Mr. Speaker, and more and more families can be 

seen playing on the swings and the playground equipment. 

 

Mr. Cliff and Mrs. Marie Just had an important graffiti cleanup 

program that ensures graffiti in the community is cleaned up as 

soon as possible. The community association is reaching out to 

its community partners — among them Pioneer Village, Luther 

high school, and Gateway Christian Fellowship church — to 

provide positive programs in the community. 

 

[13:45] 

 

I’m extremely proud of the McNab Community Association 

and its partners. I ask all members of this Assembly to join with 

me to extend our gratitude to this community association and its 

partners for the meaningful work within our community. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

The Significance of November 7th 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Pacific 

NorthWest Economic Region, or PNWER, held a leadership 

forum last week in Regina. The topics discussed included 

global competition, responsible development of energy 

resources, agriculture, and innovation. The delegates from 

PNWER were also able to take in the Roughriders’ game on 

Saturday. And it was an amazing game, and everyone had a 

great time. And it was wonderful to see our guys come out on 

top and finish in first place. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, Saturday’s Riders’ win is just one more reason 

to celebrate November 7th. It was on November 7th, 2007 that 



3490 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2009 

the reign of the tired, old NDP [New Democratic Party] came to 

an end. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan believed that it was time this 

province started moving forward and fulfilling its potential. Fast 

forward to November 7th, 2009 when the Riders won the first 

CFL [Canadian Football League] West Division championship 

in 33 years. And if the members on this side of the House 

continue to work hard for the people of Saskatchewan, we will 

be celebrating yet another November 7th, Mr. Speaker, in 2011. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Moose Jaw Prepares for Olympic Torch Run 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, Moose Jaw’s 2010 Olympic torch runner will be 

Diane Therrien — local business owner, founder of Moose 

Jaw’s Relay for Life, and now the main force behind the Cause 

for a Walk. 

 

To help the city prepare and get motivated for the January 10th 

relay, the organizing committee has planned five events. The 

first was a barbecue held in September and featured Moose 

Jaw’s own Lisa Franks, Paralympian and multiple gold medal 

winner. Lisa said she believes that the torch coming through 

Moose Jaw will spark an excitement and desire in the city’s 

youth that will push them to strive for Olympic gold. 

 

Four more events are slated including Be an Olympian Day, 

where families have the opportunity to enjoy free swimming, 

skating, and a number of other activities. December 10th will be 

the day where school children from all over the city will 

participate in their own torch run. The event organizers have 

worked towards the involvement of local organizations in all of 

their planning. 

 

It truly is a privilege for Moose Jaw to be part of the torch run. 

Being a celebration community is an honour and the whole city 

will be able to be proud of and benefit from. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will ask that all members join me in 

congratulating the organizers, supporters, and participants of 

Moose Jaw’s 2010 Olympic torch run and those being held 

right across our fine province. And I would also like to extend 

my best wishes to all of our Canadian athletes in preparation for 

the games. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Results of Recent Polls 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 

hard to believe just how out of touch with Saskatchewan the 

Leader of the Opposition became while he was living in 

Calgary. When he got back to Regina, the first thing he told us 

is that our economy is in freefall. Saskatchewan people are 

grumpy, and the reason they’re grumpy is because they’re mad 

at the Premier. 

 

Mr. Speaker, wrong, wrong, and wrong. According to two 

recent polls, Saskatchewan people are actually feeling pretty 

good. They think our province is on the right track. They’re 

feeling positive about the economy, and they really like our 

Premier. Now that doesn’t sound like a grumpy province to me, 

Mr. Speaker. In fact, it seems the only person who’s grumpy 

these days is the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is not the same Saskatchewan the Leader of 

the Opposition saw in his rear-view mirror when he went to 

Alberta a decade ago. Saskatchewan today is a vibrant, 

confident, and optimistic place. I invite the Leader of the 

Opposition to stop living in the past, join us in the new 

Saskatchewan, and turn that frown upside down. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Men’s Cancer Month 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, the Cancer Society, Livestrong, 

and the Midtown mall in Saskatoon partnered for the giant 

colon event this past September, which was Men’s Cancer 

Month. They displayed a giant colon that visitors could actually 

walk through. As a nurse, I am familiar with colons, but I have 

never seen one this big. The display certainly brought this area 

of the body into sharp focus and provided the community with 

information and an opportunity to ask questions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, colorectal cancer is the third most common cancer 

in both men and women and is curable with early diagnosis. 

However simple embarrassment often stops patients from 

asking or seeking screening, and this is because people see this 

as involving functions in areas of the body that are considered 

private. This event illustrated we can and should take an active 

role in maintaining our health. 

 

There are simple lifestyle changes we can make to lessen our 

chances of developing this disease, like stopping smoking, cut 

back on drinking alcohol, and exercise regularly. We do not 

have to be ruled by fear or shyness. Knowledge is power and 

the more comfortable we are with and understand all parts of 

our body, the more control we have. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I commend the Cancer Society and Livestrong for 

this impressive display. It was a clever and memorable way of 

providing information to the community. Thanks, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Public Safety Procedures 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Minister for 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing has admitted that there 

was a dangerous sex offender that was released three months 

early without the public being made aware of it, Mr. Speaker. 

And he’s undertaken to do a review of the system to find out 

what happened. 

 

To the minister: has his deputy minister identified what has 



November 9, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3491 

happened and who was responsible for this release? And when 

will he be letting us know? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yes, in 

fact the deputy minister is conducting an investigation. The 

investigation is ongoing and as of yet we have no results of the 

investigation. We will be looking at the results when the 

investigation comes back from the deputy minister. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This 

should be a relatively simple issue to investigate what happened 

as pertaining to the actual release, Mr. Speaker. But instead we 

have the minister and his officials doing a witch hunt to find out 

who released the information to the public and informed the 

public about this dangerous offender being at large. 

 

My question to the minister, Mr. Speaker, is this: will he 

undertake the resources he has on his witch hunt, looking for 

who may have made the public aware of this information, and 

turn it to finding out what really happened and fix the problem? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, as part of the 

investigation being conducted by the deputy minister, it’s 

looking into all aspects of what transpired during this time 

frame. One is the error that was found out on the 26th of 

October, as to how the mistake was made and just entered on 

the 26th. 

 

The other very important question that the deputy minister is 

looking into is the disclosure of confidential, sensitive 

documents and how those confidential, sensitive documents 

arrived in the hands of a member of the opposition. That would 

be part of the investigation as to how those documents were 

released from the correction facility. So that will be part of the 

investigation that is ongoing right now. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Severance of Public Servants 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The other 

day the government tried to hide the fact that it had wasted 

millions of dollars more than previously admitted on severance 

payments to fired professional and career public servants. 

 

In May the government admitted it had paid 10.7 million in 

severance to about 70 public servants, but the total did not 

include severance payments that were being negotiated with 

another 16 public servants. And last week the government said 

perhaps it has settled with all but one of those 16. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a simple question: how much in additional 

severance has been paid to these former public servants? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I had indicated to the 

member opposite last week that we were going to review the 

information and provide it in due course. I expect we will have 

it in the very near future. Mr. Speaker, it was the intention of 

this government and always will be the intention of the 

government to treat outplaced employees with the utmost in 

dignity and respect. 

 

The members opposite in 1992 terminated well in excess of 200 

people. Mr. Speaker, our government terminated far less people 

with that and we have, I understand, settled with all but one of 

those people, Mr. Speaker. And we will continue to deal with 

this matter in an appropriate, fair, and compassionate manner. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. The government total 

also ignores another $1.2 million paid to nine former public 

servants fired without cause at Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority and 340,000 in legal fees, paid to law firms 

that donated money to the Saskatchewan Party, to negotiate 

those severances. 

 

Mr. Speaker, will the government now admit that in the midst 

of a budget crisis it has spent more than $14 million dismissing 

more than 100 professional and career public servants without 

cause? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we indicated last week and 

we indicated in the spring session there was approximately 60 

employees that had been terminated. That includes the 

employees that were employees at Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is duplicating numbers. We 

indicated that we would get to him and get to him in the very 

near future with an accurate, up-to-date list to ensure that there 

isn’t confusion or other things that are wrong or out of place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to remind the members opposite that 

their transition to government in 1992 resulted in over 300 

dismissals without cause. The current Leader of the Opposition 

called this, and I quote, he was looking for “. . . people who 

better reflect the needs of the government.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 1992 there was no compassion; there was no 

warmth. The members opposite treated them in a cruel, callous, 

cold-hearted way and cost the province of Saskatchewan many 

millions of dollars that were unnecessary. We have approached 

this in a different manner, Mr. Speaker. We have approached 

this with care, caution, and compassion. We have not indulged 

in anything that was unnecessary or inappropriate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Workplace Safety Issues 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, last week the minister 



3492 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2009 

dismissed my suggestion that an unsafe, uncertified crane had 

been allowed to operate for months at a construction site at the 

Regina perishable distribution centre. The minister told this 

House that, “Two highly experienced occupational health and 

safety officers have inspected the crane in the last 24 hours. 

And we confirm that the crane is safely operating.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, those were the words of the minister in this 

Assembly last Wednesday. Can the minister confirm that the 

very next day the crane was found to be in contravention of the 

law for failure to provide certification and was removed from 

the construction site? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for 

the opportunity to provide an update. Mr. Speaker, there is a 

stop-work order as it pertains to this crane. The crane has been 

inspected and certified as safe by a Saskatchewan registered 

engineer. It’s been inspected by Klondike inspections and 

we’ve utilized a Saskatchewan registered engineer, Mr. 

Speaker. That being said, there are a number of outstanding 

questions that still need to be addressed and, Mr. Speaker, those 

questions are being investigated. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the question really is for the member opposite. 

When did he come into possession of the document that he 

presented in this House, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, we know that minister knew 

about three weeks before he replied. But I would just ask him 

this, Mr. Speaker, a straightforward question to the minister: if 

this crane was safe all along, why is it now gone? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve just said, the crane 

has been inspected and certified as safe by a Saskatchewan 

registered engineer, Mr. Speaker. There are questions, Mr. 

Speaker, that we continue to investigate as part of our due 

diligence. We do that as part of our commitment to 

occupational health and safety, Mr. Speaker. That’s a 

commitment that we can demonstrate. 

 

We’ve been improving since we’ve been in government. Is 

there room for more work? Yes, Mr. Speaker, and the 

investigation that’s under way just reinforces our commitment 

to occupational health and safety. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it is clear that this 

minister and this government have zero commitment to the 

health and safety of Saskatchewan workers on the job site. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if this issue had not been raised in this legislature 

and the department shamed into doing its job, this unsafe, 

uncertified crane would still be lifting tonnes of steel over the 

heads of Saskatchewan workers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, through his words and through his actions, isn’t 

the minister telling Saskatchewan employers, you only have to 

worry about following occupational health and safety laws if 

they get caught? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite has 

raised the issue of occupational health and safety and this 

government’s commitment to occupational health and safety. 

Work stop orders, Mr. Speaker, have gone up by 269 per cent, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

As it pertains to the crane that has been mentioned specifically, 

there are a number of outstanding questions. That investigation 

is under way, Mr. Speaker. The crane has been deemed safe. 

That being said, we will continue with our investigation to 

ensure that we understand the full implications of occupational 

health and safety. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our record stands for itself. We stand with the 

workers of this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Health Care Resources 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. How quickly things 

change. Three years ago the then Health critic and now Health 

minister characterized the doctor shortage and temporary 

closures of hospitals and services in rural Saskatchewan as “. . . 

pretty scary if it happens all the time.” A year later he said 

hospital closures in rural Saskatchewan were “absolutely 

appalling.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Medical Association questioned 

the minister on Saturday about doctor shortages and hospital 

closures in rural Saskatchewan and the minister said: 

 

Can I ensure there will be a doctor in every community 

like there used to be? You know, we just can’t do that. The 

system is changing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: are doctor shortages and hospital 

closures in rural Saskatchewan still absolutely appalling today 

under his watch? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we certainly know that 

there is a doctor shortage not only in small towns but some of 

the larger communities. Even in Regina and Saskatoon, we have 

a lower than national average amount of GPs [general 

practitioner] and specialists, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But unlike the former government that refused to admit there 



November 9, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3493 

was a problem, we know there’s a problem and we’re taking 

actions. I find it interesting that the opposition would take about 

hospital closures. It seems to me that there was 52 hospitals 

closed . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I know the 

minister’s voice carries but it’s becoming somewhat difficult, 

especially out of the left ear, to hear what’s happening. So I 

invite the minister to complete his comments. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — I think I was talking about how many 

hospitals closed under the NDP when they were in government: 

52 hospitals closed under their watch, Mr. Speaker. And we 

know at that time health care professionals left the province in 

droves because of the NDP and the whole hospital closures 

under their watch. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, what’s appalling is that the 

minister still is hiding behind what we did or didn’t do; has no 

answer for himself and what his government is going to do. 

He’s using doctor shortages and hospital closures in 

Saskatchewan for political gain, as usual. In opposition the 

minister said he had a plan. Today he says he has nothing. 

 

On Saturday doctors made it clear to the minister that there 

were not enough doctors in rural Saskatchewan and the ones 

that are there are severely overworked. Practices are failing out 

in rural Saskatchewan. And how does the minister respond? He 

says: 

 

We haven’t solved the problem and I don’t think we’ll 

have it solved by next year, or the year after, or the year 

after. It’s going to be an ongoing issue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister is this: why is he 

putting all of rural Saskatchewan on a four-year wait-list? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we know that there is a 

doctor shortage, and that’s why our government has acted and 

acted decisively. Mr. Speaker, this year the intake at the College 

of Medicine was 84 students from Saskatchewan. We have 108 

residency positions in our province. That’s up from the 60 

medical seats under their watch. One hundred and eight 

residency positions is up from the 60 that was under their 

watch, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and this is what — just in the dying days of that 

old NDP government — this is what the president of the SMA 

[Saskatchewan Medical Association] had to say: 

 

. . . we are disappointed that the expansion of the College 

of Medicine falls far short of what this province needs. 

We will still not be able to train enough physicians to 

meet our own needs and that should be our goal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that was Vino Padayachee about the NDP 

government. We’ve expanded the number of seats in the 

College of Medicine and residency, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, the minister’s rants are cold 

comfort to the residents of Lestock who’ve been without a 

full-time doctor for months, or the people living in Maple 

Creek, Arcola, and Kamsack, just to name a few. They’ve had 

to suffer through the suspension of emergency health services 

and hospital closures due to doctor shortages. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in opposition that member called doctor shortages 

and hospital closures appalling, and he said he had a plan to fix 

the problem. On Saturday the minister said his biggest 

challenge when he meets with groups from small towns is to 

“change their expectations of how health services are 

delivered.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: how does he square raising 

expectations in rural Saskatchewan when he was in opposition, 

and now under his watch telling rural Saskatchewan to lower 

their expectations and accept less services? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the reality is things have 

changed in Saskatchewan. There’s a positive attitude that we’ve 

never seen before in this province, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

when it comes to health care, we’re using nurse practitioners, 

and utilization of nurse practitioners is far greater now than it 

ever has been, Mr. Speaker. There is a changing environment, 

Mr. Speaker, in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

We are taking this subject very, very seriously. We’re attracting 

physicians from out of country. We’re going to be putting 

forward a physician recruitment strategy that, Mr. Speaker, will 

address the problem. But the fix isn’t done in one year, two 

years, and three years because it was created over 16 years of 

NDP government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Management of Provincial Economy 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Unfortunate 

economic statistics are announced on an ongoing basis of late. 

A provincial economy that was growing not long ago is 

shrinking, is under contraction under the Sask Party. 

 

Everyone knows there’s a recession. Just ask the 1,100 recently 

laid off workers from PCS [Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan Inc.] and CNH [Case New Holland]. But the 

Finance minister says, I quote, “We sort of largely bypassed the 

recession.” 

 

To the Minister of Finance: why is he the only person in 

Saskatchewan that does not know there’s a recession going on? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 



3494 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2009 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I am pleased to have an opportunity to stand up in this 

House and talk about the strength of Saskatchewan’s economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is no doubt that there has been an 

unprecedented economic slowdown, not only in Canada, not 

only in North America, but in indeed the entire world. And 

through it all, Saskatchewan has done relatively better than any 

other jurisdiction in that same environment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, granted that the rate of growth predicted currently 

for Saskatchewan’s economy is very, very small. But even that 

small amount in 2009 is the highest number in the country of 

Canada and is higher than most jurisdictions. And so we do 

have some satisfaction in those numbers, Mr. Speaker. In 

addition to that, almost every forecaster looking forward to 

2010 is predicting that Saskatchewan will again lead the nation 

in economic activity and growth going forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think those are reasons why the people of 

Saskatchewan should be very, very proud and very, very 

optimistic about the future of this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the Finance minister says 

there’s not a recession. But the newly appointed Chair of the 

Sask Party economy committee, its chief economist, disagrees. 

From the P.A. Herald on October 2nd, and I quote, “Darryl 

Hickie, Saskatchewan Party MLA from Prince Albert Carlton, 

said he’s focused on pushing the . . . [economy] out of recession 

. . .” 

 

Now frankly, Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure I’d let the member 

from P.A. Carlton push my truck out of a snowbank, let alone 

push the economy anywhere. But that’s another point. So the 

top Sask Party . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. We’ve allowed the use of a 

name in a quote. But members are to realize that when they’re 

not using the quote, they are to refer to individual members by 

their seat or riding. I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Right, Mr. Speaker. We don’t have 

much faith in the member from P.A. Carlton. So the top Sask 

Party economic head thinks there is a recession, but the Finance 

minister doesn’t. To the Minister of Finance: help us all out. 

Who actually knows what’s going on over there? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the people 

of the province know what’s going on, and that’s what’s 

important. Mr. Speaker, it is absolutely amazing how members 

opposite can be so out of touch with the people of 

Saskatchewan. Every weekend when we have the opportunity to 

go home, I’m certainly always encouraged by the attitude and 

the enthusiasm of people in my constituency and constituencies 

right across this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in polling that has been done, the people of the 

province by huge majorities — something in the order of 76 per 

cent — believe that the economy is strong and the economy is 

going to move forward. Everyone recognizes that the 

economies of North America and Canada and Saskatchewan 

have come through a real battering with the recession that has 

gone on. 

 

And everyone that is objective about it understands and believes 

that Saskatchewan is faring better. Are we immune? No, we’re 

not. And we’re not going to be immune going forward. We 

have a huge challenge in potash, and that’s going to have an 

effect and is having an effect on the overall economy, 

particularly in that sector. But, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is 

still the place where most people wish they were at, not wish 

where they were from. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, that’s cold comfort for the 

many, the thousands, that have lost jobs in this province this last 

year. The Minister of Finance says, don’t worry; no recession 

here. The Chair of the Sask Party economy committee says, 

we’re in a recession. He’s going to push us out of here. Why 

doesn’t the right hand know what the far right hand’s doing 

over here, Mr. Speaker? 

 

To the Minister of Finance: how can the people of 

Saskatchewan trust the Sask Party to manage this economy 

when they can’t even agree on the basic facts? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the facts of 

the economic growth in the country are not up for discussion or 

debate. They are based on economic predictions by independent 

agencies that predict economic growth, that look at all the 

factors affecting economy. And they try to make sure that they 

have accurate predictions of where the economy is going. 

 

And I’d like to stress for the members opposite, they are 

predictions. They are the best estimates made using a whole 

range of factors that go into the economic modelling that the 

Conference Board, the banks, and our own Finance ministry put 

together in order to give, as best they can, a prediction of the 

future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s an important thing to recognize that the same 

people that are doing predictions for Saskatchewan now in the 

Ministry of Finance are the same people who were doing 

predictions for the former administration in the Ministry of 

Finance. And they’re looking at all of the variables across the 

country. Mr. Speaker, all of those facts point to the fact that 

Saskatchewan, while being affected by the recession, is still 

doing better than other jurisdictions in Canada. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we’re encouraged that the 

Finance minister is finally talking about private sector 

forecasters because he wanted nothing to do with them during 

last budget time. Isn’t that interesting? 



November 9, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3495 

We’re going to continue to talk about the real economy of 

Saskatchewan. They can talk about what they want, but when 

the real economy of Saskatchewan . . . I’m talking about 

massive job loss, a reduction in jobs year over year, a reduction 

in full-time jobs, a shift to part-time jobs, a massive 

6,500-person jump in unemployed individuals in this province 

this year, huge increases in employment insurance recipients, 

youth unemployment lower than it has been in years, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Economic stat after economic stat points to decline. Consumer 

spending is down. Retail sales are down. Wholesale trade down 

35 per cent, international trade down 30 per cent, manufacturing 

trade down 33 per cent. Crops as it relates to price index are 

down 27 per cent — many of those folks are still toiling in their 

fields here today as we debate in this legislature — and huge 

losses for livestock producers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, admitting one has a problem is just the first step. 

So my question to the Finance minister: when is he going to get 

real and recognize that we have a problem, and put forward a 

plan to respond? Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — Before I recognize the Minister of Finance, 

the last little while we’ve had a handful of members who have 

been continually interjecting and taking away from the ability 

of the ministers to respond. I would ask the members to give the 

minister the same opportunity to respond as the member had to 

ask the question. The Minister of Finance. 

 

[14:15] 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I don’t understand why the opposition is so 

enthusiastic . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I can’t 

understand why the opposition is so determined to put a 

negative spin on what is pretty good numbers for the province 

of Saskatchewan and what is very good numbers in comparison 

to other jurisdictions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would have the opportunity to go through a 

whole list of where employment’s increased, but we’re running 

short of time and I know I won’t have the opportunity to do 

that. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that this government is 

optimistic about the future of Saskatchewan. We’re optimistic 

about the fundamentals of the economy. And we’re mostly 

optimistic about the people of Saskatchewan and their desire to 

move this province forward. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, that’s an empty plan. 

Think good thoughts and buy more pompoms. No way, Mr. 

Speaker. It doesn’t cut it. 

Bruce Johnstone from the Leader Post says, I quote, “I find the 

provincial economy has gone to hell in a handcart,” Mr. 

Speaker. Provincial sector forecasters’ predictions, if you take 

the average, are calling for a decline — a shrink in our economy 

in 2009. If you look at GDP [gross domestic product] for the 

Conference Board of Canada, they’re talking about shrinking at 

negative 2.7; RBC, negative 1.3; TD [Toronto Dominion], 1 per 

cent; IHS Global Insight, also a shrinking economy. 

 

When will our Finance minister acquaint himself with the real 

economic statistics? And when will he plan for what this means 

for Saskatchewan business, Saskatchewan families, in our 

already mismanaged treasury? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well you know, 

it’s an interesting debate, Mr. Speaker. There’s nobody in this 

Assembly that would not agree with the notion that this 

province’s economy is not immune to what’s going on around 

the world, to what’s going on across the country. 

 

And you know what, Mr. Speaker? As you look at some of the 

surveys that have come out in the major daily papers, and now a 

radio network poll that’s come out, it appears that there is 

almost unanimous consensus about something else in the 

province of Saskatchewan, and that is that the people . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The member from Athabasca 

will come to order. And the member who just asked the 

question will allow the Premier to respond. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — And that is that the people of Saskatchewan 

understand that it is comparatively better here than almost 

anywhere else on the planet, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The reason they believe that is that even in the last job numbers, 

Mr. Speaker, we know this province has the lowest 

unemployment rate in the country. Saskatoon has the lowest 

unemployment rate of any city in the country. Regina is number 

two. Employment insurance claims are down for the last two 

years. The Dominion Bond Rating agency has upgraded the 

credit rating of the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In the midst of a recession, this economy in the province of 

Saskatchewan continues to lead the country — which is why, 

Mr. Speaker, which is why the people of this province like what 

they see in the last number of months from the economy, even 

in a recession. 

 

They like the plans of the government in infrastructure spending 

and lower taxes and lower debt to continue that economic 

momentum. And they can’t understand for the life of them why 

the NDP have nothing to do but point out gloom and doom 

when they feel very positive about the new Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. 

 



3496 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2009 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Review of Child Welfare 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

in the recent Speech from the Throne, our government promised 

to continue putting vulnerable people in Saskatchewan first. 

Over the last two years we have made tremendous progress on 

this front. Our government has made significant investments 

towards protecting at-risk children and supporting foster 

families and extended family caregivers. 

 

In the most recent budget, nearly 25 million was set aside to 

improve the child welfare system. In addition our government 

will begin implementing a new electronic case management 

system to provide better monitoring and protection of children 

and youth in its care. Today Saskatchewan takes another step 

forward in the battle to protect our most vulnerable citizens. 

 

This morning our government announced the launch of a 

comprehensive review of child welfare in our province. There is 

no greater priority than our children, and this wide-ranging 

child welfare review is intended to help ensure the safety and 

well-being of all the children in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this review will go well beyond an examination of 

the relevant provincial legislation. It will include all aspects of 

child welfare in Saskatchewan including fostering, adoption, 

child protection, and the prevention of child abuse and neglect. 

Extensive consultations with First Nations and Métis people 

and organizations and with other child welfare stakeholders will 

be an integral part of the review process. 

 

The stakeholder consultations will begin early next year, will be 

led by an independent panel chaired by former minister of 

Social Services and current Saskatoon city councillor and 

human services consultant, Bob Pringle. 

 

Given his previous experience as a social worker, minister of 

Social Services, executive director of Habitat for Humanity 

Saskatoon, CEO [chief executive officer] of the Saskatoon Food 

Bank, Cosmo Industries, and the Saskatoon Housing Coalition, 

and more recently as Co-Chair of the province’s task force on 

housing affordability, I am confident that Mr. Pringle is well 

prepared to chair a review of this magnitude and help our 

government address the challenges of child welfare in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The panel will examine issues ranging from addressing critical 

issues in child protection to looking at what changes might need 

to be made regarding adoption to identifying what steps 

government can take to prevent children from experiencing 

child abuse and neglect. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my personal commitment is that this review and 

related stakeholder consultations will provide the foundation for 

a new direction in child welfare in Saskatchewan. Our 

government looks forward to the review panel’s final report as 

we continue our efforts to put children first in Saskatchewan. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And first I 

do want to thank the minister for sending over an advance copy 

of her ministerial statement so I could prepare. 

 

We indeed hope that this is a landmark study and the review, 

and it actually leads to landmark work. We think this is very, 

very important. In fact if I could quote Mr. Pringle this 

morning, I think he said in the news conference that it’s 

important to get this right. And we agree — very, very 

important to get it right. 

 

We are very glad to hear that it’ll go beyond just the legislation, 

The Child and Family Services Act. We hope that that does get 

a bit of an overhaul, but it’s important to go beyond. And that 

we’re also very glad to hear that the emphasis is on prevention. 

And that it’s very important to make good use of the 

stakeholders. They are, after all, the front lines people who are 

dealing with this day in and day out so it’s important to hear 

their thoughts, their observations about how we could make this 

important. 

 

As well we were happy to see the FSIN [Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations] represented this morning and to 

hear the Vice-chief Lerat’s comments. That was very, very 

important. And we hope that they stay fully engaged in this 

process because it’s so important to the First Nations and the 

Métis in Saskatchewan. 

 

Of course our job, Mr. Speaker, as opposition, is to ensure 

fairness, accountability, and transparency, and so my comments 

will focus on that. I think I have, if I can just say, three 

concerns, three general concerns. This morning I noted a lack of 

terms of reference. There is a press release, and I would hope to 

see, shortly, more information about actually the road map 

forward. There was some talk about how other provinces are 

doing, and yet there was no details about that. 

 

And we know, of course, the Children’s Advocate did an 

investigation, a very important one. In fact, one could almost 

call that was a landmark investigation last February. Breach of 

trust — how does this tie into that? I think it’s important to see 

how that’s done together, particularly around the child-first 

principles. How are they going to be engaged? How are we 

going to engage other departments? Very important. 

 

And one that I think is very critical is around accountability and 

transparency. People are looking for this. They want to make 

sure that when it comes to children — and I think the 

government and the minister is right; we all think this is a 

priority, a huge priority — but we want to make sure things are 

transparent and that there is a strong sense of accountability. 

And how will this happen? And well, with the terms of 

reference, how will stakeholders prepare for meeting with the 

panel? 

 

The second concern that I have is the time, the time frame that 

goes along with this. Of course the minister first announced this 

review in June 2008 in response to the 2007 Children’s 

Advocate report. So we had it first appearing in June 2008. 

Then we had it appearing last Throne Speech in 2008, October 



November 9, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3497 

2008. And this is the third time that it’s appeared, this year in 

the Throne Speech in October. So it’s very, very delayed. 

 

She’s been talking about two years, but of course it’s been a 

year and a half getting to this point. We would like to see the 

consultations start as soon as possible. The press release talks 

about spring. I heard her saying, early 2010. I think the earlier 

the better because we know that if it goes through 2010, the 

recommendations come back the fall of 2010, 2011 we have the 

session in March, but that’s it. It could get stalled out there. We 

would like to see this tied up as much as possible before then. 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I think if there’s a chance for early 

recommendations, that would be good. 

 

The last part really talks about consultations — very important 

to engage the stakeholders. We agree with that. But I would 

also like to see the panel talk to individuals, particularly 

children. That’s very important. Adult survivors — very 

important — also professionals in the field, particularly social 

workers. It was good to see the Saskatchewan Association of 

Social Workers there today. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I have to note that two weeks ago 

we were reading in the paper about 3,000 women and children 

turned away from the YW [Young Women’s Christian 

Association] in Saskatoon. We do not have the luxury of time. 

We do not have two or three years to deal with this. When you 

have 3,000 children and women turned away from the YW in 

Saskatoon, the time is now, and the time is now to get it right. 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 608 — The Cadet Instructors Cadre 

Recognition Day Act 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 608, The 

Cadet Instructors Cadre Recognition Day Act be now 

introduced and read for the first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 

Moose Jaw North that first reading of Bill No. 608, The Cadet 

Instructors Cadre Recognition Day Act be now read the first 

time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered a second 

time? 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Question of Privilege 

 

The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I have a statement in 

regards to a question that was presented to my office by the 

member from Regina Dewdney. 

 

On Thursday, November 5th, 2009, the Opposition House 

Leader raised a question of privilege after having provided 

notice and written details of his case in accordance with the 

provisions of rule no. 12. 

 

The Opposition House Leader claims that the Minister of 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing made certain remarks in 

the Assembly that were, and I quote, “. . . intended to be 

perceived as threats, and therefore to have discouraged . . . [the 

Opposition House Leader] from the performance of . . . [his] 

duties and the exercise of free speech.” 

 

The Opposition House Leader states that the statements, which 

the minister later confirmed to have said to the media outside 

the Assembly, constituted a threat of police or legal prosecution 

if he persisted with his actions in the Assembly, most notably 

during question period. 

 

Subsequent to receiving the notice of this privilege case, the 

Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing made an 

apology in the Assembly for his remarks. On orders of the day, 

the Opposition House Leader presented the arguments of his 

case to the Assembly to which the Government House Leader 

responded. 

 

Having considered the case, heard the apology by the minister 

and the arguments of both House Leaders, I deferred my ruling 

until today. This is a serious case that is without exact precedent 

in this province, so it was necessary for me to consult the 

parliamentary authorities and precedents in other parliaments. I 

am now prepared to rule on this case. 

 

First I want to refer members to what the parliamentary texts 

say about interference with the member’s privilege of speech. 

Maingot’s Parliamentary Privilege in Canada, 2nd Edition, 

page 228 states, “. . . if a Member was threatened for what he 

said in the House that would amount to a breach of the 

Member’s privilege of speech.” 

 

Erskine May Parliamentary Practice, 23rd Edition at page 144 

states, and I quote, “threatening a Member with the possibility 

of a trial at some future time for a question asked in the House” 

has been considered contempt. 

 

It is clear that the perceived threat by one member against 

another has been the basis for finding contempt in cases at other 

parliaments in Canada. Both Alberta and Quebec have cases 

where the circumstances are relevant to the case brought 

forward by the Opposition House Leader. 

 

[14:30] 

 

In September 1993, a minister in Alberta objected to a line of 

questioning during estimates review and stated to an opposition 

member that, and I quote, “I can assure the Honourable Member 



3498 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2009 

across the way that he has lost any road program for the next 

four years.” 

 

The response was raised as a question of privilege. And the 

Speaker in making his ruling stated, and I quote: 

 

Threats of this kind are an extremely serious matter. There 

is no doubt that the implications by a Minister that action 

might be taken with respect to another Member’s words or 

actions could have the effect of inhibiting freedom of 

speech. 

 

A withdrawal of the offending remarks closed the matter. 

 

In May 1996, a government member of the Alberta Legislative 

Assembly asked a minister to respond to a question about a 

proposed opposition amendment to a Bill before a committee. 

The question was whether the minister “would confirm that he 

will not bring forward legislation to protect convicted criminals 

as suggested by the Liberal Opposition.” The opposition 

member who proposed the amendments wrote a letter to the 

member who asked the question. The letter was viewed to 

imply that civil action would be taken if the government 

member continued to make defamatory remarks and false and 

misleading statements. 

 

The Speaker found that the letter constituted a threat and found 

a prima facie case of privilege had been established. The matter 

was quickly settled when the offending member apologized for 

his letter. 

 

Similarly in a ruling from the Quebec National Assembly in 

December 2000, a minister threatened a member for remarks 

she made in debate saying she, and I quote, “would pay for her 

remarks.” In this case the Speaker accepted that the minister 

had made a threat in response to comments made in debate. The 

question of privilege was resolved when a letter of apology was 

written by the minister to the member and tabled in the 

Assembly. 

 

It is clear from the parliamentary authorities and relevant 

precedents from other jurisdictions that comments made in 

nature of a threat do constitute contempt of Parliament. Having 

reviewed the details presented in this case and the admission of 

the member to have spoken the words, I find that the comments 

in the nature of a threat are therefore contemptuous. 

 

The Opposition House Leader further directs attention to a letter 

that he received from the deputy minister of Corrections, Public 

Safety and Policing. In his case, the Opposition House Leader 

details that the letter is “most probably not intimidating,” but 

cites it as evidence that the minister meant his comments as a 

threat. 

 

I do not find the letter affects the privileges of the member. I 

refer all members to page 235 of Maingot’s Parliamentary 

Privilege in Canada, 2nd Edition where it states: 

 

Accordingly, not every action by an outside body which 

may influence the conduct of a Member of Parliament as 

such could now be regarded as a breach of privilege, even 

if it were calculated and intended to bring pressure on the 

Member to take or to refrain from taking a particular 

course. 

 

I will now address the apology made by the Minister of 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing to the Assembly on 

November 5th. The minister apologized and withdrew the 

inappropriate remarks. 

 

Erskine May Parliamentary Practice, 23rd Edition on page 172 

states, in the section proceedings against a member, the 

following: 

 

When a Member has made an acceptable apology for the 

offence, the critical motion has sometimes been 

withdrawn. In two instances, the House condemned the 

Member’s conduct as a breach of privileges, but resolved 

that in consequence of the full and ample apology [the 

Member] had offered to the House, or that having regard 

to his withdrawal of the expressions complained of, it 

would not proceed any further on the matter. 

 

Similarly, at page 267 of Maingot’s Parliamentary Privilege in 

Canada, 2nd Edition, in the section “Where a Member is a 

subject of a question of privilege,” it is stated “An apology by 

the offending Member will invariably close the matter without 

the necessity of putting the motion to a vote.” 

 

In each of the cases cited, an apology ended the matter. This has 

also been the custom of this and other Assemblies as outlined 

by the precedent set. In consequence of the apology of the 

minister, it is my decision that this case need not go further. 

 

I want to make it clear however that if a minister had not 

apologized, I would have had no other choice but to find the 

prima facie case of privilege. The minister has done the 

honourable thing, and I must accept his sincerity of the apology 

just as I accepted the sincerity of the Opposition House 

Leader’s perception that the offending words were meant as a 

threat. 

 

Before leaving this subject, I would like members to consider 

the unanticipated consequences of the words they sometimes 

choose to use in this Assembly. The minister has apologized for 

words that were perceived by another member as a threat. In the 

heat of debate, it is sometimes difficult to know where to draw 

the line with remarks made across the floor. 

 

I want to repeat what was said by the Speaker in Alberta at the 

closing of one of the rulings I have cited. The Speaker in 

Alberta said this: 

 

Members are human and subject to all the emotions that 

come with that territory: anger and pride are two that 

come to mind. Sometimes this job seems to require that 

we be superhuman in controlling our anger and our pride 

and in exercising good judgment and we just have to do 

it. If we fail, we must make amends. 

 

The minister has done the honourable thing by apologizing. I 

think there’s a lesson for all of us in this case. 

 

And before we move on, when I put my name forward to accept 

this position as Speaker, chosen, I’d indicated I would treat all 

sides fairly. And I had also indicated through my own protocol 



November 9, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3499 

that, in addressing rules, I would work through the House 

leaders. And I say thank you to the Opposition House Leader 

for earlier on, through words to the member regarding rules 

about speaking through the Speaker and then a letter, that 

members on the opposition were able to get a greater 

appreciation for the rules. 

 

In regards to relevance, while I addressed an issue of two 

ministers in the House, I regret that I didn’t previously speak 

with the Government House Leader and pass on my concerns 

about the rules and how they were applied. And I will 

determine in the future to address all members of the Assembly 

on the rules equally. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 107 — The Weed Control Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, at the end of my remarks I will move second reading 

of Bill No. 107, An Act respecting Prohibited, Noxious and 

Nuisance Weeds and to make a consequential amendment to 

The Municipal Board Act. 

 

The new legislation will be referred to as The Weed Control 

Act. This Bill also repeals The Noxious Weeds Act, 1984. After 

consulting with numerous stakeholders, it has been determined 

that The Noxious Weeds Act, 1984 is outdated and no longer 

meets the needs of Saskatchewan residents. The modern 

approach to weed and invasive plant control applies the 

strategies of early detection and eradication of new weeds as 

well as containment and integrated control of locally 

established weeds to prevent their spread. 

 

The new Act will reflect a more modern approach to weed 

control legislation by establishing three classes of regulated 

weeds with varying enforcement levels, increasing the 

maximum for fines to $5,000, and increasing the maximum 

amount that municipalities may recover from a landowner for 

costs incurred as a result of control measures taken during 

enforcement. These amounts, however, will not be listed in the 

Act but set out in the weed control regulations which will be 

developed subsequently. 

 

Prohibited, noxious, and nuisance weeds will be designated by 

the minister’s order under the new legislation. 

 

The new Act will also contain provisions for an appeal process 

for routine enforcement. The process will allow a person who 

disputes a weed inspector’s order to appeal that order, first to 

the municipality and then to the Saskatchewan Municipal Board 

if they are not satisfied with the municipal decision. In addition, 

the new Act corrects or clarifies other administrative processes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Ministry of Finance has reviewed and 

analyzed our proposal to repeal and replace The Noxious Weeds 

Act, 1984 with The Weed Control Act and is satisfied all 

financial, accounting, and administrative matters are addressed. 

I would also like to point out that the proposed Act is consistent 

with modernized weed control legislation in other jurisdictions 

in North America. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move that An Act respecting 

Prohibited, Noxious and Nuisance Weeds and to make a 

consequential amendment to The Municipal Board Act be read a 

second time. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Agriculture has moved 

second reading of Bill No. 97, The Agri-Food Amendment Act, 

2009 . Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

I recognize the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And it’s a 

pleasure to be able to rise this afternoon and make a number of 

comments on to Bill 107, An Act respecting Prohibited, 

Noxious and Nuisance Weeds. And this also makes 

consequential amendments to The Municipal Board Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s kind of odd that this comes before the House 

at this point in time, because over the last while I have had a 

couple of problems that have surfaced at my constituency office 

where there has been issues over noxious weeds and how 

they’re dealt with. And I have to say it can be a very frustrating 

problem, not only for the MLA [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly] that’s trying to help out a constituent and to get 

some clear information, but also for the producer that’s 

involved. 

 

Now I know that this Act, from the minister’s comments — and 

we had a quick conversation the other day — how it lays out the 

three classes of noxious weeds. And I don’t think any of us 

would dispute the fact that weeds are an issue, can cause all 

kinds of problems, not only for oneself but for your neighbours. 

And it can also mean crops being docked when they are taken 

in for weed content, and the issue goes on and on. And some are 

extremely hard to get rid of. 

 

And of course, we have a number of environmental issues with 

weeds that have been brought in from other places that aren’t 

native to our province. Purple loosestrife pops to mind right 

away — that is spreading and I have not heard of any way to 

get rid of it. I know there’s been a number of unique trials that 

have been run around the province trying to get rid of it and 

trying to control it. But it is a problem that’s out there and is 

continuing to grow, and no pun intended, Mr. Speaker. So I 

know there has to be particular need and attention paid when it 

comes to noxious weeds. 

 

But I also remember, Mr. Speaker, I was reading a gardening 

book one time, and I know producers may not think this is an 

appropriate analogy, but in this book they were talking about 

weeds. Weeds are something that grows where it’s not wanted. 

And while the minister has talked about three classes of noxious 

weeds — which I realize gives it a little more serious of a 

context — to some people what may be a weed, to others it may 

not be a problem or may not be something that they take notice. 

 

And that’s really the root of what’s happened in a couple of the 

situations that I have run across dealing with noxious weeds, 



3500 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2009 

where the RM has been concerned to the point where they are 

looking to take action. And the producer who had a 

disagreement with the RM over the extent of the problem ended 

up having a fairly lengthy debate and discussion — and not 

satisfactorily I might add, Mr. Speaker — with the RM. 

 

Now the part that is troubling for me is not that . . . I understand 

that the RM has the controls, that there needs to be some clear 

definitions of what their roles and responsibilities are. And that 

is adequately, or in most cases, adequately laid out within the 

municipal Act. But when we look in RMs, often this is 

neighbours. And I need to read the Act again more thoroughly 

and maybe, in estimates or in committee, be able to ask the 

minister a few more detailed questions. 

 

But I know the part that was upsetting was that some of the 

definitions weren’t clear enough. There was quite a bit of 

latitude in the decisions that were made, and when it got down 

to too much flexibility and a fair bit of misunderstanding in how 

it was being interpreted . . . or maybe not misunderstanding, but 

we all have our own understanding and add our own 

interpretation, especially to legislation, the way it’s written. 

 

It was neighbours against neighbours. And that was the most 

difficult piece of all, I think, for me to deal with and to try and 

work with, to come to some type of understanding on the issues 

that we’ve dealt with. And it has to be hard for the 

municipalities, for the councillors sitting on the municipalities 

that they need to deal with their neighbours. 

 

[14:45] 

 

And there’s some fairly aggressive steps that can be taken when 

you are deemed to have noxious weeds and not be looking after 

them. Your farm land can be removed into control of the rural 

municipality. They will arrange for that land to be farmed, for 

the weeds to be addressed in an appropriate manner, and the 

land to be cropped for a number . . . well, it can be a couple of 

years is my understanding, until the weeds are brought under 

control. And what crop is taken off that land or what revenue is 

seen from this land being farmed by the council ends up, the 

costs are deducted and dispersed to the municipality or in to 

whomever is hired to do the actual work on the property. And 

whatever is left over is then returned to the owner of the land. 

So it adds a bit of insult to injury, Mr. Speaker, and it does get 

personal. 

 

And I look forward to having an opportunity to ask the minister 

how the appeal process works. And I’m glad to see that it goes 

to the municipal board, the second step of an appeal, and that 

the producer will have an opportunity and the municipality also 

have an opportunity to speak to a arm’s-length kind of third 

party board that will be able to settle what disputes may arise. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure actually how often this is used. I’ve 

run across it. I have an area south of Moose Jaw that is farm 

land and ranch land and have run across it a couple of times, not 

all right within my constituency, but from people south of 

Moose Jaw. And I don’t know how often it’s used right across 

the province, if this is a common problem, if some areas are 

worse than others. 

 

But I would assume that by the minister updating and 

modernizing the language, further defining the terms of an 

inspector, the processes that have to be taken, and just generally 

reviewing the legislation, then I would assume that there is 

enough cases that would have brought this to the minister’s 

attention, and enough cases that would have warranted the 

legislation being modernized and updated, because it’s no small 

task. 

 

This isn’t a huge piece of legislation, but with any good piece of 

legislation you need to consult with your stakeholders. You 

need to make sure that there is input into the legislation, that 

you are addressing the problems that are out there right across 

the province and not just in one area of the province but right 

across the province. And that’s always the difficulty, that we 

need to make sure that we take into consideration all those who 

are affected by the legislation that we put in place. 

 

So with that being said, Mr. Speaker, there is a number of my 

colleagues, I know, that are looking forward to getting up and 

speaking on this issue. And I know that I have many more 

detailed questions that need to be asked when we are in 

committee, when the Bill finally moves to committee. And at 

that, Mr. Speaker, I will adjourn debate for today. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Moose Jaw Wakamow has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 107, The Weed 

Control Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 97 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Bjornerud that Bill No. 97 — The 

Agri-Food Amendment Act, 2009 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gives 

me a great deal of pleasure to join into the debate on this 

particular Bill, Bill 97. And it, by the looks of it, is a pretty 

comprehensive Bill because the title is An Act to amend The 

Agri-Food Act, 2004, to repeal The Cattle Marketing 

Deductions Act, 1998 and The Cattle Marketing Deductions 

Regulations, 2004 and to make consequential amendments to 

The Department of Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 

Act. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, just based on that title, you can quite 

quickly see that it’s a very wide and comprehensive Bill 

although perhaps short in size and short in nature. But it seems 

to cover a wide range and affect a lot of other Bills and a lot of 

the other operations of various regulations throughout the 

department. And I was discussing this with my seatmate here, 

and I said it was certainly a Bill that was treating the deductions 



November 9, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3501 

and the regulations like a wide broom making a very wide 

sweep. His opinion, it was more like a huge vacuum cleaner 

making a large sucking motion and making a fair amount of 

changes. 

 

So whichever it is, Mr. Speaker, it’s certainly big. And 

although, like I said earlier, it may be short in nature having 

only seven clauses to it, but it certainly would, I think, be a lot 

more than just a normal routine housekeeping Bill that one 

would expect, this obviously making some significant changes. 

 

Some of those changes — I think as the most evident — is to 

deal with the collection of the deductions, the levy deductions 

that have been in place now for a while. This Bill will now 

allow the Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s Association to collect 

both, both the $1 non-deductible national levy and collect it 

from the cattle that are sold at the marketplace and the $2 

refundable provincial levy collected for the cattle sold at the 

marketplace. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker . . . I don’t think there’s too many 

producers in Saskatchewan that would object to those 

deductions because the intent of those deductions, as I 

understand it, is to be used to develop the industry, to develop 

markets, to enhance the industry in wherever it may be needed. 

And if there was ever a industry that really needed assistance, 

Mr. Speaker, at a time like now, it’s certainly the cattlemen’s 

industry or the cattle industry in this province because it has 

been under some horrendous pressure for a number of years, 

economic pressure to the point where a number of producers are 

really struggling to continue to survive and continue to exist in 

the industry. 

 

This summer, I had the opportunity as I travelled throughout the 

province, the opportunity to talk to several producers. Some of 

them getting up there in age and probably were looking at the 

opportunity to retire but were feeling it wasn’t the correct time 

to get out of the industry because they weren’t going to get the 

revenue from the sale of their livestock herd that they had 

banked on. And quite frankly, that was a very big part of their 

retirement package was the revenue that they would receive 

from the sale of their cow herd and the cow herd that many of 

them had spent a lifetime in building up. 

 

And one that comes to mind, I know that the gentleman is 

running around 150, 160 cows and has for a while and has taken 

a great deal of pride in his animals. And he has been breeding 

them in a manner and shape that he would improve the 

offsprings, and he would keep, of course, many of the 

offsprings as heifers and put them back into his cow herd and 

used his entire lifetime to build his cow herd up. And he has a 

very attractive and very beautiful herd and good quality 

animals. There’s no doubt about that. 

 

But he also, you know, as most farmers, they use their assets 

that they build up over the lifetime to constitute their retirement 

package. And part of it is, particularly in the mixed farming, is 

not only the grain land and the land that they farm and the land 

that they use for pasture, the land they may use for production 

of hay, but it’s also their cow herd that make up a very big part 

of it, very big part of it. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, prices have plummeted over a number of 

years here now. I think that probably the beginning of the 

downfall was as a result of the mad cow crisis and the closing 

of the border in the US [United States]. It refused to take 

Canadian cattle in for the longest of times. And when it did 

open, it was only opened a short amount or a small amount, and 

only certain types of cattle could flow through. And that 

certainly had a big impact upon the industry here. 

 

And that industry had never really fully recovered from that, 

Mr. Speaker. And it’s too bad because we were quite successful 

for the last number of decades in building a cow herd, an 

industry in this province, a cow herd in this province that was 

steadily increasing until the mad cow crisis, until the economic 

crisis has hit the livestock industry here. And we’ve seen that 

now just simply reverse itself. We’re seeing the cow herds 

shrink — disturbingly so. 

 

Because this summer also, one of the opportunities I had was to 

meet with a young fellow — when I say young fellow, it’s 

comparative to me, young fellow; probably I’d say probably in 

the early 40s — been in the industry a long time. His parents 

before him was in the industry. I believe he took over the family 

farm or a portion of it. I think he may have shared some of that 

property with other siblings and went into the livestock industry 

and expanded quite rapidly and is a large operator. And I 

believe he suggested to me that he was looking at about 800 

head all together. That would be of course cows and calves, and 

that was a large operation. 

 

And he has been struggling for some time to try to stay in the 

industry, to try to make ends meet, to make pay the bills, and 

told me this summer that this fall was it. He was done. He was 

just tired of fighting. He was tired of struggling to stay in the 

industry and to survive, and had hoped that somewhere along 

this line the value of the livestock industry, the importance of 

the livestock industry to our provincial economy but also to our 

federal economy would have been enough to spur the provincial 

government at least to open up meaningful dialogue with the 

federal ministers to put into place a program that would bridge 

the industry over until such time as the markets recovered. And 

that he would be able to do what he really wants to do, and that 

is to get a reasonable profit from the marketplace. 

 

He’s not one of these — as most producers and people as far as 

that goes in Saskatchewan aren’t there — just looking for a 

handout. They’re looking for an opportunity to have that hand 

up in times of need. And they certainly have that times of need 

now. This has not been a short-term experience. This has been a 

long term, and it is simply grinding producers down, Mr. 

Speaker, to the point where many of them are ready to give up. 

 

Compounding that I think, Mr. Speaker, is in fact . . . Just this 

last weekend I had the opportunity to talk to a young fellow — 

again, Mr. Speaker, young fellow compared to me — but had 

been in industry a number of years who tells me that because of 

the weather conditions this summer, his hay stocks are down. 

His hay stocks are down to a point where he doesn’t have 

enough hay on hand this year to be able to meet the needs to 

winter his cow herd that he normally would winter. He’s hoping 

to be able to gather in some additional straw, but as you know, 

the weather conditions out there are not necessarily always 

conducive to getting that straw in. 

 



3502 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2009 

So he’s just simply telling me that he’s in a quandary because 

he doesn’t want to sell down his cow herd or even sell out his 

cow herd because, quite frankly, the prices aren’t there that he 

can get a reasonable return for. But at the same time, he hasn’t 

got the feed stocks to be able to support them throughout the 

winter months. So he’s sort of between a rock and a hard place. 

 

And I suggested to him, well I said, yes you know, have you 

checked the marketplace? Is there hay out there for sale? I 

mean, there may be those people who have produced hay but 

don’t require it or may be in the business of producing hay for 

retail. And he says that yes, he’s talked to some hay marketers. 

And they’re there telling him that he can expect to pay for a 

standard bale, a standard round bale of medium quality alfalfa, 

he can be expecting to pay 50 to $60 a bale. 

 

Well at that rate, it doesn’t take too long for the — as the saying 

goes in the industry — for the cow to eat herself up. Simply the 

cost of hay to feed that cow would be probably greater than the 

value of the cow. So there again, a young fellow that really 

doesn’t know what to do. He’s got cows coming in from 

pasture. He’s really got to make a decision here shortly, and 

whatever decision he makes, it seems like it’s going to end up 

in a loss. 

 

So there’s a lot of problems out there, Mr. Speaker, certainly 

around the livestock industry here. And I would hope that in 

some manner, shape, or form, some of these changes that the 

government is proposing here would be able to result in some 

mechanism that would be able to hand a lifeline to these 

producers out there because without that lifeline, I’m afraid that 

these young producers as they leave the industry, they’re simply 

not going to get back into it. The older producers who are about 

to retire, when they leave the industry, they won’t be getting 

back into it. And there’s nobody there to replace them. 

 

I hear of stories from cattle buyers and auction mart operators 

this fall of hundreds and, in fact I would say, thousands of head 

of breeding stock, breeding cows — good, firm, quality 

breeding cows that are going through the market. They’re not 

going back out into the market . . . They’re not going back out 

into the cow herd I mean, Mr. Speaker. They’re going from the 

market; they’re going to slaughter. 

 

So what we’re seeing is our industry that’s really, really under 

pressure. We’re seeing the prime stock being stripped away. 

And it gets to a point in time when that industry will simply 

collapse. If there isn’t the financial support there to allow 

producers to be able to survive, then it will simply collapse. 

 

And I would hope, Mr. Speaker, that at some point in time we 

would be able to see a program here that would provide that 

assistance because it’s just not only the producers that suffer 

when the industry is in the depth of the depression that it’s in, 

but as the producers get out of the industry, it has a domino 

effect throughout the economy because it takes that money that 

would normally be spent on perhaps on haying equipment or on 

supplies to support a farming operation that has cattle in it. 

Those expenditures are not made. 

 

[15:00] 

 

That means the local — whether it be hardware store or a local 

Co-op lumberyard or somebody selling fence posts and so on 

and so forth — that market is now not there. And every time 

you lose a producer, they lose a potential customer. They lose 

money. And that money is lost; it’s out of the market. It’s out of 

the economy. It’s not back into the economy again. So it has a 

domino effect. And when a producer simply leaves, my 

seatmate here is saying here, when a producer simply leaves, 

it’s lost. That loss is there. And they simply don’t get back into 

the system here. 

 

And these changes the government is proposing, Mr. Speaker, I 

think is, in all intents and purposes, is probably heading the 

right direction, but it does raise a lot of questions. We’re 

looking at moving the ability to collect the levies now from 

what used to be the Department of Agriculture, or Agriculture 

and Food, and that money was then collected and went into the 

revenues of the department. That now is going to be in the 

hands of the Cattlemen’s Association. 

 

There may not be anything wrong with that, as long as we can 

have an assurance that there’s going to be a fair and reasonable 

accounting mechanism to ensure that the funds are being used 

in the way they were intended to be used, and that they will be 

used in a way that would benefit the producers, benefit the 

industry, and perhaps enhance the marketplace, enhance the 

ability for our product that’s being produced here in 

Saskatchewan to be readily acceptable to the consumers, 

whether they be locally here or whether they be international. 

 

Again, what mechanism will be in place to assure us that 

government has actually gone out and done its consulting? Has 

the government done its consulting, and who has it consulted 

with? Has it talked to a wide range of the industry, or has it 

talked to just a few producers? I would like to have some sense 

of an idea at least of what was the percentage of producers that 

had been contacted, either directly or through their associations, 

and what was their reactions. 

 

What has the government done to ensure that producers are 

aware that these changes are coming? Has there been any type 

of communication with the producers? Has there been any letter 

sent out? Has there been any informational meetings held? Has 

there been an explanation of what these changes are taking 

place, and how may they affect the producers and the industry? 

Are the levies the right amount? Has that question been asked? 

Are the producers satisfied with the levy rate now? Are the 

producers thinking perhaps it’s too high? Are producers 

thinking that perhaps it’s too low and that more money, perhaps 

in the checkout fund, might be an assistance to being able to 

establish a program here that would be able to assist the 

industry? 

 

There are a lot of questions that actually come out of this, what 

is really a short Bill. And it certainly needs to be looked at 

carefully. Yes, my seatmate asked me the question here, what 

mechanism is in place to ensure that these levies may be 

changed in the future? And if they are, what mechanism is 

available to ensure that the input from the producers is there, 

from the cattlemen is there, to ensure that these levies reflect the 

actual needs, the actual desires for the industry to look at its 

ability to continue to move forward in a positive way? 

 

Another question I would have is how much, what percentage 



November 9, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3503 

of the levies that are being collected by the Saskatchewan 

Cattlemen’s Association, what percentage of that levy would go 

to the day-to-day operation of the association. Will all the 

money that’s collected, will that go into a fund that would be 

used to enhance the industry, or is a portion of that money 

going to be set aside to cover the cost, the day-to-day cost of 

operating the association? Or it just going to be the cost of 

collecting the fees that come out of the fees themselves? 

 

So there’s a lot of questions that come up when we look closely 

at this. There’s a number of . . . Actually I guess, Mr. Speaker, 

if you look really closely at it — although it’s like I said, it’s 

only eight clauses — but if you look closely at it, it raises a lot 

of questions in regards to the funds themselves being raised and 

how are they going to be treated and how are they going to be 

disbursed. And what is the mechanism going to be in place to 

ensure that the disbursement is going to be that which is going 

to benefit the producers and benefit the industry? 

 

What we need to do is be able to ask those questions. And first 

of all, I would like to be able to ask the minister the questions as 

to what work has he and his department done — or ministry, 

now it’s called — what have they done to ensure that the cattle 

producers throughout Saskatchewan here have had their input 

into these changes? Have they been contacted? Has there been a 

letter sent out? Has there been public meetings held? What type 

of communications has been used to ensure that the producers 

have their ample say? 

 

After all it’s their livelihood that’s at stake. We wouldn’t want 

to see a government making changes to an industry that doesn’t 

reflect the benefit to the livestock industry out there. Because 

it’s these producers, it’s their livelihood we’re talking about, the 

very same people who produce the product that we consume 

each and every day here, Mr. Speaker. They need to know that 

they have the ability to have their thoughts conveyed to the 

government to provide the opportunity for the government to 

take these opinions from right across the industry and to have 

them applied, I guess you would say, to the changes that the 

government’s proposing in this Act. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s no doubt that this particular Act as you 

review it certainly, certainly raises a lot of questions. And right 

now, Mr. Speaker, it raises for me more questions than I have 

answers for. 

 

So with that, I would certainly like to say that I think, I hope the 

government has done its consulting. I would hope that it 

perhaps has consulted other aspects of the agricultural industry, 

not just the livestock producers, because this will change the 

governance of the livestock producers and the collection of the 

levies. But what effect would that have then on other aspects of 

the agricultural industry such as chicken producers and pork 

producers and so on and so forth? Would they want to see their 

mechanism of governance change? Has the government talked 

to them about that to see if there would be a reflection as to the 

changes being made here in the livestock industry, how it might 

reflect on other industry — poultry and livestock industry — 

throughout this province? 

 

So as you can see, Mr. Speaker, I’ve just barely touched the 

surface here, and I’ve raised for myself a lot more questions 

than the government had provided answers for. So with that, 

Mr. Speaker, I think the opposition here will certainly need to 

use some time here to consult with the stakeholders of the 

industry across this great province to first assure that they have 

had the opportunity to have input into these changes, and if 

these changes are that that they would see as beneficial to their 

industry. 

 

And with that, Mr. Speaker, we’ll need that time to do that, so 

we’ll be doing that over the next several weeks here. So with 

that, Mr. Speaker, I’ll move adjournment of debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Northeast has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 97, The Agri-Food 

Amendment Act, 2009. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 98 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Gantefoer that Bill No. 98 — The 

Municipal Financing Corporation Amendment Act, 2009 be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to rise and join the debate on Bill 98, An Act to Amend 

the Municipal Financing Corporation Act. 

 

Of course this is one of these Bills where the clause being 

changed is relatively straightforwards, but not unlike the tip of 

the iceberg, it’s significant of much, much more, Mr. Speaker. 

And I’ll certainly get into that in my remarks. 

 

The measure being proposed is that under the authority of the 

Act, that the borrowing limits be changed from 250,000 to, I 

believe it is, 350,000. Again this refers to The Municipal 

Financing Corporation Act essentially an initiative to provide, 

to put the borrowing power of the province at the disposal of 

the municipalities in terms of their very important infrastructure 

borrowing needs. 

 

Certainly there are things that you can do under the clout or the 

economic capacity of the province, in terms of not just sharing 

in terms of revenue or in terms of grants or what have you, but 

the various partners that we work with, in terms of promoting 

the well-being of this province. 

 

But in terms of using that borrowing power of the province, this 

is an initiative that in general we support on the opposition side 

of the Chamber, Mr. Speaker. But it’s one that of course we’re 

interested to see how this is actually carried out and how this 

authority is exercised. Because of course within the overall 

fiscal picture of the province, Mr. Speaker, where this current 

government — we await the mid-term probably in days now, 

Mr. Speaker, but certainly the first quarter results from the last 

budget — where there was something like $1 billion shortfall 

and where there was one billion three blown projection when it 



3504 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2009 

came to the potash revenues, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Again in principle, this is something that we’re very interested 

in. And we’re glad to see that the record to date has been good 

in terms of uptake from our municipal partners in this province. 

But again, is this yet another avenue for this government to 

cause some problems for the finances of the people of 

Saskatchewan over the long haul? In his remarks to the 

Assembly, the Finance minister gave a bit of a review of 

different . . . of the projects that have been supported via this 

vehicle over the past two years, supporting 64 projects in 53 

municipalities. And again, Mr. Speaker, we have no problem 

with the virtue of those projects, of those initiatives. 

 

Certainly there’s a great need in terms of the infrastructure 

capacity out there in the municipalities. I know in the 

municipality that I have the honour of residing in, that of 

Regina, that when it comes to the water, the sewer, the streets, 

the lighting needs, the different sort of urban development plans 

that are ongoing for the city of Regina, when it comes to the 

western transportation hub, the intermodal facility west of 

Regina — and I believe that’s one of the projects that has 

accessed some funding out of this mechanism — when it comes 

to the things that make life a bit more enjoyable in terms of the 

neighbourhoods I represent . . . I think of Maple Leaf Pool or 

Lawson Aquatic Centre or Dewdney Pool or Regent Pool and 

the importance of those institutions to the neighbourhoods that 

they’re located in, and the fact that of course it takes municipal 

dollars to be brought to bear to make those projects go. 

 

And you know, it was certainly in the case of the origin of those 

projects and the fact that in terms of the upkeep of those very 

important institutions, those very important facilities in our 

neighbourhoods, there are dollars required for that as well. 

 

Now again we’ve seen some positive things from the 

government in terms of carrying through negotiations that were 

begun by the then minister, Harry Van Mulligen, in terms of 

municipal revenue sharing. We’re glad to see that the point nine 

of one per cent of PST [provincial sales tax] was brought 

forward in the last budget. And again, Mr. Speaker, that defrays 

the need, those greater own-source revenues on the one hand 

defray the need for greater reliance on programs such as this, on 

the other. 

 

You know, increasing the own-source revenues is not in the 

entire tool box that a province can bring to bear in terms of 

aiding and supporting important infrastructure initiatives on the 

part of local communities. But it certainly is very important, 

and we welcome seeing that go up to point nine per cent in 

terms of that one point of PST. And there’s been a promise to 

move that up to 1 per cent of PST in the budget to come. And 

we’ll be watching very closely to see whether or not that 

happens because of course again, Mr. Speaker, these decisions 

are taken within an overall budgetary context. 

 

[15:15] 

 

And I think last year it was the members opposite declared that 

we’d arrived in this year country only to find out later in this 

year that they’d blown the potash projection by $1.3 billion. It 

causes a tremendous amount of trouble in the budget. And I 

guess it’s all the more concerning, Mr. Speaker, in the context 

of the concerns that were raised by the official opposition at the 

time of the tabling of that budget, the urging of caution that 

went unheeded by the members opposite at that time. 

 

So when you make mistakes like that of course, Mr. Speaker, it 

curtails and constrains the ability of the government to carry 

through on things like the full increase to 1 per cent of PST and 

again, getting back to the Bill, how that impacts on the 

borrowing limit in something like the Municipal Financing 

Corporation. 

 

Again, in and of itself, not the loan . . . Raising the limit from 

250 million to 350 million, not a bad thing. But if again we’re 

going to see a shift in the emphasis being from, you know, 

greater own-source revenues and greater no strings attached 

financial help to loans that ultimately have to be repaid, again 

that has an impact on the municipalities, and it has an impact on 

the ratepayer. And of course as I’m sure we’ll all agree in this 

House, there is but one Saskatchewan taxpayer and, you know, 

depending on how they’re paying their taxes or which pocket 

they’re coming out of or which . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Bless you, Mr. Speaker. I’m feeling better myself this week, but 

you know I’m getting blamed for different things over on this 

side of the House. But I’ll try not to engage the Speaker in 

debate any further. 

 

Anyway in terms of the raising of the limit again, our concern is 

that the ability of this government to manage the financial 

resources of this province in terms of being able to manage the 

books of this province, in terms of being able to fully account 

for what’s going on in this economy and in the province’s 

finances, the more opportunity we see for this government 

getting into greater and greater debt. That will be something 

that we follow with very specific interest, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But in terms of the Municipal Financing Corporation, again in 

and of itself should be a good thing for the municipalities. But if 

there’s too great a reliance placed on it by the province in lieu 

of coming forward with real financial help in terms of increased 

revenue sharing and own-source revenues, then again it doesn’t 

do the job by the municipalities that should be done, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Again there are different projects. I think of the intermodal 

facility in particular — we’re glad to see that that’s been able to 

access some of the resources available through the MFC 

[Municipal Financing Corporation of Saskatchewan] — a 

critical infrastructure project for the province of Saskatchewan, 

one that the previous government was very supportive of and 

one that we’re glad to see the current government of the day 

going forward with. We’ll look for more detail in terms of the 

role that the member from Cypress Hills is playing as the Chair 

of that vehicle. 

 

And we look with great interest on seeing how the different 

negotiations carry through in terms of the shift of title with the 

respective railroads and the different sort of interests that are 

tied into this project. And we look to see what kind of support is 

garnered for this critical infrastructure project from the federal 

government and to watch very closely to see that Saskatchewan 

gets its fair share, specifically within the context of competition 

from other, you know, albeit worthy projects, but projects that 

are outside of the province. 



November 9, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3505 

I think of that in the province of Manitoba focused on Winnipeg 

for example. And we want to make sure that this project is 

being advanced as it should be and promoted and defenced as it 

should be by the province. And they’ve got a vaunted 

relationship that they like to talk about in terms of how they get 

along with the federal government. And we’ll be watching very 

closely to see that, you know, not that there’s unfair treatment 

but to make sure that Saskatchewan is getting a fair shake in 

terms of support for a very vital project like the intermodal 

facility. 

 

In terms of the reporting-out functions of the MFC, again it’s 

subject to the various regulations under the statutes. And again 

we’re glad to see the minister reporting that there have been a 

number of projects that have accessed the funds available under 

this corporation — again, 64 projects in 53 municipalities. And 

the minister in his remarks talked about 2,022 residential lots, 

five commercial lot projects, three industrial lot projects, and 17 

off-site projects being partially or in the main funded by funds 

accessed under the MFC. Again, different things like the 

residential and commercial lot development in Weyburn, waste 

water infrastructure upgrading in Dalmeny, and as I had said, 

the intermodal facility in Regina. 

 

So again, all of them are worthy projects in their own right. But 

again, in terms of the different sort of policy tools that you have 

to select from, Mr. Speaker, that the provincial government has 

taken on this means of using our borrowing power as a 

collective to enable and support different projects at the 

municipal level. Again, in and of itself we don’t have a problem 

with it but just so long as it’s part of the overall financial picture 

and so long as it’s being very closely monitored in terms of, you 

know, are the limits on track? How does this impact the overall 

fiscal picture of the province? And how this carries forward in 

the context of a budget where there’s a billion dollar shortfall 

and a potash projection being blown by $1.3 billion. 

 

I guess one of the other things I’m interested in, Mr. Speaker, is 

that a number of years ago I can remember a similar instrument 

being brought forward by the then Finance minister, Eric Cline. 

And a number of concerns were raised with it at that time, 

perhaps by the auditor, and how it related to generally 

acceptable accounting principles, and as well by members of the 

opposition that of course took every opportunity to criticize 

anything being done by the then government of the day. 

 

As my understanding of it goes, Mr. Speaker, the MFC is very 

similar to that instrument. And again in terms of the different 

things that were spoken out against in opposition by members 

opposite and that when they come into government suddenly 

become good ideas, we’re interested to see that trend continuing 

as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One of the other things that’s interesting in terms of the 

measures brought forward in the Throne Speech . . . Again, the 

Throne Speech being entitled “Moving Forward.” One of the 

criticisms we’d raised against the Throne Speech of course is 

that a lot of it has to do with the reannouncement of different 

initiatives that have taken place over the past few years. 

 

And I’m noting with interest, Mr. Speaker, that our deputy 

leader, the member from Wakamow, in her remarks on this — 

also as Municipal Affairs critic — stated that this was number 

46 of the former initiatives that were highlighted in this year’s 

Speech from the Throne. 

 

And again it’s significant in that it’s a piece of a whole in terms 

of the initiatives brought forward by this government to date in 

terms of reannouncements or rehashing or recycling and in 

terms of how it’s indicative of a government that is for the most 

part . . . The new stuff is gone. This year country, I guess, is this 

year country, and very soon it’ll be last year, at least as 

discernable from the initiatives of the members opposite and 

this government of the day. And again in terms of this being an 

instrument that came forward in a very similar manner under 

the previous government, derided by the members at that time, 

and suddenly it’s a great thing to utilize on behalf of the 

municipalities in this province. 

 

So in terms of it being part of, you know, 50-plus former 

initiatives that were reannounced in the Throne Speech, in 

terms of it . . . You know we’ll see how this matches up with 

the finances come the mid term. We’ll see how this matches up 

with other initiatives that have a great impact on the provincial 

ratepayers, on the municipal ratepayers in this province, and 

whether or not the full point of provincial sales tax is in fact 

forthcoming in the budget, or whether or not that a good 

financial situation has been squandered and a great financial 

opportunity has been missed. And then of course, they’ll start 

retrenching on different of their promises and, you know, 

cutting back and curtailing and lowering expectations. 

 

So if that is the context as it comes forward in the mid term, if 

the trajectory that’s evident in the first quarter reporting of the 

finances of the province, if that comes forward, Mr. Speaker, 

and continues to worsen in the mid term . . . Obviously we 

know that the members opposite are going through the 

budget-making exercise right now. At least we hope they are. 

We hope it’s not being written in the back of an envelope 

somewhere, but some of their projections in last year’s of 

course certainly were a resemblance to that kind of process. We 

know that the budget is being made at this time. We know that 

they’ve got a set of projections that they’ve got to pull together, 

and we’ll have a clearer picture of that situation come the 

mid-term report.  

 

So when we come to the budget in the spring, how The 

Municipal Financing Corporation Act fits into that of course is 

if the revenue-sharing increases isn’t there for the 

municipalities, we still have many vital needs in the sector. 

Then of course if they haven’t got the resources, the revenue 

sharing, then the rate of uptake on this particular instrument will 

only increase. And so again that it’s been as robust an uptake on 

it as it has been to date, we look on that with great interest, and 

we’ll certainly be paying close attention to the continued uptake 

on this. 

 

And we’ll be watching of course. If there is yet another move to 

increase the limit within the near future, what does that mean in 

terms of the relative debt-carrying capacity of our 

municipalities? In the history of this province, Mr. Speaker, 

there have been times when the argument was put to different of 

our municipalities that there were things you couldn’t afford not 

to do. And in terms of, you know, borrowing positions or 

projects undertaken, projects that when of course the economy 

turned, went very hard on different of the municipalities in this 



3506 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2009 

province. 

 

And I know that there are municipalities that made certain 

decisions in terms of their finances and what they thought they 

could afford that they wound up paying for over decades, Mr. 

Speaker, in terms of the inability to borrow, in terms of going 

bankrupt, and in terms of projects that got half-started and were 

left incomplete. 

 

So of course again, it’s one thing to be optimistic, Mr. Speaker. 

It’s another thing to let optimism carry you far away from the 

economic resources you have to bring to bear to make things 

happen so that you’re not, you know, mortgaging your future 

and the children’s future and the grandchildren’s future in terms 

of the ability to be able to pay for these things. 

 

You know again, we’re optimistic people on this side of the 

House, Mr. Speaker, despite what members opposite might like 

to tell us. But we’re also, I think, in tune with that other 

Saskatchewan ethos which is, show us the money. Things have 

to add up. They have to hold water. And in terms of being 

pay-as-you-go kind of people, I think we’re very much in that 

vein on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker. And you know, 

maybe that makes us skeptics or . . . The members opposite 

construe that in different ways. 

 

But we think that in the history of this province, there have been 

different times when people have been sold a bill of goods that 

seem to be too good to be true. And I guess in response to those 

historical lessons and in response to people that would tell us 

there are things that we just can’t afford not to do, I’d say again, 

Mr. Speaker, show us the money. Make sure that these things 

add up. Make sure that the books weigh like they should, and 

they’re not being thrown on the barbecue, Mr. Speaker. And 

make sure that the accounting is first and foremost, not the 

cheerleading. 

 

[15:30] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it’s been a pleasure participating in this 

debate. Certainly our lead on this is the member from Moose 

Jaw Wakamow, our deputy leader and Municipal Affairs critic 

for Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition. I know that she’s doing 

some work in terms of reaching out to stakeholders to do that 

due diligence and that further examination of this measure. So 

with that, Mr. Speaker, I look forward to her findings and the 

work that will be done with the municipal sector. And with that, 

I would move to adjourn debate on Bill 98. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Elphinstone-Centre 

has moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 98, The 

Municipal Financing Corporation Amendment Act, 2009. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 99 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert that Bill No. 99 — The 

Emergency 911 System Amendment Act, 2009 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yes it is true, Mr. 

Speaker. I’m up on my feet the second time this afternoon. 

Obviously I drew the short straw. So you’ll have to bear with 

me. But truly, Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to enter into this 

debate, the debate on An Act to amend The Emergency 911 

System Act. And again, Mr. Speaker, it’s a relatively short Act, 

being of only nine clauses, but it’s also a very comprehensive 

Act as it’s certainly making a number of changes in the system 

that we have here in Saskatchewan. 

 

I want to start out by saying, Mr. Speaker, that I think it’s 

certainly an essential part of our society here in Saskatchewan 

and that Saskatchewan people need to, you know, be able to 

have access to emergency assistance no matter where they live 

in the province. I don’t think it’s something that should be just 

isolated to one area or a certain number of communities or a 

certain size community. I think everybody in Saskatchewan is 

certainly entitled to have the ability to access emergency 

services when they need it. 

 

Emergencies aren’t limited just to areas of large population. 

They’re not limited to areas of urban or rural. Emergencies 

happen wherever people are. And certainly you never know 

when an emergency may come up. I suppose all of us hope that 

we go throughout life without having to need the emergency 

services, and hopefully that would be the case. But we never 

know when an emergency may arise. You never know when 

you may need those services and it’s a comfort to know that 

those services are available and are at hand if that emergency 

was to rise. 

 

And this is why we need to ensure that we have the 911 system 

here, as being proposed by the government — have it operating 

at its peak efficiency and having it be able to deliver the 

services that are needed and do so in a comprehensive and 

quick way. 

 

As you, Mr. Speaker, can understand that this has been a 

work-in-progress, and certainly there has been a lot of time and 

effort put into developing the 911 system. And as it expands 

itself now to incorporate other emergency systems that have 

been used in the province here in the past, I think it’s probably 

quite well welcomed. 

 

I think we’re seeing the FleetNet system being replaced with 

the 11 system. I think that’s what this Act is really headed for. 

And the FleetNet system has served us in the past and served us 

well. If you look at what was available when the FleetNet 

system was first adopted, it was certainly the state of the art. It 

was a leading mechanism to be able to provide a comfort level 

or provide a level of emergency response to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

But as time has gone on, other systems have come along. There 

have been other developments. And FleetNet is now probably 

not as efficient and not as effective as it once was, or not as 

efficient and effective as other systems are today, I guess is a 



November 9, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3507 

better way to put that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we’re seeing the need to enhance the systems that we have 

and really the desire to have all emergency systems being able 

to talk to each other — being able to talk to each other very 

quickly — in those cases when an emergency does happen. 

 

You need to have reliability. There’s no question that within our 

communications systems we need to have the knowledge and 

the ability to rely on those systems as not letting us down in that 

time of emergency. 

 

Somebody once said that you never know if a system works or 

not until you use it. Well when you use it in this case, it’s not a 

system of luxury; it’s a system of need because there’s an 

emergency happening of some type, some degree, and that 

system has to respond to that emergency. And so you certainly 

need to have a system that is reliable and will not let you down 

when that occasion does occur. But you need to call on that 

system, on that emergency system, to be able to address an 

issue that you may be facing, and that is true right across the 

province. 

 

And you know, it’s easier to deliver those systems in highly 

populated areas but Saskatchewan is not as a province highly 

populated. We have slightly over 1 million population spread 

over a large, large geographic area. And I believe that our goal 

should be that no matter where you live in Saskatchewan — 

whether you be in a large city or a small town or a village, 

whether you be in an urban setting or a rural setting, whether 

you be in a northern setting or a southern setting — you should 

be able to have access to good emergency response systems. 

 

And that is what we have to make sure that we get it right. 

There’s no room for error in this process. There’s no room for 

mistakes. We need to ensure that the investment that’s being 

made by the taxpayers of this province is going to result in a 

system that is effective to those who need it, the time when they 

need it. 

 

And I know, Mr. Speaker, that there will be those who say, well 

it’s very difficult to provide that level of assurance that every 

person, no matter where you live in Saskatchewan, has access 

to good emergency responses. Because we have such a — in 

some areas — a very sparse population and large distances 

between communities, and others we have more isolated 

situations, particularly as I think of northern Saskatchewan in 

particular. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s what makes Saskatchewan 

unique is that we do have these issues. We do have these 

problems. These are issues and problems that we have faced in 

the past with other programs and other delivery systems of 

services for the people of Saskatchewan. And to the credit of 

the people we have working for us in the government, to the 

people we have in this province, period, we have always been 

able to find a way. We’ve always been able to find a way to 

make it work. 

 

It’s been innovative, and in a lot of ways Saskatchewan has led 

the world in being able to identify some of the services and the 

delivery systems for those services for the people of this 

province regardless of where they live — north or south, east or 

west, urban or rural. 

 

So I think that’s something we should be commending 

Saskatchewan people for because we need to ensure that no 

matter where you go, we have the consistency of services or we 

have the availability of those services, and that those services 

are available in a timely manner. So that when an emergency 

does arise and somebody in this case uses the 911 and calls the 

dispatcher, they’re able to talk to somebody there that can 

immediately contact the emergency services that are required. 

 

Now sometimes a situation arises where more than one service 

is required. It’s just not, say, just the police force is required or 

the ambulance is required. It may be a situation where there 

may be a need for multi responses to an issue. You may need 

SaskPower for example to come on the scene because of live 

power cables. You may need SaskEnergy to show up on the 

scene because there’s a natural gas leak and potential of the 

problem getting out of hand and even getting larger. You may 

need the other emergency services, such as ambulance, fire 

department, and so on and so forth. 

 

So that’s why they need to all be on the same page, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s why they all need to have a system of 

communication that they can all benefit from, all use, talk to 

each other, and be reliable so that they all know that they have a 

system there that they can rely on when that emergency does 

happen and a response is required, that they have a mechanism, 

a system to communicate with each other, so that they can be 

there in a timely fashion. 

 

You know, I think it’s fair to say that in any response, whether 

it be a fire or perhaps a police call or anything like that, the 

quicker that that service is available on the scene, the less 

likelihood there is to having extensive damage, perhaps being 

able to . . . I’m thinking of emergency responses as far as 

ambulance is concerned. Within the medical profession, I’ve 

been told that there’s a standard. They call it the golden hour, 

and that is the first hour after a trauma is very important to the 

victim. The quicker the victim can have services delivered 

within that hour, the better chance they have of surviving. The 

better chance they have of being able to lessen the effects the 

trauma may have had on the individual. 

 

And I know that to some small degree from personal 

experiences, Mr. Speaker, having had a very close family 

member a few years back, a number of years back now, suffer a 

heart attack — and it was my wife — and we were fortunate 

that we were able to get the services we needed well within the 

hour. The response system was there. The medicine that was 

required to relieve the blood clot that was causing the heart 

problems was administered and it was done within the timely 

fashion and therefore lessened the effects of the heart attack 

itself. So I have had personal experience at that situation and 

from that I’ve learned that the quicker a response can take 

place, as far as an emergency is concerned, the better off all are 

concerned. 

 

I would say that probably the same stands true for a fire 

department. I think in Regina here, I think the fire department 

moves, has a rule of thumb that they, from the time of the call 

comes into the fire hall, they want to be on scene in three 

minutes or less. And that’s their goal. And I think in most cases 



3508 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2009 

if you talk to people in Regina here who had to use that service, 

they would probably say that yes, it’s very, very effective and 

very timely because they are on the scene as within the time 

frame. 

 

So I think, Mr. Speaker, it’s safe to say that emergency services 

simply can be made more efficient and more effective if they 

have a systems of communicating, and communicating as 

quickly and clearly and as reliably as possible. 

 

So we’re hoping, Mr. Speaker, that we will see that come 

forward as a result of some of these changes. And we’re hoping 

that we would see, no matter where you live, whether you lived 

in Regina or Assiniboia or Yorkton or La Ronge or wherever, 

that everybody, everybody living in this great province would 

have reasonable access to emergency services. And so in a . . . 

[inaudible] . . . time frame so that they would be able to benefit 

from that services being there in a timely manner and being able 

to provide the services that they require. 

 

This has been an ongoing process. I think it’s fair to say that we 

want to take our hats off to the men and women who work for 

this government who have been assigned to this project and 

have been working on it for a number of years. I know that this 

project is not something that’s just came about overnight. It’s 

something that’s been worked at for a long, long time. It’s 

something that has been first introduced a number of years ago 

when 911 was first introduced to some communities, and it was 

slowly spread to other communities and then to the province as 

a whole. 

 

Then I think there was a need to enhance the communications 

between emergency responders so that they would be able to 

talk to each other very clearly and distinctly and reliably. And 

FleetNet certainly served the purpose at its time. Like anything 

else, it was good in its day — only difference is its day has sort 

of passed itself and we’re moving forward. And I think with the 

assistance of some federal departments, I believe the RCMP 

[Royal Canadian Mounted Police] as well involved with the 

expansion of the new systems here, the emergency 911 system, 

and I think that they looked forward to using that as a 

mechanism to enhance their ability to communicate. 

 

I didn’t know this, Mr. Speaker, until a couple of years ago but 

the communication mechanisms that the RCMP have today — 

or at least at that time a few years back — the system that they 

had in place was wanting, I guess you would say, as far as their 

needs was concerned because it didn’t cover the entire province. 

There was pockets in the province they could not communicate 

into. 

 

[15:45] 

 

A lot of time that they would be reliant on their cellphone to be 

able to call in. In some cases where they didn’t have cell 

coverage and it was in that pocket, they couldn’t communicate 

with . . . An officer going in there on a case or an issue or on a 

call was probably left very isolated because he didn’t have the 

mechanism to communicate back to, you know, for perhaps 

backup if it was required or perhaps for other emergency 

services for an ambulance or fire department. There was no way 

to communicate, so he’d have to drive out until he got outside 

the dead spots, as they would refer to it, and be able to phone in 

on a cellphone and get help. 

 

So this, I understand, system once it’s fully implemented and 

operating and functioning properly in this province, it will 

address all those issues. I understand they will be able to 

communicate. They won’t have any dead spots and they will be 

able to communicate with their own detachment or they’ll be 

able to communicate to other emergency systems or emergency 

providers to be able to call upon them in a time of need. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it should be just standard acceptance in 

Saskatchewan here that everybody, no matter where you live, 

has the ability to reach those emergency services when they are 

required — whether it be the fire or whether it be calling the 

police for emergency services or an ambulance. I think that’s 

very, very important. And I think particularly the medical side 

of it, the ambulance response is something that will be muchly 

appreciated by people, particularly in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Many of our small towns, Mr. Speaker, as I think you’ll agree 

with me, are populated with many of our seniors — people who 

have spent their life in this province or working in this province 

who have sacrificed to build this province. And today they’ve 

retired and they’re living in their home in a small community. 

And I think that it’s pretty commonplace, pretty common 

knowledge that the older you get in the tooth here — speaking 

from one who is certainly getting up there — the more 

conscious you are of medical services and your distance from 

those medical services and the ability of those medical services 

to be there when you need them. 

 

So if we have a system where we can have a quicker response 

because we have better communication so we can have a 

quicker response through our ambulance system, and we have 

people that are confident in these systems in our small towns, I 

think, makes their life just a little bit better. If they have the 

knowledge, the comfort, the piece of mind to know that if, if 

they’re called upon, if the emergency should arise, that they 

would be able to call upon the medical services and that they 

would be there in a timely fashion because they have the 

systems to communicate and communicate clearly. 

 

And I think that is without a doubt, Mr. Speaker, brings piece of 

mind and relief to a lot of our senior citizens who are residents 

in our small towns and may be a distance, a little distance away 

from a medical outlet, whether it be a health centre or perhaps a 

hospital. And I think, you know, when word is out we have 

emergency systems here that they can talk to each other and can 

talk to each other clearly, distinctly, with reliability, and with 

really instantly, then I think that people will understand that, 

well we’re moving in the right direction. And we have a system 

here that’s serving all of Saskatchewan, not just part of 

Saskatchewan but all of Saskatchewan, regardless of where you 

live. 

 

I know that there are always issues around a new system. 

There’s always those who will be concerned about whether the 

system will be able to meet their needs or not. But so far, I 

would say from my knowledge of this system — which is not 

extensive by no means — but my knowledge of this is that it 

certainly is a refined system and one that seems to be working 

much better than what has been available in the past. 

 



November 9, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3509 

Of course you always raise the questions of cost whenever 

there’s something new being introduced. Whenever there’s 

something new being developed, the question of costs come 

into mind and who all is basically involved in this process and 

what is the cost to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan here. What 

might be the cost to those people who are involved in the 

system? Those are all the questions that come to mind. And you 

can’t help but think of, you know, who’s carrying these costs, 

how are these costs being divided by those stakeholders 

involved in the system. whether it be a police force or whether 

it be medical services or a volunteer fire department. 

 

Is a volunteer fire department going to be expected to carry 

their fair share of the costs here, or is the government going to 

step up to the plate here and pony up some dollars to make 

these things available to those communities out there who have 

and who basically rely on volunteers — volunteer fire 

departments that serve them and serve them well. But quite 

frankly, they have limited funds available to them. They are the 

ones who really need the system to be able to communicate 

with. 

 

And is the government going to be introducing a program to 

allow them to be able to get on to the new system here and buy 

the equipment that’s required in order to properly and fully use 

the system? Because it’s no use having a system that people and 

organizations and communities can’t afford. Having them is one 

thing. If they can’t afford them and can’t use them, that’s a 

whole different ball game. So what we need to do is ensure that 

the government over here understands that they need to be able 

to be there to support these communities, support these 

volunteer organizations within the communities to ensure that 

they are able to utilize the system to the best of their ability. 

 

This really, Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, is not something that 

just came about overnight. I know that there’s been work done 

on this for a long, long time. I know that this was started under 

the former government. And it appears to me that this 

government has pretty well followed the same track that had 

been set out by the former government in the implementation of 

the 911 system, and the continued discussions with all those 

involved in using the system including the federal agency of the 

RCMP who I know are interested in using the system and being 

a partner in this. 

 

And I think that the government’s probably headed in the right 

track, being that it was well thought out and it has been long in 

the process of development. And I would say they’ve been 

developed at a pace that would reflect being able to carry out 

good quality work. It wasn’t done in haste. And I think that 

with that fact, that it wasn’t done in haste, then we should be 

able to — over a period of time here — be able to develop a 

system that is effective and is efficient, does the job, does it for 

all people of Saskatchewan, regardless of where you live. And I 

think it’s probably a system that will, I hope, will always be 

under review and with the goal of improving. 

 

I would hope that, once this system is in place and is running, 

that the agency looking after it and the government opposite 

doesn’t just say, well there we go; the job is done. The system is 

in place and we will go on to other things. 

 

I would hope that there would be an aspect here where we 

would always be reviewing the system and looking for ways 

and means to make it more efficient, more effective. I would 

hope that we’d be looking at new technology as it comes along, 

being able to be incorporated with the system to improve that 

system because that should be the goal — to provide people of 

Saskatchewan the best possible emergency system available. 

 

Because I just simply don’t know any finer people than the 

people of Saskatchewan or anybody more deserving of having a 

system that they can rely on. A system that they know that if an 

emergency does arise or a situation does arise, that they can 

place one call, they can place one call and have the responses 

that they need, responses that they need — whether it be a 

police force, whether it be a fire or ambulance or maybe all 

three, or maybe SaskPower. All of these service providers need 

to be able to be reached and contacted in a timely fashion to be 

there to address the emergency as it may arise. 

 

And like I said earlier, it may be a multiple call. I mean it may 

not be just one agency that can meet the needs of the 

emergency. It may need more than that. So I would hope that 

we would have that system in place. And I would hope that the 

agencies looking after it and the ministry looking after it — and 

I’m sure they will — will always strive to improve upon that 

system. The system is a good system, but it’s one that I think it 

could always be improved upon. 

 

Particularly with the world we live in today and the changing 

technology that’s always at hand and how technology is 

changing so very rapidly, that we should be looking at taking 

those changes, incorporating those changes within the system so 

that we have a system that is efficient, effective, responsive to 

the needs of Saskatchewan people and — that being so — no 

matter where you live. 

 

Today’s world is interesting. Communications has no limit or 

has no bounds. You can be, quite frankly, here in Regina and 

quite easily, with our new modern technology, be 

communicating with somebody half ways around the world. 

 

Twenty or 30 years ago, Mr. Speaker, that would have been a 

very difficult thing to do. It would have meant at best probably 

a long-distance telephone call that would have probably taken 

maybe a long, long time to be able to get through all the 

international operators and so on and so forth to finally 

communicate with somebody on the other side of the world. 

Today that’s not the case. That communication is almost 

instantaneously with the technologies that’s now available to us. 

 

So we need to continue to watch the changes in our technology 

and adapt those changes to our emergency systems here to 

ensure that we have available to the people of Saskatchewan an 

emergency system that continues to meet their needs. And I 

think those needs will change as the economy changes. As the 

time changes, those needs change. But I think we have to be 

aware of that. We have to be able to be reflective of those 

changes and the changing needs out there. 

 

But we also have to be mindful of the changing technology and 

how we can use that technology to best benefit our needs here 

and our services here within the province. And I think we owe 

that, Mr. Speaker. I think that we owe that to the fine people of 

Saskatchewan because they are the ones that continually 



3510 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2009 

provide, I guess you would say, the pioneering spirit that we 

have seen move this province forward. That same spirit is alive 

and well today. It’s the willingness to look at new and 

innovative ways of providing services and new and innovative 

ways of doing things. 

 

And I think that the people of Saskatchewan, as history has 

shown — whether it be in many aspects of our society, in many 

of aspects of our economy — the people of Saskatchewan have 

led the way on innovation and coming up with new and 

innovative projects and new and innovative ways of solving 

problems and providing, I think, improved services. And we 

certainly look forward to having that continue. 

 

And we certainly hope the government will be aggressive 

enough, I guess you would say, to want to really ensure that 

Saskatchewan people have access to the best of emergency 

systems. We hope that none of us ever have to use those 

systems. We hope that we never have in our own personal life 

an opportunity to use an emergency system. We hope that 

would be the case, but that’s not reality. Some of us have 

already experienced those systems and some of us perhaps will 

in the future. 

 

But I think it’s important for all of us and all the people of 

Saskatchewan to have the peace of mind to know that if one of 

those emergencies arise, one of those emergencies arise, they 

have the ability to make one call and call upon all the services 

that they need at that time. It’s very important to have the 

ability to know that one call — three numbers — one call will 

bring about the services that you need at that time. So with that, 

Mr. Speaker, I say that I have certainly enjoyed the opportunity 

to add my comments to this debate. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

appreciate the opportunity to rise today and speak on Bill 99, 

The Emergency 911 System Amendment Act, 2009. And just 

listening to my colleague, the MLA from Regina Northeast, I 

just want to congratulate him on raising a lot of solid points 

around this issue. A person takes a look at this and thinks 

there’s not much to it. But really, clearly it is an important 

service that we provide, and he gave an exhaustive review. He 

was somewhat modest in saying he wasn’t an expert, but I sure 

appreciate the questions that he raised. 

 

As the minister has outlined, there’s really two key parts to this 

legislation, and I’d like to review that. Of course the first one 

would give the Ministry of Corrections, Public Safety and 

Policing the authority to operate and maintain the emergency 

911 system. So that’s relatively straightforward. They get the 

authority. 

 

That’s important to establish because in this kind of investment 

. . . and we understand that there’s been significant investments. 

Actually I understand that the government has put close to $130 

million to date in developing the system, and it’s close to being 

operational in the next year or two. And so it’s important to 

establish the authority because what happens if things go off the 

track and you have somebody saying, who’s responsible? 

Who’s really responsible? And quite often when you have that 

kind of investment, it’s clear to know where the buck stops. 

And so that’s relatively straightforward. 

 

[16:00] 

 

But the second part really talks about the system itself. And 

while it’s got the acronym the PPSTN . . . and that stands for 

the Provincial Public Safety Telecommunications Network. I 

think it’s been noted that that’s not the catchiest acronym. But it 

does work. It is exactly what it is, and people who are familiar 

with it will know exactly what they’re talking about. 

 

It’s an important network as it replaces the SaskTel FleetNet 

system, and that one’s scheduled to wind down, I understand, at 

the end of 2010. So as the two systems join together and the old 

users of FleetNet come over to the provincial public safety 

telecommunications network, they need to know that it’s all 

ready to go. And it’s important to know that it’s moving from 

SaskTel over to Corrections and Public Safety and Policing. 

 

People don’t think that’s a big deal, but it’s important to know 

who’s really in charge because often, especially when you come 

to emergencies, that people know who’s responsible, so when 

people call 911, they have the confidence that they are talking 

to somebody in charge and that the system will act consistently 

under any kind of circumstances. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as 

we know, in Saskatchewan we have all sorts of challenges here 

in this province. 

 

And whether it’s heat, cold, rain, snow, the system just has to 

work. It’s imperative that the system work. And we also have, 

in terms of natural disasters or challenges — whether it be 

blizzards, rainstorms, hailstorms, extreme heat — and of course 

we also have the forest fires, which are huge. This is important. 

This is important right through the four corners of our province. 

As the MLA from Regina Northeast, I think he was talking 

about Regina, Assiniboia, Yorkton, La Ronge, Wollaston are a 

few examples where people have to know that when they call 

in, this system will work. 

 

And in Saskatchewan we have quite a history of systems that 

can rise to the challenge that our province throws out there. And 

we’ve seen that, whether it’s the air ambulance . . . And it has 

quite a history, the Saskatchewan air ambulances. People 

recognize right throughout North America that we rose to the 

challenge of how to provide the best medical care that we can 

possibly provide to 1 million people over such a huge 

geographical area. I think this is important. We have a history 

of meeting those challenges, and it’s important that we do. And 

there’s just no question about it. 

 

And so on one hand, while this seems like a short Act, and one 

that maybe just really quickly we can push through, I think it’s 

time that we reflect on it, contemplate the different challenges, 

and what are the unintended consequences. And I know that we 

have talked a little bit about that, the unintended consequences. 

The members before me talked about the billing. Who will pay 

for this and how will it be paid? And whether or not some of the 

folks who we expect to use this and have access to it — on both 

sides of the system, both calling in and also receiving it — what 

will the bills look like, and will it be fairly apportioned on the 

usage, but also on the ability to pay?  

 



November 9, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3511 

We depend so much in our province for volunteers, both for 

wonderful joyous things, like whether we’re talking about arts 

and culture, but also for some of the things that are so much 

more important — the first responders or the volunteer fire 

departments. 

 

We have a true, strong history in this province of volunteers 

stepping up to the plate in all sorts of circumstances. And we 

certainly don’t want to do anything that might discourage 

people from getting involved, because we know we get 

excellent value from volunteers. And so this is really important, 

that there are no unintended consequences in people signing up 

and oh, I didn’t understand this was going to be part of the 

package when I signed up. And clearly, that needs to be clear. 

That needs to be clear. 

 

Some of the other unintended consequences . . . You know, Mr. 

Speaker, I was listening to the radio this morning, but it was 

such a Canadian moment. And there was an uncle and his 

nephew caught on an ice floe just off the coast in the North. 

And they had recovered the uncle, had evacuated him to 

Churchill for hyperthermia, but they were going out in the 

morning with the Hercules to rescue the boy. Now I don’t know 

if they found the boy or not, if somebody heard the update. 

They did find him? But I think this is truly a Canadian story and 

truly one that we relate to in Saskatchewan, where families are 

caught in circumstances where they’re isolated, and they need 

to have the best technology available. 

 

And as the member from Regina Northeast was talking, I was 

thinking about the unintended, he raised the issue around 

unintended consequences. And one would be in joint services 

that we have right across the country, and in fact even North 

America. I can think of firefighters who serve not only in 

northern Saskatchewan, come into the South if there’s fires. 

We’ve had that circumstance on grasslands. But also will travel 

across the country, and in fact I understand that some of them 

have travelled into parts of United States. 

 

And one of the most unfortunate circumstances we can have is 

if our technology cannot be coordinated with other technologies 

that are being used throughout Canada for sure, and particularly 

our sister provinces of Alberta and Manitoba that we rely on so 

much, especially along the borders, and up in the Northwest 

Territories that we have some coordination there. And so we 

need to have that issue resolved. 

 

And I hope that’s been simply resolved. I believe it would be 

with the kind of money that’s been invested already, the $130 

million that the minister’s raised, that has said that’s been spent 

to date on this. So I’m sure that some of those things have been 

taken into account. 

 

But I think it’s important, I think it’s an important issue that, as 

we bring people into the province to help with emergency 

circumstances, we don’t have technology from another era, that 

we have up-to-date technology, that we have stronger 

technology, that we have technology that can be counted on in 

any circumstance, in any kind of weather, and any kind of place 

or, as I say, circumstance. Whether it’s a huge rainstorm, 

windstorm, or fire, those kind of things are important and 

particularly when it comes to emergency medical assistance. 

 

We have circumstances in our province where we see people 

. . . And we hope people come out. In fact I’m still waiting for 

the Minister of Parks and Tourism and Culture to announce the 

new wilderness parks. And I understand that this is a 

commitment that this government has made, that there will be 

new wilderness parks announced in this mandate. And clearly 

when people come to our province to go into some of the 

wilderness parks — and I think that the ones that are in 

existence, Clearwater right now and people have enjoyed the 

Churchill River — that they know that they can get access 

quickly to medical assistance. 

 

And so there has to be that confidence, both within the province 

and outside the borders, that when people come here, whether 

it’s for holidays or whether they’re moving or, as the member 

from Regina Northeast talked about, we find that seniors or 

people moving back to live in our smaller communities — and 

we have wonderful communities; and you know, I think of my 

own hometown, Mortlach that’s attracting many people to move 

back to the community — with the confidence that if there is an 

emergency things can happen. And it’s consistently right across 

the province, and hopefully fits well with other parts of the 

country. 

 

And so this legislation appears to be continuing that work that 

we had started, and that’s why we kind of lean towards 

supporting this Bill. We have some questions, and I’ll talk 

about more about those in a minute, but we kind of, we do lean 

towards supporting this. Because the 911 system is a strong 

system, and we think that the integration of the Provincial 

Public Safety Telecommunications Network or known as 

PPSTN seems to accomplish that. So we hope that that will be 

the case. 

 

Now of course we’re switching over here from SaskTel, who 

are the experts in this area, over to Corrections, Public Safety 

and Policing. We hope that along with that goes the expertise. 

SaskTel’s well known for its technological skills and innovation 

in the type of things that it’s done over the years, over the 

decades. And SaskTel has a strong, strong history, right from 

the very beginning days of the telephone system in 

Saskatchewan to now and the continuation of that. 

 

But I do hope that with the transfer over to Corrections, Public 

Safety and Policing that there’s not a disconnect. The worst 

case scenario is if there is a disconnect. And that’s one thing all 

people in telephones dread is the disconnect. And so I think that 

it’s important that there’s a smooth transition between the two 

organizations, and I’m assuming that’s the case. SaskTel clearly 

has a historic reputation for ensuring that what it does operate, 

operates consistently and into the future. So that’s hugely 

important. 

 

And so it will be interesting as we move forward, and how we 

see the transition next year and into the following year. And 

clearly we don’t want to be reading any stories about things that 

have gone wrong. Unfortunately sometimes things do, but if 

there’s anything that we can help out right now in terms of 

making sure the transition is smooth, we want to make sure that 

we think about it in the next few weeks through discussions like 

this. 

 

And that’s why it’s important to stand up and have this, think 



3512 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2009 

about this. Think about how does it work with other 

telecommunications systems in Canada, particularly Manitoba 

and Alberta and in the North where there’s . . . You know in the 

South, clearly with our road systems we have a bit of an 

advantage. But when you get in the North, the 

telecommunications systems are hugely, hugely more 

important, particularly in some of the challenges that they face, 

and whether that’s the forest fire season, when we know 

particularly things become very anxious when things start to dry 

up and the lightning season starts knocking on the door, and 

people start to worry about what will happen. 

 

And we need to make sure our emergency systems are 

top-notch and ready to go, and everybody knows how to operate 

them. This sounds like it’ll be relatively simple. I hope the 

name is not misleading, because I’m assuming that it is 911. 

And if it’s much more complicated than that, they’ve given it a 

fancy name. But it’s more complicated than that, then we’ve got 

a little problem too. I hope it’s not as complicated as its 

acronym, the provincial public safety telecommunications 

network. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s a lot that they can . . . be said 

about this. It’s one though that we’ll have a lot of pride if it can 

work really well, and we do have a lot of confidence. 

 

I have to tell you that the civil service has worked on this, 

whether they’re in the Crowns, like SaskTel, or in Corrections, 

Public Safety and Policing. I do have a lot of confidence. This 

has taken a lot of time. As I said, we started working on this 

ourselves, and so I think that the time seems to be right. It’s 

moving along in an orderly fashion. And still some questions 

though. 

 

I think we need to know, how does it relate to other provinces 

and in some of the states that we do a lot of work with? Will we 

find ourselves isolated because we’ve got a system that’s out of 

date? I hope that’s not the case. I truly hope that’s not the case. 

And so especially with the kind of money that’s been invested 

to date, that would be really unfortunate. 

 

[16:15] 

 

So as I say that’s one concern. The other concern is around the 

billing, what are we going to do, making sure that it’s fair and 

reasonable. Because when systems like this are put into place, 

there is a cost and somebody does have to pay the bills. And 

then again the training, making sure it’s up and running. And I 

hope it’s simple. I hope it’s straightforward because that’s the 

beauty of innovation, making things relatively more 

straightforward and more simple. 

 

So we will be looking to consult with others on this — 

emergency service providers and communities. What are their 

thoughts on it? This is their opportunity to hear, to be heard. So 

we will be talking to them. And we want to learn a little bit 

more about what the experiences are in other jurisdictions with 

this system, and as I said, both inside the province and outside 

the province, north and south, the four corners of the province. 

 

Well I would think that we are inclined to support this Bill. I 

can’t see any problems. We have seen though — and I do have 

to raise this flag, Mr. Deputy Speaker — we have seen Bills 

that have been brought back because of some of the unintended 

consequences. 

 

For those reasons then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, then I’d like to 

adjourn debate on Bill 99, The Emergency 911 System 

Amendment Act, 2009. And I know that many of my colleagues 

will like to speak on this a little further. Thank you very much. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre 

has moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 99, The 

Emergency 911 System Amendment Act, 2009. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 100 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 100 — The 

Doukhobors of Canada C.C.U.B. Trust Fund Amendment 

Act, 2009 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure at this time to enter into the debate and get some of my 

comments on the record on Bill 100, An Act to transfer the 

assets and liabilities of the Doukhobors of Canada C.C.U.B. 

Trust Fund and to repeal The Doukhobors of Canada C.C.U.B. 

Trust Fund Act. Short title, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Act may be 

cited as The Doukhobors of Canada C.C.U.B. Trust Fund 

Amendment Act, 2009. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, very interesting historically, this Act and 

amendment that is being proposed, and perhaps I would like to 

just get that in the record. The section that is being added after 

section 19, the dissolution and winding up section 19.1, which 

again talks about: 

 

Notwithstanding any provision of this Act, after 

consulting with recognized Doukhobor societies 

organized in Saskatchewan, Alberta and British 

Columbia, the Lieutenant Governor in Council may, by 

order: 

 

(a) dissolve the body corporate called the Doukhobors 

of Canada C.C.U.B. Trust Fund Board . . . [(b), Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, deals with the windup of the fund, the 

existing fund that was there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and] 

 

(c) transfer the assets and liabilities of the board and the 

fund to any person, agency, organization, association, 

enterprise, institution or body within or outside 

Saskatchewan that, in the opinion of the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council, is capable of representing the 

interests of the Doukhobors of Canada. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, further to that, the addition includes: 

 

(2) In ordering the dissolution, winding up and transfer 



November 9, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3513 

mentioned in subsection (1), the Lieutenant Governor in 

Council may do all or any of the following . . . 

 

And this allows for the dissolution of the property and that is, 

“In ordering the dissolution, winding up and transfer mentioned 

in subsection (1), the Lieutenant Governor in Council may do 

all or any of the following . . .” And it outlines then, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, all that can be done. And that’s “impose any terms and 

conditions with respect to the dissolution, winding up and 

transfer;” and (b) then — that was (a) — and (b) then, “provide 

for adjusting and settling the assets and liabilities of the board 

and the fund,” Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Ending with (c) and (d): 

 

provide for the disposal or destruction of the records of 

the board and the fund; [and] 

 

(d) order any other matter or thing that the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council considers necessary for the purpose 

of dissolution, winding up and transfer”. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in order to properly understand this 

Act, I would like to talk a bit about the historical, and so that we 

can get a context, a historical context of how the previous Bill 

came into existence and why this Bill might be necessary. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, we’re doing a careful analysis of this so that 

we may do the right thing here. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Bill basically, just generally, 

Bill 100 will allow for the winding down of the C.C.U.B. 

[Christian Community of Universal Brotherhood] Trust Fund 

and its replacement with a private organization, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. The monies presently in the fund would then be 

transferred to that organization. Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s 

simple enough, but again we have to put this into some sort of 

context, that being historical, and I think that’s where I would 

like to just talk briefly about that. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Doukhobors have a long 

tradition beginning in Russia where they, as we all know, were 

at odds with the Russian czars and the Russian Orthodox 

Church, and they emigrated to the Canadian Prairies at the end 

of the 19th century — coming here as probably a lot of our 

forefathers had as well, each coming with their own particular 

reason for coming to Canada. And as I said, they emigrated to 

the Canadian Prairies at the end of the 19th century, coming and 

settling. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, historically Doukhobors were 

communitarians, vegetarians, and pacifists, and they were 

Christians who contended that many of the Scriptures were not 

literally true. And well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, while it’s not a 

belief commonly held by Doukhobors living in Saskatchewan 

today, they also believed the land should be held in common, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that they would hold land in common and 

that was part of their beliefs when they came here. 

 

Now in Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there were three 

colonies of settlers from Russia who settled in our province, as I 

mentioned, in the late 19th century. And those colonies were in 

or near the present-day Kamsack and Veregin, Good Spirit 

Lake and Yorkton area, and the Blaine Lake area which is close 

— that one I’m aware of, Mr. Deputy Speaker — close to 

Saskatoon. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, just a bit of historical on this. The 

National Historic Site in Veregin, Saskatchewan, the National 

Doukhobor Heritage Village. Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is a 

National Historical Site in Veregin, Saskatchewan, and that 

being the National Doukhobor Heritage Village. 

 

And in 2005, our government, the NDP at that time, designated 

the Doukhobor Dugout House at Veregin, Saskatchewan, as a 

provincial heritage site, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to recognize, as 

we have recognized many other people who came to this 

province and who have contributed to the welfare of the 

province. And that designation went a long way for recognizing 

the people, the Doukhobors who came here. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as in all for the different people that 

came to Canada or Saskatchewan, there at times were 

controversies or concerns. And the Canadian government, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, originally promised the Doukhobors that they 

could hold land in common, as I mentioned earlier, and be 

exempted from military service. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 

government later reneged on those promises. 

 

So part of the reasons that the Doukhobors who came and who 

had those beliefs in land being held in common were told 

initially by the government that they could do this — only later 

that the government reneged on those promises — and 

exempted them from, as I mentioned earlier, military service as 

well as holding land in common. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, a split developed in the Doukhobor 

community, and it led to three camps. It led to a number of 

Doukhobors moving to British Columbia in an area near 

Castlegar. Now the Doukhobors who stayed behind were called 

independents. And these, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they were 

willing to swear an oath to the Queen and were open to the idea 

of private ownership of land. 

 

So quite an interesting history, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on the 

development of beliefs of the Doukhobors who came into 

Saskatchewan and Canada. This is a crucial time in their history 

in terms of the split — people moving to Castlegar in British 

Columbia, and people staying behind in there. But as I 

mentioned, willing to swear, Mr. Deputy Speaker, an oath to the 

Queen and that they would be open to private land ownership. 

And quite a difference you see there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on 

what the thinking might have been. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in The Encyclopedia of 

Saskatchewan, virtually all the Doukhobors in Saskatchewan 

today are descendents of those independents that we have. So as 

I was speaking that we had Doukhobors had come here in the 

late 19th century with certain belief systems that they held, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and those were changed. Those were changed 

and sometimes historically we find different groups having to 

deal with issues or concerns that they have. And these were 

people who made decisions, made decisions about the way they 

would be living, the way they would be conducting their 

business. 

 

Even though they came to escape, as I spoke earlier to . . . As I 



3514 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2009 

said where they were at odds with the Russian czars and the 

Russian Orthodox Church and they emigrated here because of 

their beliefs. But faced with a life in Canada, again they had to 

make choices when they were here, as most people have to. 

 

And this is very interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as to what 

they did and part of the moving to Castlegar in British 

Columbia. And those staying here were independents. And 

again as in The Encyclopedia of Saskatchewan, today most of 

those Doukhobors that are here are from the independents as 

they were known. 

 

Now a very interesting point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that the 

original C.C.U.B. Trust Fund was established by the Blakeney 

government in 1980, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to administer the 

funds that the former Christian Community of the Universal 

Brotherhood. And they were a co-operative that owned a 

number of assets in Western Canada until they were foreclosed 

on in the late 1930s. 

 

So what we have, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is we have people who 

came here in the latter part of the 19th century at odds at home 

as many people were. I know various people came for various 

reasons, came to Canada, came to Saskatchewan, were 

promised certain things — being able to hold land in common, 

being exempted from military service — only to find that in fact 

the government changed their minds on them and did this. 

 

So I raise this as sort of a historical background for . . . Perhaps 

we can all better understand the Act that we would be dealing 

with here and what it means to these people. 

 

So as I mentioned, the original C.C.U.B. Trust Fund was 

established by the Blakeney government in 1980 to administer 

the funds of the former Christian Community of the Universal 

Brotherhood and again they’re the co-operative that owned a 

number of assets in Western Canada until they were foreclosed 

in the 1930s. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a very interesting situation 

that was happening. Now the money left in the C.C.U.B. fund 

was combined after the foreclosure in the 1930s, was combined 

with the proceeds of sales from former Doukhobor reserve 

lands that had been held in an account supervised by the 

Saskatchewan government. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I will also be talking about 

Larry Ewashen, a BC [British Columbia] board member with 

the C.C.U.B. But just to get back to . . . The money left in the 

C.C.U.B. fund was combined with proceeds of sales from 

former Doukhobor reserve lands that had been in an account 

supervised by the Saskatchewan government. 

 

Now Mr. Ewashen notes that these parcels of land originally 

belonged to the communal Doukhobors who left for BC. So Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, you can recall that, as I said, when they came 

in the 19th century and at the end of the 19th century, to Canada 

and Saskatchewan, leaving and with certain beliefs, and then I 

spoke about when the Doukhobors, some had left for British 

Columbia. And here we have — and then I’ll be getting to this 

document — Mr. Ewashen notes that these parcels of land 

originally belonged to the communal Doukhobors. And these 

were left as proceeds of the former reserve lands. And these all 

were in the C.C.U.B. fund. And this kind of gets perhaps for us 

a better understanding of the C.C.U.B. fund, what it was 

originally composed of, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Before we would take that step and have agreement on this Bill 

or be able to establish our position on the Bill, it would be very 

important to know these sort of historical facts as to how . . . so 

that we could properly make a decision. 

 

[16:30] 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when this particular trust fund that 

was set up by the Blakeney government, as I mentioned, in 

1980 was established, there was approximately 267,000 in the 

fund. The principal was to be invested in perpetuity and the 

interest earned on the fund’s investments was meant to be spent 

to preserve Doukhobor culture. Organizations in the three 

Western provinces could apply for project fundings. Now this is 

very good for us to know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and to take the 

time and to understand very clearly what had occurred here. 

 

Now so if I could, Mr. Deputy Speaker, again just to mention 

the proud tradition that the Doukhobors have, and how 

important they are to our province’s heritage with the numbers 

of other immigrants who came here and settled, and they also 

have their story to tell, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Now I guess the unfortunate part of that history, as I went over, 

is the promises made to Doukhobors by governments in the 

early part of the 20th century were broken. And those were on 

land ownership, military service, and more, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. So they came out of, as I mentioned earlier, came out 

of where they were at odds with the Russian czars and the 

Russian Orthodox Church, immigrated to the Canadian Prairies. 

Felt that they could, basically, their religious freedoms could be 

practised. 

 

The unfortunate part is that their history is also marred here, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, by the governments who broke their 

promises on land ownership and military service, so that they 

were . . . Now again before we would rush in, I think I would 

take the time on this Bill, the time that we need, that we not 

repeat history on this, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

My comments leading up to this were just so that we would all 

understand the significance of what we are doing and that again 

we need to consult, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We need to consult 

with the modern-day descendents of the original Doukhobors to 

ensure that this Bill meets their needs. 

 

A very interesting history indeed, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a 

history that many people who have come and left their homes 

and come and are faced with challenges, and the challenges 

they write, the challenges, decisions they make, write their 

story, Mr. Deputy Speaker, write their story for what they will 

be doing into the future. And here we have in 1980 where we 

establish a fund, and now we again are revisiting that fund to 

make changes to it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Now as I mentioned, I was going to make a few comments on a 

statement from Mr. Ewashen. He makes some interesting 

comments on the fund and how it has been used. And he writes, 

and he says: 



November 9, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3515 

Although many contemporary Doukhobor societies have 

received funding from the C.C.U.B. Trust Fund, not 

everyone is aware of the origins [or] of this funding 

organization. [Mr. Ewashen is the . . .] As a member of 

the board serving my second term since being appointed 

by the BC Attorney General, this question has come up on 

different occasions. 

 

And again he writes out . . . and this is very interesting because 

it’s from his particular perspective of what he would be seeing 

this fund is about, what it should be used for, what it was 

initially set out. So he puts it: 

 

Simply put, the C.C.U.B. Trust Fund, is the financial 

remnant of the once flourishing Christian Community of 

Universal Brotherhood [and I spoke about that earlier]. 

 

Incorporated in 1917, and brought to its knees in 1938 

through foreclosure action, some [of the] resources of this 

one time exceptionally successful communal enterprise 

remained as a legacy to the present day Doukhobor 

societies. 

 

So very interesting on that. “After the . . . foreclosure action by 

Sun Life Assurance, the Canadian Imperial Bank and Crown 

Life over the outstanding $300,000 interest, the BC 

Government negotiated a settlement with the Trust companies 

by paying $280,000, [280,000, Mr. Deputy Speaker] on the 

debt, and thus becoming owners of the entire C.C.U.B. 

holdings.” Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 

 

Previous to the BC Government takeover, the receivers 

announced to the CCUB governing Doukhobors that they 

intended to liquidate available resources to recoup their 

financial outlay. 

 

This liquidation [Mr. Deputy Speaker] continued until 

most of the Doukhobor resources such as lumber and any 

other items in stock were sold off at fire-sale prices, and 

the basic industries such as the jam factory were totally 

depleted so there was no chance of the Doukhobors 

surviving their CCUB company in a meaningful fashion. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, “After the receivers had completed 

their work, the Government of BC took over and imposed a 

second condition, that being permission for the Doukhobors to 

remain in the villages as tenants on the properties that they had 

previously owned.” So quite the story, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

where the Doukhobors came to Canada and Saskatchewan to 

now find themselves in this situation. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, “After the government recouped the 

$280,000, there was a balance left which was deposited into a 

holding account in Regina, [right here in] Saskatchewan, and 

was supervised by the Government of Saskatchewan under the 

terms of the bankruptcy procedures,” Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I spoke earlier of the 

communal land and that and “When the communal homesteads 

were cancelled in 1906-07 in Saskatchewan over the issue of 

naturalization and communal living, the government of the day 

graciously reserved 15 acres for each resident over eighteen 

years of age on the periphery of each village.” So, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, as I spoke earlier, the government going back on its 

promises in 1906 and 1907: 

 

Of course, this was not sufficient for a family to survive 

on, [we can well imagine, Mr. Deputy Speaker] and those 

Doukhobors who had left for British Columbia, had given 

up their ownership rights. [Again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if 

you check the history books in Saskatchewan, you’ll find] 

These reserves dwindled as they were purchased by the 

new occupiers of the property after the Doukhobors 

vacated, in some cases by the Independent Doukhobors 

. . . 

 

And independent, Mr. Deputy Speaker, remember I spoke of 

those being the Doukhobors who split and were the ones that 

were left in Saskatchewan. Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 

 

In 1918, these former Dominion lands were sold or 

reverted to the province. The proceeds of these sales were 

also [Mr. Deputy Speaker] added to an account supervised 

by the Saskatchewan government. It is important to note 

that these fifteen acre parcels originally belonged to the 

communal Doukhobors who had left for BC. 

 

Those are the people who went to Castlegar, as I spoke earlier, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. “[Now] Up until the time of the 

bankruptcy procedures against the C.C.U.B., this fund was 

referred to as The Credit Surplus Fund and was held in trust by 

the Toronto General Trust, later one of the receivers in the 

case.” 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we all know, bankruptcy procedures 

can be costly and so in this case as well. A sum of $142,111 

was all that remained after the foreclosing agents. And the 

money was combined with the money from the proceeds of the 

15-acre lots, which we spoke about, were allotted from the 

people who had left to go to British Columbia and who sold off 

their lots. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 

 

In time, this trust grew to $222,000 plus accrued interest. 

This sum was held in trust by the Canada Permanent Trust 

Company on behalf of the bankruptcy court and in 

1979-80, was deposited with the Minister of Finance of 

Saskatchewan, concurrent with the creation [and this is 

where we get back to the Blakeney government’s] The 

Doukhobors of Canada C.C.U.B. Trust Fund Act . . . 

 

Now the question, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was but who were the 

legal heirs of this fund? Who were the legal heirs of this fund 

. . . [inaudible] . . . give you a bit of a history here in terms of 

how this fund was developed. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, since it was a surplus, presumably 

the creditors were paid off, but there were cases of people who 

had lent money to the corporation who were not paid, and so 

this posed a bit of a problem, but they also, Mr. Deputy Speaker 

. . . which complicated this, was that they had not made any 

claims on this money. Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 

 

Various suggestions came forth as to how this money 

should be disposed of — it was accumulating interest at 



3516 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2009 

[that time at] 3.5 % and if no action was taken, it could be 

transferred into the provincial treasury. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, so we have this fund. We have the 

fund growing. We have it growing at 3.5 per cent. And now the 

legal heirs in this case, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s important to 

know that “the legal heirs appeared to be all Doukhobors who at 

one time belonged to the CCUB or had their homesteads 

cancelled in Saskatchewan.” You understand just going back to 

1907-06, all of those . . . This presented a very complex and 

unique problem because you had all of these people who had 

owned some land. It was being cancelled. You had a fund 

established and now what was to happen? How was this money 

to be dealt with? And so the issue, people took the position 

perhaps that “the legal heirs appeared to be all Doukhobors who 

at one time belonged to the CCUB or had their homesteads 

cancelled in Saskatchewan.” 

 

Now at the last hearing of the commission on the problem of 

this disposition of these lands which were held with the 

C.C.U.B. and which were sold to Doukhobors in private, the 

attorney suggested that money should be converted into a 

general welfare fund for all Doukhobors. So as you see, not a 

simple issue, Mr. Deputy Speaker, not a simple issue at all, 

people having to determine what they would be, how this 

money would be dealt with. 

 

And now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, “It should be noted that the 

Government of BC profited exorbitantly [according to Mr. 

Ewashen] from this transaction, since they had taken over 

71,600 acres for $280,000 and sold all these properties 20 years 

later at appreciated prices.” We can well understand, being from 

Saskatchewan and land prices and what can happen to land 

prices, that this was quite a profit-taking. 

 

Now other possessions, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there were other 

possessions. There were possessions such “. . . as schools were 

absorbed by local school boards, [and] the famous suspension 

bridge built in 1913 was taken over [Mr. Deputy Speaker] by 

the Department of Highways and continued to serve the public 

into the sixties, again without compensation to the Doukhobor 

toilers.” 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, a very interesting situation for the 

Doukhobors, and we’ve already, as I spoke earlier, we talked 

about how they left because they were at odds, came to a 

country where they felt they could continue in their style or in 

their customs, then had that changed on them. And then now, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we hear that in these days of how their 

land is sold or taken, their homestead cancelled, having to move 

again to British Columbia — Mr. Deputy Speaker, quite a story 

when we have a closer look at all of this, having their properties 

later sold. Twenty years later I suppose, Mr. Deputy Speaker; 

we could all have comments on that. 

 

But I think if any of us in the legislature here or in public, this is 

quite a story, Mr. Deputy Speaker, once we get into it and do 

that. And I think it’s necessary in order when we deal with a 

Bill like this, that we truly get an understanding, that we get an 

understanding from the history so that we can put our changes 

in a context, Mr. Deputy Speaker, put changes into a context 

and thereby understanding the Bills that come before this 

legislature, so that we as legislators can properly deal with this 

before we rush anything through. 

 

And I think it’s incumbent upon us to do this type of research 

and listen to the people that it impacts, and we’ll still be doing 

some of that, contacting the stakeholders to this before we 

would be moving on this Bill. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s quite a bit more here because 

if all the . . . As I mentioned before, that there was a 

commission, at the last hearing of the commission of the 

problem of this position of the former C.C.U.B. lands which 

were sold, the attorney suggested money should be converted 

into a general fund for all Doukhobors. And you recall when I 

spoke of the legal heirs appeared to be all Doukhobors who had 

belonged to the C.C.U.B. or had their homesteads cancelled in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now if everybody was there, still left in Saskatchewan with the 

independents, and then the folks who went to BC were all legal 

heirs, so then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if all the Doukhobors were 

legal heirs, what form could this general welfare fund take was 

a question that people had to struggle with. And out of that a 

Doukhobor institute was proposed, a seniors’ rest home, a Chair 

of Doukhobor studies at the university. And, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, these were things that were discussed and done. 

 

[16:45] 

 

Now “A committee from Verigin approached the provincial 

government with the suggestion that the funds be allocated 

towards heritage purposes of the Doukhobors. [And again] The 

result was the committee receiving $107,000 to begin forming 

the National Doukhobor Heritage Village in 1980, although this 

sum was not from this fund,” Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And I spoke about the village and the rest of that previously, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. But again, those were the things around 

along with the National Historic Site in Veregin and the 

National Doukhobor Village. And then in 2005, as I mentioned, 

the former NDP government designated Doukhobor Dugout 

House at Veregin as a provincial heritage site. 

 

Now of interest is in June of 1980, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 

 

In June of 1980, the Doukhobors of Canada CCUB Trust 

Fund was proclaimed by the Government of Saskatchewan 

following an order-in-council. [And this would bring us 

back up to the date where I spoke, about 1980.] The stated 

intent of the fund was to further the culture and heritage of 

the Doukhobors in Canada. Monies left, the principle sum 

of $267,500 was invested in perpetuity and the interest 

earnings were to be shared by applying Doukhobor 

organizations from the three Western provinces. 

 

[Now the] formula designated a board of nine persons, 

consisting of three delegates from Saskatchewan, three 

from BC, one from Alberta and one person nominated by 

the Attorney General of BC and one from Saskatchewan. 

The three members each from BC and Saskatchewan were 

to be nominated by recognized Doukhobor societies. 

[Each member again] Each member [was to hold] . . . 

office for a term of three years or until his successor is 

appointed . . . no member may be appointed for more than 



November 9, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3517 

two consecutive terms, [Mr. Deputy Speaker]. 

 

[Now] The present distribution formulae is 45% to British 

Columbia, 45% to Saskatchewan, 10% to Alberta, 

although it is [Mr. Deputy Speaker, although this is] worth 

noting that the vast majority of the capital funds came 

from the CCUB residual fund of BC. 

 

Again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what was important about this fund 

was that they wanted to know . . . was that this was not rigid 

and subject to change, depending upon the relative groups and 

societies in relation to each other. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, “. . . the entire Saskatchewan 

disbursement is taken over by the museum in Verigin, by 

comparison, the Doukhobor Discovery Centre in Castlegar 

receives a portion [but it’s] not larger than the many other 

groups who apply from British Columbia, since that is where 

the majority of the societies and groups are headquartered.” 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, so all of this very important when we 

come to look at our changes and what we are doing here: “The 

Sons of Freedom, who had formally reduced the assets of the 

C.C.U.B. through arson, are also now equal benefactors of this 

fund, as well as the Independent Doukhobor Societies of 

Saskatchewan who did not contribute to the C.C.U.B. holdings 

but now choose to have their entire allocation given over to the 

museum in Veregin” which I spoke about earlier. 

 

Now again this was seen as “. . . entirely appropriate, since all 

buildings in the museum were constructed by members of the 

CCUB prior to the move to BC.” Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

what also occurred were things that the Attorney General of 

Alberta, who had no longer wanted to be involved or sanction 

the Alberta appointments — and so that was just an interesting 

development as I spoke of earlier, where the Saskatchewan and 

British Columbia and Alberta had appointees — now in Alberta 

the appointments will be simply made from the Doukhobor 

societies. 

 

Again BC. BC again went the same way, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

It was on this basis, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the Doukhobor 

culture and heritage finds itself. And we come to, as I spoke 

earlier, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the history of this group. The 

history of this group, and hopefully I’ve been able to help in a 

better understanding of where we are. So just, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, to briefly go over the Doukhobors and some of their 

traditions and the background to this fund. 

 

Again I spoke about the long traditions that they have, 

beginning in Russia, being at odds with the czars and the 

Russian Orthodox Church, their coming to the Canadian 

Prairies in the late 19th century. Who they were, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker — communitarians, vegetarians, pacifists. They were 

Christians, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But they believed that land 

should be held in common. That was one of their essential 

beliefs, was that. 

 

And so as a result of what occurred in, as I spoke about, in 

1906-07 where the government came and when communal 

homesteads were cancelled, Mr. Speaker. So for those people 

coming and owning land communally, who had uprooted their 

lives to come to the Canadian Prairies, to now find themselves 

to being told that this was not the life that they could and . . . 

And then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to say to the people at that time 

that they would get 15 acres for everybody over 18, we can well 

see perhaps why people left for British Columbia, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, leaving all that land. And that land being taken up and 

then later resold, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So quite an interesting history to how this fund came about. 

Quite an interesting history where in fact it has ended up. And 

so it brings us to today and the changes that we see before us 

here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the changes we see before us on the 

Bill. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the changes, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, will allow for the transition to occur, with the 

operation of the trust fund as it is currently structured, to an 

organization outside of a legislative framework. 

 

Again quite the interesting history of the fund, how it has 

moved. Quite an interesting history of the people who came 

here to the Canadian Prairies and settled and the things that they 

had to face, the struggles that they endured. And again quite the 

story they have to pass on. 

 

Now again, some parts that this will do is the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council will have the authority to set any terms 

and conditions it deems appropriate to the new organization 

that’ll administer the trust fund. And they put, for example, 

requiring that the board has representatives from each province 

of British Columbia, Alberta, and Saskatchewan. Again, the 

evolution of this fund, the evolution of the governance of this 

fund, something that perhaps with the historical background 

that helps us better see what this might mean. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this transition. Very interesting that 

all provinces will again put on, we’ll again require board 

representatives from each of these provinces, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And we have to, when we look at these Bills — what 

might seem at first glance to be simple and straightforward, it 

all changes — we as legislators must look at these changes and 

pay close attention to them, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Again just the way that the addition to the section, and 

hopefully that’ll achieve what the drafters are talking about, and 

that being that the notwithstanding any of the other provisions 

in the Act. And hopefully we would have to further look at that. 

And “after consulting with recognized Doukhobor societies,” 

and that’s very important for us as legislators when we look at 

this, that we would consult the stakeholders in this to determine 

that what’s being done here is in accordance with what they 

have requested. 

 

And again quite clearly that when you do that, to: 

 

(a) dissolve the body corporate called the Doukhobors of 

Canada C.C.U.B. Trust Fund Board; 

 

That needs to be done. 

 

(b) wind up the fund. 

 

And then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as has been wanted here, the: 

 

(c) transfer the assets and liabilities of the board and the 

fund to any person, agency, organization, association, [Mr. 



3518 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2009 

Deputy Speaker] enterprise, institution or body within or 

outside Saskatchewan [again] that, in the opinion of the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council, is capable of representing 

. . . 

 

And it’s very important that their views be represented here, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, because as we’ve seen what a history that 

the Doukhobors have had on the Canadian prairies. 

 

Very interesting also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that in ordering the 

dissolution, the winding down, transfer mentioned in subsection 

(1), the Lieutenant Governor in Council may do all or any of the 

following. And again we outline here that the: 

 

(a) impose any terms and conditions with respect to the 

dissolution, winding up and transfer; 

 

That they would: 

 

(b) provide for adjusting and settling the assets and 

liabilities of the board . . . 

 

(c) provide for the disposal or destruction of the records 

of the board and the fund; 

 

(d) order any other matter or thing that the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council considers necessary for the purposes 

of the dissolution, winding up and transfer. 

 

 

Again so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at this time I know there’s many 

more of my colleagues who have things to say on this Bill. It’s 

an important Bill for all of us here. And at this time I would 

adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 

Fairview has moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 100, 

The Doukhobors of Canada C.C.U.B. Trust Fund Amendment 

Act, 2009. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move that this 

House do now adjourn. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 

moved that this House do adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House now stands 

adjourned until 10 a.m. tomorrow morning. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:57.] 

 



 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3487 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3487 

  LeClerc .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3487 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3487 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3487 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3487 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3487 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3488 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3488 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3488 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3488 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3488 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3488 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 20th
 
Anniversary of the Fall of the Berlin Wall 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3489 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3489 

 McNab Community Association 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3489 

 The Significance of November 7th 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3489 

 Moose Jaw Prepares for Olympic Torch Run 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3490 

 Results of Recent Polls 

  LeClerc .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3490 

 Men’s Cancer Month 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3490 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Public Safety Procedures 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3490 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3491 

 Severance of Public Servants 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3491 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3491 

 Workplace Safety Issues 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3491 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3492 

 Health Care Resources 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3492 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3492 

 Management of Provincial Economy 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3493 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3494 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3495 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Review of Child Welfare 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3496 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3496 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 608 — The Cadet Instructors Cadre Recognition Day Act 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3497 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 Question of Privilege 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3497 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 107 — The Weed Control Act 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3499 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3499 



 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 97 — The Agri-Food Amendment Act, 2009 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3500 

 Bill No. 98 — The Municipal Financing Corporation Amendment Act, 2009 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3503 

 Bill No. 99 — The Emergency 911 System Amendment Act, 2009 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3506 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3510 

 Bill No. 100 — The Doukhobors of Canada C.C.U.B. Trust Fund Amendment Act, 2009 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3512 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium Development 

Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

 Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

Government House Leader 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. James Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Capital Commission 


