




















































Hansard: October 27, 2009


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 
 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 4B  TUESDAY, OCTOBER 27, 2009, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3255 

 October 27, 2009 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by the Hon. Mr. McMorris, seconded 
by Ms. Ross, and the proposed amendment to the main motion 
moved by Mr. Lingenfelter.] 
 
The Speaker: — Being 7 p.m., the evening session of the 
Legislative Assembly will come to order. I recognize the 
member from Regina Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Now that 
I‘m fuelled up and ready to go, I think I have a little energy to 

give a speech here tonight. I have a song in my heart on behalf 
of the people of Saskatchewan — health care providers, 
working people, no matter what the walk of life they have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we talked earlier about of course the health care 
workers and two of the things that have happened. One, the 
Sask Party government having said they had a plan before they 
were elected two years ago to drive down the wait-list for 
surgery. Then in the Throne Speech delivered here the other day 
they said, well that plan didn‘t work so we have a new plan that 

we‘ll unveil over the course this year, this coming. We have a 

plan now that we‘ll unveil. And they say the report card won‘t 

be due until sometime 2013 — a full two years after the next 
general election. 
 
I want to say to Sask Party government members that that‘s 

wishful thinking on their part. The report card is going to be 
coming due a lot sooner, and in fact in many ways that report 
card‘s happening already. 
 
The second part of course of health care that‘s happening is the 

essential services legislation where the Sask Party proposed 
legislation that said, here‘s the minimum level of workers you 

need to work safely in a hospital. This is the minimum level. 
And despite being shown in writing 1,305 times in one 
two-month period that the staffing levels were lower, they 
dither and do nothing. Mr. Speaker, that‘s the shame. 
 
And it‘s a shame that the workers in three health care unions 

had to come to their legislature to try and be heard by the 
government, to point out the errors of their ways, only to be — 
after they‘ve had their peaceful rally and a few speeches — 
only to be told they couldn‘t get in to the legislature. This 

legislature that Sask Party government members claim far and 
wide when they introduce people, they welcome them to your 
legislature, is the words they use. And I pointed out that your 
legislature is fine if you happen to be here at the invitation of a 
Sask Party member, but it‘s not your legislature if you happen 
to be here protesting or part of any organized group that says 
things aren‘t perfect. 
 

Mr. Speaker, in the interests of time, that‘s the summation of 

my brief speech before supper. But I have several other points 
that I really wanted to speak to on behalf of my constituents and 
on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. One critical one, that 
it seems New Democrats are forever asked to clean up the mess 
left by right wing governments. I remember it well, as my 
leader points out. I remember it well because I served my first 
term in office in opposition to the right wing Grant Devine 
Conservatives. And I recall the debt, the deficit, the impossible 
decisions that were left for the New Democrats when Roy 
Romanow won the election in 1991. And I don‘t want to, I 
don‘t want to go over old history other than to say if we refuse 

to learn from history then I guess we deserve to repeat it over 
and over and over. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I talk about finance because earlier this year the 
Minister of Finance stood and gave a budget with a projection 
of $2 billion in potash revenue. He had other projections that 
were very rosy. And what we‘ve been reading about ever since 

is problems, particularly in potash, but problems throughout the 
piece — not restricted to the 800 workers that were laid off or 
got layoff notice — 800 workers from Rocanville, Cory, and 
Allan potash mine but . . . not restricted to them, but certainly 
not restricted to the 300 workers that also got their layoff notice 
earlier, late last week from Case IH in Saskatoon. That‘s 300 
layoff notices that frankly we were led to believe the opposite 
was happening. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we have is the $2.3 billion Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund is gone, and what do we get in this Throne 
Speech? Now we get the rhetoric that, well what we need is to 
change the budget reporting process. The budget process needs 
to be changed. This in this year‘s blueprint from the Sask Party 

government: we need to change the budget process. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I say from experience: beware; watch out. 
When a conservative government says we need to change the 
budget process when they‘re in trouble, when they‘re in fiscal 

trouble, when the money‘s gone, now they‘re trying to find 

ways to not have to report the true financial situation of 
Saskatchewan, finding ways to hide deficit. Finding ways that 
are going to leave inevitably a New Democrat Party 
government sometime in the future will . . . leaving us to clean 
up the mess yet again. And it doesn‘t have to be. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, just because someone has a right wing 
philosophy doesn‘t mean they have to misrepresent the fiscal 

situation. It doesn‘t mean they have to misrepresent any of that 

to the people of Saskatchewan. We all know that things can‘t be 

perfect every day and in every way. That‘s the reality of 
Saskatchewan, but it‘s also what makes the unique character of 

Saskatchewan people. It‘s what makes us resilient and vibrant 

and sharing and caring with each other. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I‘ll come back to the budget situation a little bit 
later in my speech. But I want to point out that, respecting 
finances, this Sask Party government inherited $2.3 billion in 
the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. And their record is dismal, dismal 
when it comes to standing up for working people in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Utility rates are at an absolute all-time high. We‘ve paid, for the 



3256 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2009 

last winter, the highest, the highest natural gas utility rates of 
any province in all of Canada. We just had an 8 per cent 
increase in our power rates earlier this spring, and we‘ve had 
the promise of annual increases in the range of 10 per cent for at 
least five years more into the future. This is what the Sask Party 
government is promising to us — this at a time when they took 
away the lowest cost utility bundle that was a guarantee, or 
almost a birthright, of Saskatchewan people. A guarantee that 
no matter what happened with utility rates, at the end of the day 
the government would make it right and we would have, we 
would pay the lowest for the total bundle of any province in 
Canada. 
 
Now on top of the gas and the power rate hikes that keep 
happening, Mr. Speaker, the latest insult that we‘ve got is a 4.4, 

4.5 per cent average increase in SGI [Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance]. This is in the Auto Fund rate of SGI. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that there‘s absolutely no 
reason for this. The Auto Fund maintains a stabilization fund 
that has an admitted target rate of 80 to $120 million. That‘s the 

target to keep the stabilization rate in the Auto Fund. 
 
And what‘s it at, Mr. Speaker, when this rate, average rate hike 
of four and a half per cent came into effect? The Auto Fund had 
a surplus of just over $102 million, just slightly above the 
median of what their target is — $102 million surplus in the 
Auto Fund. And despite that, they ask Saskatchewan drivers to 
pay an additional, on average, four and a half per cent. And I 
say shame, Mr. Speaker. There‘s simply no need for it. There 

are other ways to deal with it. We would have dealt with it in 
other ways. And in fact we did, as the record will show because 
we enjoyed the lowest SGI Auto Fund rates in all of Canada 
and we‘re very proud of the work we did in that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I talked about the layoffs that happened late last 
week — the 800 layoff notices to the potash workers and the 
300 to the Case IH workers in Saskatoon. I‘m not talking about 

the Sears call centre in Regina that‘s shut down or for many of 

the other areas of concern for working people. But I ask people 
not to take my word that things are tough. I think they should 
look at Stats Canada, which reports in September of 2008 there 
were 3,700 fewer full-time jobs in Saskatchewan than there 
were in September of ‘08. I think I may have said ‘08 in the 

first instance. From ‘08 to ‘09, September to September, 3,700 
fewer full-time jobs in Saskatchewan. 
 
And the government says, oh, we‘re all doom and gloom on this 

side. Well tell that to any of the 3,700 people that are no longer 
working full-time — the single moms and the dads that are 
trying to put food on the table and keep their children clothed. 
Talk about the people trying to work to pay exorbitant rents that 
just skyrocket every day. It seems they just spiral up. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You know that that‘s not possible. 
 
Mr. Trew: — And you know, Mr. Speaker, I hear the Deputy 
Premier is saying, well you know that‘s impossible. Well that‘s 

not what my constituents say. My constituents are telling me 
that rents are going up, repeatedly going up. Repeatedly this has 
been happening. My constituents are telling me that. I‘m 
shocked if they aren‘t telling government members as well. 
 
And I‘m not talking rents going from 450 to $470. I‘m talking 

rents that go from 450 to $600 and beyond, Mr. Speaker, 
without anything being done to the apartments. And that‘s just 

examples, of course; many of the rents are a lot higher than that. 
And they are skyrocketing. They continue to skyrocket and this 
government, the Sask Party government, does nothing to 
mitigate it, nothing to help Saskatchewan renters, Mr. Speaker. 
And I would have thought that that would have been in the 
blueprint, in the Speech from the Throne budget plan. I would 
have expected that government members would be hearing 
some of the same things that we‘re hearing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to swing into agriculture briefly, Mr. Speaker. And 
briefly is about what the government says it deserves, because 
the mention of agriculture was so restricted and limited in this 
Throne Speech. But I wanted just to make this observation. 
Spot loss hail coverage was promised by the now Minister of 
Agriculture, by many members opposite. It was part of their 
election platform — spot loss hail coverage for farmers. 
 
The report was given to the Minister of Agriculture, to the Sask 
Party government, that recommended that spot loss hail 
insurance be included in crop insurance. And what‘s the 
response? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who cut the program? 
 
Mr. Trew: — And what‘s the response? The response is, still 
no spot loss hail program. The Minister of Agriculture chirps 
from his seat, ―Who cut the program?‖ Well, Mr. Speaker, we 

answer for what we did in government when we cut or 
enhanced programs. We answered for it. We answered for it, 
and you bet we answered for it in the last election. 
 
But we weren‘t the ones going out and promising that we were 

going to be able to be the ones that delivered it. You, sir. You, 
sir, promised that. You did, not me. You did, sir. You promised 
it. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I want to remind the 
members that the comments are to be directed through the 
Chair, and I remind the member from Regina Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Trew: — And I thank you, Mr. Speaker, for that. Mr. 
Speaker, so no spot loss hail, despite the promise of many 
members opposite — including the Minister of Agriculture — 
to farmers, that it would be delivered. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what was in this year‘s blueprint from the Sask 

Party respecting agriculture? Well there was some bragging 
about having moved the AgriStability program. Moving it. Can 
you imagine? Farmers must be just elated to know that the 
management, the people that administer the AgriStability 
program, were moved from one city to another city. Man, that 
must help farmers. I bet they‘re just elated. 
 
Imagine all of the workers moving from one city to another 
city. Well congratulations, you really delivered this time. How 
absurd, Mr. Speaker, how absurd. Wonder when this is going to 
turn and when it is, Mr. Speaker, turning to a different . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . I‘ve hit some nerves here, I can tell. 
 
[19:15] 
 



October 27, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3257 

Mr. Speaker, we are pointing out, our job is to point out 
promises made and promises not kept, promises broken. That is 
our job, Mr. Speaker, and it is our job to point out what we 
might do differently. Our job is not to deliver wall-to-wall 
disappointment; our job is to deliver good suggestions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, moving to housing where Saskatchewan had 
record housing starts. Well you know what? In 2009 housing 
starts are down 51 per cent from 2008, Mr. Speaker — 51 per 
cent drop in housing. This is not doom and gloom from us; 
these are Stats Canada numbers. It‘s the reality out on the street. 
You look at what is going on in Saskatchewan and we see 
housing starts down off 51 per cent. And there‘s reason for it — 
3,700 fewer full-time jobs in Saskatchewan is part of it at a time 
when the government, Sask Party government says, oh we 
choose not to participate in the world downturn. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. If members would like to sit 
down and chat, they‘re welcome to do that, but there are places 

where members could sit down and chat where they wouldn‘t 
interfere with the member on his feet. So I ask members to 
recognize the right of the member from Regina Coronation Park 
to be able to present his speech. The member from Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Trew: — And I thank you, Mr. Speaker. All of this and I 
haven‘t even touched on forestry where, what was the election 

promise? In P.A. [Prince Albert] it was, a vote for Darryl is a 
vote for the mill. Well you know what? The building‘s still 

standing there. The equipment‘s all gone. The trees are standing 
there. Not one of the 700-plus jobs in the mill is in P.A. A vote 
for Darryl is a vote for the mill, close quote, from the election in 
Prince Albert. 
 
There is disappointment across the forest belt in Saskatchewan, 
huge disappointment because they have not seen anything but 
empty rhetoric from the government members opposite, from 
the Sask Party. Imagine, Mr. Speaker, forestry was the fourth 
largest contributor to Saskatchewan‘s economy and had 

potential to grow even more. Forestry that employed thousands 
upon thousands of people, most of them in northern 
Saskatchewan. I confess that Regina‘s forest belt is beautiful 

but tends not to be enough trees in Regina to be commercially 
viable in a major way. We certainly can‘t support a pulp mill in 

Regina but maybe there‘s some potential in future for other 

ways, other areas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have talked about health care. I have talked 
about a number of things but I want to come back to the budget 
and I want to come back to what I‘ve heard. I actually heard 
some members opposite saying that that what their constituents 
deserve and what the people of Saskatchewan deserve is our 
honesty and our integrity — our honesty and our integrity, Mr. 
Speaker. At the end of the day as a politician, that‘s what we 

have to bring to the table. 
 
I heard the Deputy Premier bragging, waxing eloquently about 
education and about how he‘s convinced the Minister of 

Finance to pump ever more money into education. And it 
sounded wonderful, Mr. Speaker. I heard that. He spoke just 
before me. I heard it. And let me point out some of the harsh 
reality that comes out of the Sask Party‘s own news releases, 

Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, since the budget was introduced in this boom 
times, since the budget was delivered and they had $2.3 billion 
surplus in the Fiscal Stabilization Fund, since that time, the 
reality that has set in on the people of Saskatchewan is Sask 
Party government slashed $32 million from the academic health 
sciences building in Saskatoon, slashed $32 million out of the 
budget. 
 
Then they took an additional $30 million out of the Education 
budget. Well how is it, how is it that things are so perfect there? 
And they say, oh but we on the opposition side are negative 
nellies, they say. We didn‘t cut $32 million from the health 
sciences budget. We didn‘t cut $30 million from the Education 

budget. We didn‘t this year cut $130 from health care and then 

say, oh but you have to deliver ever more. Cut $130 million out 
of this year‘s budget — that‘s what they did. And 9 million, get 
this: at a time when there‘s 3,700 men and women fewer 

working full-time in Saskatchewan than there was a year earlier, 
they cut $9 million from employment and training programs, 
Mr. Speaker. Can you imagine that? 
 
And they have the audacity to say, oh but things are perfect. If 
you happen to be a health care worker, you‘re not welcome in 

the legislature. If you happen to want the academic health 
sciences building built, not this year. If you happen to want 
some school roofs fixed and some things like that, not this year. 
No, not this year. Stay tuned. Maybe next year. Maybe. If you 
happen to need that 130 million in health care — now what 
could we need 130 million for? Well I don‘t know, Mr. 

Speaker. 
 
I look at today‘s Leader-Post and I see ―H1N1 hits hard . . .‖ 
It‘s the headline. ―H1N1 hits hard . . .‖ It seems to me, Mr. 
Speaker, instead of proposing essential services legislation, they 
could take that $130 million and fix a lot of wrongs in the 
health care system. 
 
They had all the answers before they were elected two years 
ago, Mr. Speaker, but very few of them now. So, Mr. Speaker, 
in opposition, the Sask Party . . . I think I‘m getting the hook 
here. I got a minute left there and the time‘s up here. Mr. 

Speaker, I will take my place fairly quickly. 
 
But I want to point out, in opposition the Sask Party had all of 
the answers. And then when they were elected, they had all of 
the money — all of the money, including the $2.3 billion Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund. Then the Sask Party government spent the 
2.3 Fiscal Stabilization Fund. They overestimated revenues, and 
now they say we need to change the budget process. 
 
Well beware, Mr. Speaker. We need to change the budget 
process — why? Why would they say that at a time when 
revenues are collapsing for them because they overestimated? 
Why would they say that when they have had to slash their 
expenditures? Why would a government say we need to change 
the budget process? Well my hypothesis is nothing short of a 
cover-up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the amendment very proudly. 
And I will not be supporting this Speech from the Throne. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 
Environment, the member for Martensville. 



3258 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2009 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like 
to begin by welcoming the new member on the opposition side, 
the member for Saskatoon Riversdale. And to the returning 
member, we welcome him as well, back to this legislature. 
 
I‘d like to make a few comments about my constituency, the 

constituency of Martensville. I think there are few places in 
Saskatchewan that are growing at such a rate as my 
constituency. And I may be a little bit biased, but I don‘t know 

that there‘s any place in Saskatchewan that better represents the 

new attitude of growth and moving forward that can be found 
within my constituency. 
 
This summer, in fact, the town of Martensville, inside the 
constituency of Martensville, was named a city. It was the 15th 
city proclaimed in the province of Saskatchewan. It is growing 
at an unprecedented rate. And from door knocking in the last 
election, I can say that a lot of the people that are moving into 
my constituency are people who used to live in this province, 
who had left over the last 20 years and are now coming home. 
They‘ve got a great hope for our province and are very 
confident in their future within our province. 
 
In speaking of Martensville, I‘d like to offer a special 

recognition to their mayor, Giles Saulnier. He has been mayor 
of the town of Martensville for many years. He oversaw the 
town of Martensville becoming a city. He has recently stepped 
down. I asked him the other day why he was stepping down. 
He‘s done such great work. And he said he was tired. And I told 

him, after all his lobbying our government over education 
property taxes, that I was pretty tired of him too. But I‘m pretty 
sure that his replacement will continue to represent Martensville 
well. And we wish Giles all the best. He was an amazing 
advocate for his community. 
 
And I have to say, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that I like, not 
most about my constituency, but one thing that makes me pretty 
happy, it‘s one of the few constituencies in this province that 
has never been, ever, represented by a CCF [Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation] or NDP [New Democratic Party] 
member. And I think that‘s pretty fantastic, and I have to . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . The member opposite said they 
came close. Well, Mr. Speaker, I would like to remind the 
members opposite that in the by-election in March of 2007, the 
Saskatchewan Party got 77 per cent. The NDP got, I think, 
about 10 per cent. It was the worst showing of any election in 
the history of this province, and it was so low that the NDP 
actually didn‘t get their deposit back. So I don‘t think they‘re 

making a whole lot of inroads in my riding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the voters in Martensville 
who‘ve elected me twice in less than three years. Their 

confidence in me is very humbling. 
 
My constituency is full of very hard-working people, and I 
would like to mention just a couple of them. Kevin and Melanie 
Boldt own Pine View Farms in my constituency. It‘s a organic 

meat processing plant. They sell throughout the province and 
outside the province and recently they partnered with the folks 
who own Calories in Saskatoon and opened up a specialty food 
store called Souleio Foods in Saskatoon. I was able to be at the 
grand opening yesterday, or on Sunday. The Minister for 
Advanced Education, Labour was there as well. 

They‘re a remarkable couple. They‘re a young couple and they 

have such a vision and determination for their business, and to 
contribute to their community. Between Kevin and Melanie and 
their partners, with the various businesses that they have, they 
employ 100 people in our province, Mr. Speaker, which I think 
is exceptional for such a young couple. 
 
I would also like to take a minute to thank the staff that I have 
working for me in my constituency office, Whitney Friesen, and 
in my ministerial office, Cam, Drew, Kelly, Krista for all of 
their hard work and dedication. 
 
I would also like to offer some special thanks to my Legislative 
Secretary, the member for Yorkton, who has been working on 
the recycling file. I recently got his report. It‘s very large. It‘s a 

huge binder and he did a lot of work. He did consultations 
across Saskatchewan and outside of the province as well, and I 
certainly appreciate the efforts that he made on behalf of our 
province, working towards better opportunities for recycling. 
 
I would also like to thank the hard-working men and women 
who work within the Ministry of Environment, the 
Saskatchewan Watershed Authority, and SaskWater. Mr. 
Speaker, I believe that the public servants that work for us are 
the unsung heroes. They do most of the heavy lifting for us, 
sometimes all of the heavy lifting for us, and in my ministry, 
I‘m blessed to have amazing staff. In particular — and I hate to 
start picking out one or two — but in particular my deputy 
minister, Liz Quarshie, who is a shining star, and I wouldn‘t be 

able to do what I do every day without her help. 
 
And I cannot forget that a large part of our government‘s 

continued success is the contributions from all of the caucus 
members on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker. They are 
dedicated to making our province a better place. But I have to 
say, I don‘t believe that anybody serves us better or deserves 
greater thanks than our Premier, the member for Swift Current. 
I don‘t believe that we could have a better leader and it is an 

absolute honour to serve with him. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I‘m happy to stand today to reply to what is now 
our government‘s third Speech from the Throne. A great man 

once said: 
 

Now this is not the end. It is not even the beginning of the 
end. But it is, perhaps, the end of the beginning. 

 
But, Mr. Speaker, what a beginning we have had. Never in 
history of our province has a government acted so quickly to 
keep so many of its promises. We have fulfilled over 100 of our 
campaign promises and are making steps to address the 
remaining ones. And I think that‘s a pretty fantastic record for 

two years in government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have given the largest tax break in 
Saskatchewan history. We have removed 80,000 people from 
the tax rolls — low-income folks who will no longer be paying 
provincial income tax. We have provided the largest property 
tax relief since the tax was established. The members opposite 
promised to fix this for decades and it never was addressed. 
They promised that the status quo was not on and then failed to 
deliver. 
 



October 27, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3259 

We have introduced climate change legislation and a real plan. 
The members opposite, particularly the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres, will like to lament that we abandoned their 
climate change plan; but, Mr. Speaker, I would remind her yet 
again that there really was no plan. A glossy brochure does not 
make a plan. Our government has done the work. We have 
introduced legislation and will pass regulations to make sure 
that emissions are actually reduced in our province. 
 
The members opposite can stand up and ask questions in this 
House about climate change. I think it‘s a little bit laughable, 
considering under their tenure, greenhouse gases rose by almost 
70 per cent, Mr. Speaker. That is their record. What they have 
left behind is an environmental debt. 
 
[19:30] 
 
I‘m sure that at some point the NDP Environment critic will 
stand up and lament that we closed her climate change 
secretariat. I was actually surprised, Mr. Speaker, she had her 
Speech from the Throne and barely addressed the environment 
at all, and even left out her three main talking points. But I 
would point out yet again that by her own quote she has 
admitted that the climate change secretariat actually never 
existed. It was just a plan to do something at some future date. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That‘s your version, Nancy. You stick to 
it. 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — She says it‘s my version. Here‘s a 
quote from the member opposite, the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. ―Saskatchewan also had a plan outlining the 

establishment . . .‖ Not the actual establishment. She also said, 
―It was going to be but it never was,‖ because they never did it, 
Mr. Speaker. Not my version; that would be her version. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, on addressing climate change, the members 
opposite like to discuss their $320 million, a one-time payment 
that was going to address all of our problems. But, Mr. Speaker, 
our government is committed to almost $2 billion. And just to 
read into the record some of the things that we are doing: $700 
million for the Boundary dam clean coal project, gas turbines, 
aqua store, deep saline aquifer CO2 storage projects, continued 
support for CO2 monitoring. We have committed money to the 
Saskatchewan-Montana CCS [carbon capture and storage] 
project. 
 
The list goes on, Mr. Speaker, including increased funding to 
the PTRC [Petroleum Technology Research Centre]. We‘ve 

increased funding to the Go Green Fund. I have other ones here, 
Mr. Speaker, but I‘ve read most of them into the record before, 

and I would hope that people are making notes of the 
commitments that we‘ve made. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned, we are committing $70 million 
over four years to the Go Green Fund. We‘ve re-established the 
fund; we did a restructuring. 
 
Last year we had a report done on the previous NDP Green 
Initiatives Fund to see if it was actually living up to the 
expectations and, Mr. Speaker, the report came back stating that 
it was absolutely not living up to expectations. The report came 
back saying that the fund lacked any quantitative measures. It 

had weak objectives and ignored the largest emitters in 
Saskatchewan. It lacked clear priorities and had no focus on 
environmental objectives. It was also unlikely to achieve the 
government‘s objectives. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, like I said, since then we have restructured it, 
looking for quantifiable objectives such as actual reductions of 
greenhouse gases, actual water conservation. I would point out 
we‘ve committed over the next four years $11 million to a toilet 

replacement program which, when it‘s fully implemented, will 

save 15 million litres of water per day, which I think is an 
extraordinary achievement for the province. 
 
We also committed money to biodiversity conservation and 
energy conservation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP‘s lack of commitment on the 

environment is very evident from their time in office, as most of 
us would know. Kyoto was signed in 1998. It took another four 
years, until 2002, for the NDP to release a position paper on 
climate change – not a plan, just a position paper. And then it 
took another five years, on the eve of an election in 2007, for 
them to issue some glossy brochures. So, Mr. Speaker, in the 
course of time, it took almost a decade. And at the end of it, 
they still didn‘t have anything concrete that was going to make 

any difference with our emissions. 
 
In contrast I would like to point out that in just 18 months of 
this government, we aligned with the federal government‘s 
targets. We did widespread consultation. We introduced 
legislation. And, Mr. Speaker, we signed an agreement in 
principle with the federal government that would ensure 
working towards an equivalency agreement to make sure that 
money stays in Saskatchewan for investment in technology. 
 
And I would point out, Mr. Speaker, for all of the NDP 
Environment critic‘s lamenting, we‘re just doing what she 

asked us to do. And I would quote, ―I would say the federal 

targets are something they should clearly be adopting.‖ So I‘m 
not quite sure what she‘s so upset about. They ask us to do, they 

expect us to do what they ask every day. And then when we do, 
then they complain about that. So I think it‘s a bit of a 

hypocritical approach. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think their dedication to the environment is 
pretty evident. In 2004 the NDP fired 200 environmental staff. 
It closed nine rural and northern environment offices and six 
fire bases. And the Environment minister at the time, the 
member for Saskatoon Centre said, in response to questions 
about these cuts, ―We have our priorities and we have to 

support those priorities.‖ Well apparently, Mr. Speaker, the 

environment was absolutely not a priority for the NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has undertaken other common 
sense initiatives. Within my ministry one of the things that we 
did, which is a common sense thing that people in 
Saskatchewan had been asking for, was to allow Saskatchewan 
residents to enjoy Sunday hunting. And I have had 
overwhelming positive response, I would point out, positive 
response to the fact that we have made this change. It brings us 
into line with just about every other jurisdiction in North 
America. It was something that had been asked of the NDP for 
years, and they completely ignored the request, but, Mr. 



3260 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2009 

Speaker, we felt that it was a good decision to make. It gives 
people an extra day to hunt. 
 
I received a letter from a young boy last year. I think he was 
about 10 or 11 years old and his dad works full-time and he 
could only hunt with him on Sunday or on Saturday. So he had 
asked why we didn‘t allow Sunday hunting. It gives him an 

extra day with his dad. And that‘s one of the many reasons why 

we made this change, Mr. Speaker. It also will generate, we‘re 

estimating, an additional $9 million in revenue for the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we‘ve also increased funding to conservation and 

development authorities to a total of $1.2 million. We have 
identified dam safety projects. These are long-term, 
long-standing issues that need to be addressed to ensure the 
safety of our water supply. 
 
We have also done substantial work in the area of acid rain. 
And we know that there‘s issues with acidification in northern 

Saskatchewan. And it was something that again, Mr. Speaker, 
on the eve of an election, the NDP started to address this issue 
but didn‘t make much headway. 
 
In fact, in March of 2007, they let lapse a memorandum of 
understanding with the Government of Alberta. And I‘m not 

really sure how we address acidification in northern 
Saskatchewan unless you‘re working with the Government of 

Alberta because the problem starts in Alberta. So if you‘re not 

talking to that government, how do we expect to address some 
of these issues? Mr. Speaker, we are working on reconstituting 
that memorandum of understanding, and we will actually be 
expanding it to include air monitoring. 
 
In total, since forming government we have spent additional 
money on monitoring and have dedicated staff on this file as 
well, Mr. Speaker. We have undertaken testing and have begun 
preparing baseline information. And also on the water file, 
we‘ve increased the funding for watershed planning 

implementation to $800,000. This will allow local watershed 
groups to implement plans they have been developing and 
provide serious protection for our water sources across the 
province. 
 
We have also added an additional $260,000 to the 
environmental assessment branch and three additional full-time 
equivalents. This will allow us to decrease the project wait 
times. There is still a substantial amount of interest in 
exploration in our province, Mr. Speaker, and this will allow us 
to keep up with the demands of industry. 
 
We have also allocated over the last two years $2 million to a 
northwest sustainable development plan. We know that the 
members opposite were happy to hand out exploration permits 
in the North, Mr. Speaker, but they did it without a plan in 
place. And we thought that it was probably a wise move to 
make sure that we have a land use plan in place for northwest 
Saskatchewan, so that we can make good decisions moving 
forward when it comes to environmental protection. 
 
Mr. Speaker, also in Saskatchewan recycling is an issue and, as 
I pointed out earlier, the member for Yorkton has been helping 
me out on that file. And with the downturn in the recycling 
market, there are communities and organizations that were 

struggling and asked us for assistance. So just recently we 
announced $2 million in bridge funding while we work towards 
a multi-material recycling program. Mr. Speaker, that money 
went to SARC [Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation 
Centres] and SARCAN, the Association of Regional Waste 
Management Authorities, and to Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities to hand out to various municipalities who needed 
help on the recycling front. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are also steadfast in our support for 
Saskatchewan technology, in particular, carbon capture and 
storage. Not only are people in Saskatchewan aware of what we 
are doing, Mr. Speaker, but we believe that the world is paying 
attention. I know that under the NDP, they promoted the idea. 
 
The member opposite, the NDP Environment critic, has 
recently called carbon capture and storage unproven and 
untried. She said it was too expensive to use. And I‘m not sure 

where in the last two years the NDP went from full-on support 
of carbon capture and storage to a complete denial of its benefit 
to our environment, Mr. Speaker. And I would suggest that the 
member opposite might want to sit down with Malcolm Wilson. 
He‘s the director of the office of energy and environment at the 
U of R [University of Regina]. He‘s a very wise man, and he 

will tell her that the technology works and that it‘s 

cost-effective and that it actually does make a difference. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, just recently the International Energy 
Agency said that without CCS technology and addressing 
greenhouse gas reductions, that the cost to reduce those 
emissions would actually triple. CCS is a tried technology, and 
it is cost-effective in the area of greenhouse gas reduction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the things that I‘m most proud of that our 

government has done in the last two years is pay down our 
provincial debt by 40 per cent. The added benefit, not only to 
get some of that debt off the books, but it frees up interest 
payments which has allowed us to assist in building schools, 
repairing hospitals and long-term care homes — things that are 
necessary for our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, within my ministry we have also looked to find 
efficiencies giving Saskatchewan people value for their money, 
and I think that‘s an important initiative for any government, 

regardless of what kind of economic times that we‘re living in. I 

know that the members opposite had questions — it would have 
been our first budget — about moving food services from 
government. We don‘t think government needs to be in the 

business of being in business all the time as the NDP did, but 
actually let local businesses participate in that food distribution 
for our fire crews. 
 
So I asked the other day, just for an update after this last fire 
season, how things were going. And things are going very well. 
The local businesses are participating, and the added benefit to 
this, Mr. Speaker, is that any leftover food that is available in 
those communities has been donated to preschool and Head 
Start programs for those communities. And if we can help kids 
while saving money and being efficient, I think that‘s a pretty 

good approach for our government and for the communities that 
it benefits. 
 
We have also removed — and also the NDP had questions 



October 27, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3261 

about this earlier this year, so I thought I‘d provide an update — 
but the wet and wild programs through the Saskatchewan 
Watershed Authority, we had asked the Canadian Wildlife 
Federation if they would deliver these programs for us. There‘s 

a cost savings to the government of $85,000. And, Mr. Speaker, 
we have managed to save money without reducing any services 
to the people of this province. Again, I think that‘s a pretty 

good approach for government to take. 
 
We have also listened to Saskatchewan communities who need 
assistance, and we heard earlier today in a member‘s statement 

the assistance that was provided to Duck Lake. The member for 
Regina Walsh Acres continues to re-petition, saying that Duck 
Lake needs financial assistance. And I‘m pretty sure — I could 
check again with the Minister of Municipal Affairs — but Duck 
Lake received money earlier this year to help with their water 
situation, Mr. Speaker. And if she would like to talk to the 
Municipal Affairs minister about that assistance, I am sure he 
would be more than willing to discuss that too. I‘d discuss that 

with him. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are listening to communities, something that 
the members opposite actually didn‘t do a very good job of. We 

are continuing to provide free water testing for communities. In 
fact we tested water in Hepburn earlier this year. Hepburn was 
able to take that information— their water quality was not good 
— and use it as part of an application form for the Building 
Canada fund. And they received $9 million this year to 
implement a municipal water system within their town. And so 
they no longer have to use the wells that are in their community 
which are unsafe. 
 
We are continuing the water testing program for communities 
that are at risk. We announced earlier this year that Katepwa 
Lake is next. And, Mr. Speaker, we will be discussing with 
other communities that are at risk, their needs, and see if they 
are also wanting us to assist them in water testing. Mr. Speaker, 
the NDP on the other hand waited for communities to call in. So 
while the NDP sat by the phone waiting for it to ring, we are 
taking action and being proactive in working with these 
communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP knows that water‘s an issue in this 

province. Water has not been an issue for just the last two years. 
Safe drinking water for our communities has been an issue for 
quite a while. And again I think it‘s pretty hypocritical for the 

NDP to pretend like this is, you know, a new issue. I would 
point out that the last two years of the NDP government, they 
handed out $9 million for water projects. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in our first two years, we have committed $76 
million for water projects. I think our dedication to our 
communities is clear. And water will remain a priority for our 
government as we move forward. We will be also working 
towards a new regulatory framework for the province. It‘s a 

results-based regulatory framework. It was actually first 
recommended under the Blakeney government, but those 
recommendations were apparently ignored. 
 
We think it‘s a common sense option for environmental 
protection in our province. We have done extensive rounds of 
consultation with stakeholders, with industry, with 
environmental NGOs [non-governmental organization], SUMA 

[Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association], and SARM 
[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities], and other 
organizations. And, Mr. Speaker, we have unanimous support 
of this approach for our government to be moving ahead. In 
fact, Mr. Speaker, we also have the 100 per cent support from 
NGOs like the Nature Conservancy of Canada, and also 
industries such as Nexon. I believe that the opposition leader is 
familiar with both of these organizations. And I would hope that 
he would be supportive of his former colleagues as we move 
forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will also be working towards a comprehensive 
water management plan for the province. I know that again the 
NDP like to talk about things. They don‘t actually like to do 

things. And I have here a discussion paper from 1999. It‘s now 

10 years old. And on page 17 it outlines a problem, and I quote, 
―In some situations such as in smaller communities, there are 

insufficient resources available to replace aging infrastructure 
and meet existing regulations.‖ Which we agree with, there are 

some deficiencies within municipalities to be able to keep up 
with demand. 
 
[19:45] 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, if you flip a few pages over, under their 
action plan, it says to establish a funding mechanism to support 
provincial water infrastructure. And, Mr. Speaker, that didn‘t 
happen. That was from 1999. So while they talked about it, Mr. 
Speaker, as I said before, we‘ve handed out $76 million for 

water projects. And we will be moving forward on a water plan 
for our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, later this year we will also be introducing our 
climate change legislation. And I know, while the NDP 
members opposite can cling to their shiny brochures, Mr. 
Speaker, as I said, we have an actual plan. We have legislation. 
We will have regulations. We have also hired climate change 
staff within the ministry and have, as I outlined before, the 
projects that will address emissions in our province. We have 
allocated almost $2 billion to combat climate change. I think 
our government has proven that we can act. We‘ve done all of 

this within 18 months, Mr. Speaker, as opposed to the 16 years 
of NDP where they virtually ignored this till the very end of 
their mandate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am very honoured to be able to represent 
Saskatchewan at the United Nations climate change conference 
in Copenhagen later this year. I think Saskatchewan has a 
remarkable story to tell, and that is the story that I will be 
telling while I am there. We have realistic targets. We believe 
that we have an opportunity to balance environmental 
protection with a continued economic growth in our province, 
Mr. Speaker, and we have a unique approach with a technology 
fund that will reinvest in low-carbon solutions within our 
province. And I‘m looking forward, as I said, Mr. Speaker, to 

telling Saskatchewan‘s story at Copenhagen on a global stage. 
 
I don‘t know that anyplace else in the world has the same 

resources as we have, but we also have the added burden of 
having exceptionally high emissions on a per capita basis. And 
that is a challenge for us to be addressing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said at the beginning of remarks, it has been a 



3262 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2009 

great beginning for our government. And as we move into our 
third year, we can do so with our heads held high. Our 
government has shown that it can govern effectively and 
successfully at a time of plenty, and we will continue to do so in 
this continued time of uncertainty. 
 
We are also capable of admitting our mistakes, Mr. Speaker, 
which we have done, and working towards correcting them — 
unlike the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker, who 
apparently reacts to his own gaffes and mistakes by saying, I 
don‘t recall. Well, Mr. Speaker, he may not recall calling the 

Premier to offer him advice on how to defeat Lorne Calvert and 
the NDP, but the voters will. He may not recall the massive 
scandal that erupted during the Leader of the Opposition‘s 
leadership campaign, and the fact that he‘s the only MLA 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly] under RCMP [Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police] investigation, but the voters will. He 
may not recall that he was willing to accept a salary from his 
caucus office, something that the NDP had criticized a former 
Sask Party leader for doing, but the voters will. 
 
He may not recall that SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility 
Development Company] cost the people of Saskatchewan 
millions of dollars, but the voters will. He may not recall 
Channel Lake, another absolute boondoggle that cost the 
taxpayers of this province, but the voters will. And, Mr. 
Speaker, he may not recall the decline of our province and the 
population decline under his tenure as the NDP deputy premier, 
but we do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government will continue to work to gain and 
keep the trust of the people of this province. They have placed it 
in us and we value that above all else. I believe our government 
has taken action on important issues that are facing 
Saskatchewan people, and we will continue to do so. 
 
This year our government has declared a bold new initiative to 
shorten surgery wait times to no longer than three months in the 
next four years. We have vowed to improve access to long-term 
care for seniors. We are continuing repairs on schools across 
this province, schools that were badly neglected under the NDP. 
We have set aside millions of dollars to improve the child 
welfare system. And we are providing millions in direct support 
to livestock producers. And, Mr. Speaker, the list goes on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you can see, our beginning may have ended, 
but we will continue to move forward. And I have to say it‘s 

been disheartening to sit in the House — we‘re only a few days 
into the session — and to hear the continued gloom and doom 
from the opposition members. So, Mr. Speaker, while the NDP 
are cheerleading for a recession, we will be cheerleading for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I am proud to be supporting our 
government‘s Throne Speech. And I will not be supporting the 

opposition amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, before I 
focus on the Throne Speech, I would like to make a few 
comments. First of all, I would like to congratulate the member 
from Regina Douglas Park on his re-election, and also the 

member from Saskatoon Riversdale on her election. And it is 
my hope that they serve their constituents well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the people of the Estevan 
constituency for allowing me the privilege of representing them. 
As you would know, Mr. Speaker, I was first elected in 1999, 
subsequently in 2003, and again in 2007. And sometimes it 
really seems hard to believe that it‘s been 10 years since I was 
first elected, but I feel as honoured today as I did that 
September evening 10 years ago. 
 
Estevan has a very diverse economy — the oil industry, 
agriculture, small business, the Shand and Boundary dam power 
stations, and mining, of course. And, Mr. Speaker, Estevan will 
soon be home to a new event centre and the energy training 
institute, which we are so proud that we are getting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to thank my constituency 
assistants: my full-time assistant, Rosalie; as well as my casual 
assistants, Danita and Wilma. And I thank them for their loyalty 
and dedication to me and the people of the Estevan 
constituency. 
 
And last but certainly not least, to my family: my son Terry and 
his wife Marnell; my daughter Trisha and her partner Terry; and 
my grandkids Beau, Brooke, Bailee, Shelby, and Tristan. They 
have supported me wholeheartedly and organized family events 
around my schedule. 
 
And as every member of this legislature knows, our families 
make huge sacrifices so that we can all do our jobs effectively. 
And I would like to thank my family and the families of all 
members for their support. And, Mr. Speaker, I would also like 
to thank the Premier and all my colleagues for their friendship 
and support. They are truly my other family and for that, I thank 
them. 
 
And now to the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This government is committed to ensuring that everyone in 
Saskatchewan benefits from our economy. Saskatchewan was 
not immune to what was happening in the rest of the world with 
the economic recession. All the while the rest of the nation and 
in fact the world faced gloom, Saskatchewan moved forward 
with huge population growth; record investment in 
infrastructure, including a $1.2 billion historic investment in 
provincial highways; paying down the debt by 40 per cent 
which is equal to $2.7 billion. We have made significant 
investments towards helping the most vulnerable people in our 
province, especially children. Mr. Speaker, this government 
believes that children hold the promise for continuing our social 
and economic growth. We have a plan to address immediate 
concerns and are putting in place long-term measures to 
strengthen our child care system and prove outcomes for 
children in care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the current fiscal year, over $4 million has been 
provided for the development of 1,000 new licensed child care 
spaces. By the end of March 2010, the number of funded child 
care spaces will total 11,400. Mr. Speaker, we can also point to 
our government‘s doubling of the daily food allowance for 
children on welfare. Because of this new funding, healthier food 
can be provided for children giving them the energy to be 



October 27, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3263 

achievers at school and in life. 
 
This government has also brought in the active families benefit. 
This benefit is a fully tax refundable benefit of up to $150 per 
year for children aged 6 to 14 who are enrolled in cultural and 
sporting activities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has acted in many other areas to 
enhance the quality of life in our great province. We have taken 
a tough approach on crime to ensure our streets and 
communities are safer. Drug use and associated criminal 
activities and violence in northern Saskatchewan will be 
enforced by a new unit made up of RCMP and the Prince Albert 
Police Service. The officers assigned to this new unit are part of 
our government‘s promise to create 120 new policing positions 

in four years; $1.6 million has been invested in the hiring of 30 
new police officers and three new prosecutors whose sole 
responsibility is to tackle violent crime in our province. 
 
Action has also been taken to clean up certain areas that are 
experiencing dangerously high criminal activity. This is through 
SCAN, the safer communities and neighbourhoods program. 
These initiatives display this government‘s commitment to 
fighting crime and making Saskatchewan a safer place to live. 
 
Mr. Speaker, regarding agriculture. This government realizes 
the importance of the agriculture sector to this province. I‘ve 

said it before and I‘ll say it again: it‘s so great to finally have an 
Agriculture minister that truly understands the industry. We 
appreciate the hard work and the investment of farmers and 
ranchers. We know that the Saskatchewan farmers and ranchers 
produce nearly half of Canada‘s canola. They are also one of 
the world‘s largest exporters of canola. Saskatchewan ranchers 

have the second largest beef, cattle, bison, and elk herds in the 
country. And Saskatchewan is also one of the world‘s largest 

exporters of flax, lentils, peas, and wheat. 
 
Saskatchewan again has demonstrated strong leadership when 
dealing with agricultural program design. The lack of leadership 
had been lost when the previous administration was forced to 
appoint ministers to this portfolio who had little or no 
understanding of the industry. 
 
Under the leadership of the member from Melville-Saltcoats, 
this government has launched a review of crop insurance. We 
focused on ways to improve the program from a farmer‘s 

perspective. From that review, our government has made the 
largest ever contribution to the crop insurance program by any 
Saskatchewan government. Our government‘s $20 million 

dollar increase to the crop insurance program brought the 
program‘s budget to $155 million. This investment means better 

coverage for producers, and it also lowers their premium‘s cost. 
 
When the NDP were in power, Mr. Speaker, every farmer was 
frustrated because of their backward thinking. Under their 
watch, the programs they offered established high premiums for 
reduced coverage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am also very pleased to see the head office of 
AgriStability moving to Melville. This will enable farmers and 
ranchers that are using the program more direct access to the 
people administering them. This new office in Melville will 
begin operating in 2010 as it begins processing the applications 

for the year 2009. And, Mr. Speaker, I know the members 
opposite have been saying it‘s no big deal, but it is a huge cost 

saving to the people of this province, and also the processing 
will be a lot more timely than it is at the present time. And, Mr. 
Speaker, this will result in 10 new jobs at the head office of 
crop insurance in Melville, and 30 new jobs at crop insurance 
offices throughout rural Saskatchewan. And this is in stark 
contrast to the NDP who closed the rural service centres. 
 
Our government has also assisted livestock and hog producers 
with direct support of $70 million through the cattle and hog 
support program. And our government has also given all 
property owners the largest education property tax reduction in 
the province‘s history. This was an issue for many years, but the 

NDP failed to act and turned a blind eye. When we campaigned 
on the property tax issue, we were the only party that included 
agricultural land in this program. Mr. Speaker, the members 
opposite excluded farmers from a reduction program, but that 
certainly didn‘t come as any surprise to our farmers and 

ranchers, and it certainly wasn‘t the first time they were 

forgotten about or abandoned by the NDP. 
 
I would again like to thank the Minister of Education and the 
present Minister of Highways and Infrastructure, the member 
from Rosetown-Elrose, for all their hard work on the property 
tax file. This is a file we promised to move forward on during 
the election, Mr. Speaker. And I am proud to say yes, this is one 
of over 100 promises that our government has kept. 
 
We have also moved forward in responding to alleviating 
long-term drought assistance issues in southwest Saskatchewan. 
Through positive co-operation with the federal government, we 
have invested $29 million in the farm and ranch water 
infrastructure program. The funding will go towards community 
wells, large and small diameter wells, deep buried pipelines and 
dugouts, and all of these will help producers have a stable water 
source so that they can be productive and competitive in dry 
years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we formed government we faced a huge 
infrastructure deficit. Since forming government, we have 
committed $2.5 billion for a wide array of initiatives. These 
initiatives include highways, schools, health care facilities, and 
municipal projects. Through the Saskatchewan infrastructure 
growth initiative we provide municipalities with an interest 
subsidy for five years to fund infrastructure development. Mr. 
Speaker, this program will save municipalities $5.6 million this 
year, and over the course of the program can save 
municipalities up to $67.5 million. This is a stark contrast from 
the past 16 years where the previous government shortchanged 
municipalities by millions of dollars in operational funding. 
 
And of course, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan municipalities can 
anticipate further increase next year when the municipal 
operating grant moves to an equivalent of one point of the PST 
[provincial sales tax]. For 16 years, Mr. Speaker, municipal 
requests for funding fell on deaf ears. 
 
[20:00] 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, our government is also helping communities 
to grow during this current global recession. We have invested 
$100 million in our new municipal economic enhancement 



3264 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2009 

program, or MEEP. This is unconditional infrastructure funding 
with no political strings attached. Nearly 800 communities have 
taken advantage of this funding, which in turn allows their city, 
town, or rural municipality opportunities to enhance their 
residents‘ quality of life. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I attended a number of announcements in my 
constituency over the summer, and they never failed to mention 
how pleased they were with the accelerated process. They all 
mentioned how this is the first time a government has allowed 
them to choose projects which were their top priority. The 
people in the community know what their own community 
needs. Mr. Speaker, I will add that the delivery of this funding 
was unprecedented. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned before, when the Saskatchewan 
Party formed government, we inherited a huge infrastructure 
deficit. That infrastructure deficit included a health care system 
that was on life support. We have taken many steps towards 
improving our health care system including something very 
near and dear to my heart, and that is cancer care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is not one person in this Chamber whose 
family hasn‘t been touched by this horrible disease, some 

maybe more than others. Mr. Speaker, it was just this last 
Sunday that marked 14 months since I lost my own husband to 
cancer. Some may think that 14 months has flown by, but 
believe me, when you go home to an empty house and 
absent-mindedly pour two cups of coffee, buy two tickets to 
events, that 14 months really seems like an eternity. So any 
progress we can make regarding cancer care, cure, or cancer 
research is extremely important to me. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we‘ve added more training seats for doctors and 

nurses and we‘ve added 13 new long-term care homes for 
seniors — one of which, I am proud to say, will be in my 
constituency at Radville. The Marian Health Centre in Radville 
is in dire need and construction of their new facility will begin 
in the spring of 2010. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Patient First Review was recently released. In 
his report, Tony Dagnone made the profound statement. He 
said, ―Residents are proud of this province‘s health care 

heritage, but they want to see the ‗care‘ restored to ‗Medicare‘.‖ 

The Patient First Review included youngest to old, rural and 
urban, rich and poor, with special emphasis on and including 
First Nations and Métis voices. People of our province said they 
are not satisfied with the quality of the health care system, the 
health care system that had been neglected for 16 years by the 
former government. 
 
They were well aware of the increasing surgical backlog which 
in turn created longer waiting lists, but they did nothing. Our 
Saskatchewan Party government has set this goal, that over the 
next four years we will reduce surgical wait times in 
Saskatchewan to no longer than three months for all surgeries. 
This is a bold goal but, Mr. Speaker, it is doable. 
 
I remember, Mr. Speaker, when the former Minister of Health, 
the member from The Battlefords, would refuse to set goals 
because he might not be able to achieve them. And I also 
remember the criticism our government received when we 
stated we wanted to recruit 800 additional nurses within four 

years. Mr. Speaker, today there are 560 more nurses working in 
our province than when this government took office. We have 
reached 70 per cent of our four-year goal in less than two years. 
 
Let us not forget, Mr. Speaker, it was the NDP that closed 52 
hospitals in Saskatchewan. They also closed the Plains hospital, 
a hospital built to accommodate people from rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on about the differences 
between a forward-thinking government and the previous 
government who, the only time their 1970s engine was put into 
gear, it automatically went into reverse. Unfortunately that 
hasn‘t changed. They were a government that settled for 
mediocrity, a government who called this province, which I am 
so proud to call home, a wee province. They were a government 
who did not plan for growth. Their mindset was, when people 
left this province it was a good thing because there was more 
left for the rest of us. 
 
They must have thought they were very successful then during 
the span of 2001 to 2007 when Saskatchewan lost more than 
35,000 people to net out-migration. In fact before the current 
Leader of the Opposition left his high-paying executive job at 
Nexen in Calgary, he was the minister of CIC. Mr. Speaker, in 
the last two years in government as CIC minister, the current 
Leader of the Opposition left a legacy. What does this legacy 
entail? Saskatchewan‘s population dropped by 10,000 people 
and had the worst job creation record in Canada. Now that is a 
legacy that I would try and not recall. 
 
The member from Douglas Park said on the news Monday 
morning that the Throne Speech left farmers in limbo. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, what left farmers in limbo or perhaps even 
devastation was when that member was part of a government 
that tore up their GRIP [gross revenue insurance program] 
contracts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to address a few mistakes that 
the member from Regina Rosemont made in an October 23rd 
interview he did with Lifestyles magazine out of Estevan. I 
heard it once said that the facts should never get in the way of a 
good story but this member really takes these words to heart. 
First of all, the member said that he was disappointed in the 
Throne Speech because he would like to see more training 
spaces for Saskatchewan nurses. Well I am surprised that he is 
not aware that that has already happened. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 2008 there was about 520 first-year 
students and we are likely to see an increase of 200 students in 
2009. I guess like the Leader of the Opposition, the member 
from Rosemont has a difficult time recalling some things. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is more good news for that member from 
Rosemont. We have added 40 new psychiatric nursing 
positions. These are the first 40 positions for psychiatric nursing 
ever in this province. And, Mr. Speaker, I am glad to give this 
update on nursing positions to the member from Rosemont so 
that he can sleep easy knowing that there are more training 
positions in Saskatchewan. 
 
And another miscalculation that the member from Rosemont 
made in the same paper was stating that the opposition is 



October 27, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3265 

disappointed that the government will run a deficit in 
2009-2010. Well I can tell him that that is not true. 
 
And I am happy to jog the memory of the member from 
Rosemont. And I guess having trouble recalling situations has 
become a common occurrence on the opposition side of the 
House but, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if these were the only two 
issues that the member from Regina Rosemont had with the 
Throne Speech, I‘m glad to inform him that he was mistaken 

and now he can throw his support behind the Saskatchewan 
Party and vote in favour of the Throne Speech. 
 
And lastly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to invite the new 
Leader of the Opposition out to my constituency, which is also 
the home of the beautiful Rafferty lake. The people in my 
constituency are anxiously awaiting for him to come out there 
and walk across Rafferty lake. And with that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I will be supporting the motion put forth by the 
Minister of Health, and I will certainly not be supporting the 
amendment. Thank you. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 
from Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It‘s a 
real honour to enter into the debate on this Throne Speech that 
was presented in the legislature last Wednesday. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I‘m predicting this is the last throne 
speech she ever responds to in this House. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — The member opposite says it‘ll be my last 
throne speech. I can assure the member opposite that I have a 
few more responses to throne speeches left, and it‘s not my last 

one. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wanted to congratulate the returning member of 
the legislature, the Leader of the Opposition, who recently won 
the by-election in Regina Douglas Park. I want to congratulate 
him, and I also want to thank his family for once again allowing 
this member to participate in political life in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition‘s son is a constituent 

of mine, and he was referred to in the leader‘s response to the 

Throne Speech. But I can attest to the fact that Travis 
Lingenfelter is a very bright young man that also has, I believe, 
a political future in the province of Saskatchewan. He also has a 
great partner in Caitie Cottrell who is a political person as well. 
And I think that these two young people represent a number of 
young people in the province who are interested in politics. 
 
I want to welcome my colleague, the new member for 
Saskatoon Riversdale, to the Assembly. The new member 
comes from a long line of New Democrats, and she and her 
family and her mom and dad, her grandparents, have been 
active in the CCF and the NDP for decades. And I think that 
this young female member of the Assembly will distinguish 
herself in the days ahead, and she certainly will represent the 
people of Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it‘s been a very interesting couple of days in the 

Assembly. And, you know, my vantage point has changed 
somewhat in terms of this particular session of the legislature. 

And I have been interested to follow members of the legislature 
in terms of their response to the Throne Speech. And you know, 
it was a very interesting quote that opened the Throne Speech. 
And the government members chose to use a quote from Albert 
Einstein, who . . . And they said in the first sentence: 
 

Albert Einstein, a man who used his prodigious intellect to 
unlock the secrets of the universe, once made this simple 
but . . . [eloquent] observation [and I quote]: 
 
Life is like riding a bicycle. To keep your balance, you 
. . . [have to] keep moving. 

 
Well the Sask Party clearly left the impression that this Throne 
Speech was going to unlock the secrets of the universe. And I 
have to say that when you sat in the Assembly when the 
Lieutenant Governor read the Speech from the Throne, I noticed 
that there were a number of empty seats in the Legislative 
Assembly. There weren‘t that many people in attendance, Mr. 
Speaker. In fact I think if the member from Massey Place 
hadn‘t invited a large school group, I‘m not sure the east gallery 

would have been full. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the other thing that I found interesting is that 
the members opposite seem to be unenergized by this Throne 
Speech. So it appears as though their universe has run out of gas 
— or is it run out of money, Mr. Speaker? Run out of money 
that the NDP — you know those people that they talk about in 
terms of the last 16 years — I think the NDP left them with $1.9 
billion in cash, and it appears as though they have run out of 
gas, they have run out of money, and they‘re now left to ride a 

bicycle, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now this government has been in office for two years. But if 
you were here on the day of the Throne Speech, it felt like they 
had been in office for decades, decades. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are number of adjectives to describe 
unenergetic. Now I would describe the members opposite as 
unenergetic. And here‘s what Webster’s says about unenergetic: 
lethargic, tired, deficient in alertness or activity, worn out, 
downcast, slow going, dormant, lifeless, dull, hibernating, 
weary, listless, stuporous, unenterprising. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, there‘s a little definition that they say in 

Webster’s. It says bullfrogs become unenergetic with the first 
cold nights. And I was thinking, Mr. Speaker, maybe it was the 
weather last Wednesday because there seems to be a lot of 
bullfrogs over there, and they seem to be very listless, 
unenergetic, and cold. Now, Mr. Speaker, that was the 
Wednesday. 
 
And then on the Thursday, the Leader of the Opposition stands 
up and he asks his first question. Now I clearly remember the 
Premier promised the people of this province that he wasn‘t 

going to engage in the old style of politics and take on people 
personally. I remember that. I remember that he was going to be 
a new adult, that he was going to act premier-like and 
adult-like. And this was after the video when he gave a very 
heartfelt and impassioned speech in this legislature about the 
video and he apologized. And he said he was going to become a 
better person. 
 



3266 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2009 

Well, Mr. Speaker, when the Premier, in answer to the first 
question from the member from Regina Douglas Park — his 
first question as Leader of Her Majesty‘s Loyal Opposition — 
the Premier gets up and acts in a way that I thought he promised 
the people of Saskatchewan he was not going to act like, I was 
surprised. So I was surprised about the Throne Speech, and I 
was surprised about the Premier‘s response. Because somehow, 

you know, Mr. Speaker, I thought the Premier was above this. 
That‘s what I thought. I thought the Premier had better things to 

do than to get down in the mud and do what the Premier did, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
[20:15] 
 
And I have to say that I do think the Premier has a lot to do, and 
I do think the Premier should act like the Premier and not 
engage in what I saw him clearly do last Thursday, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech. The Throne Speech, as I 
understand throne speeches, is supposed to be about the 
government‘s way forward, what their vision for the province 

is, and how they plan to work on behalf of the citizens in the 
coming year. Mr. Speaker, my colleagues have pointed out on a 
number of occasions that if you read the Throne Speech, and 
certainly if you listen to the members opposite‘s response to the 
Throne Speech, what they have done is they have clearly 
regurgitated what they have done in the last couple of years. 
 
And in fact, Mr. Speaker, they have in many respects not been 
totally straightforward about the last couple of years and they 
have not been forthright. And I just heard the member from 
Estevan refer to the fact that it was the Sask Party that put in 
place the first psychiatric nurses in the . . . or training seats in 
the province. And that‘s simply not correct. It was the NDP 
government that announced those seats. They had to get those 
seats in place. And so I would say that it wasn‘t the Sask Party 

that did this. It was a combination of the vision of the previous 
government and the implementation of the Sask Party, Mr. 
Speaker. I would say that. And there are numerous examples of 
that. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, a real test of any government is how a 
government handles adversity. And I would say that if you look 
at all of the economic indicators, we have adversity in the 
province of Saskatchewan. And I know that the members 
opposite want to talk about all of the wonderful things that have 
taken place in the province in the last couple of years. 
 
I would say to the members opposite that there was a lot of hard 
work that went in to getting us to the point where there are 
many citizens in our province that are enjoying the benefits of 
that hard work. But, Mr. Speaker, a true test of a government is 
how you treat all of your citizens, not just some of your 
citizens. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the other thing that I noticed, I noticed a 
Throne Speech that really isn‘t about moving forward, it was 

about looking back. I mentioned the Premier and the Premier‘s 

comments in this Assembly on Thursday. So that was 
Wednesday, Thursday. 
 
Yesterday I saw something in this Assembly that I haven‘t seen, 

Mr. Speaker. And what I saw was a government that locked the 
front doors of this Assembly to a group of men and women — 
mostly women — that came to this Assembly to have their 
voice heard. 
 
And I‘m talking about the people who clean our nursing homes, 

clean our hospitals, prepare the food, do the laundry, who are 
laboratory technicians, respiratory therapists, people who are 
nutritionists, dietitians, I mean people who do the day-to-day 
carrying out of duties in our health care facilities, people who 
maintain those facilities. What we‘re really talking about, Mr. 

Speaker, is working men and women who provide care to our 
families each day of the week, 365 days of the year. And you 
know, Mr. Speaker, they came to this Assembly and they 
wanted to be heard. 
 
And the members opposite on numerous occasions over the 
years have welcomed . . . I remember there were hundreds of 
people here as Save our Schools when they were upset about a 
school being closed in rural Saskatchewan. This Assembly has 
welcomed farmers who did a sit-in in the cafeteria, and they 
were in our galleries. 
 
This Assembly has welcomed Power workers who were upset 
about contract negotiations with the government. This 
Assembly welcomed hundreds of nurses that were being 
ordered back to work. And I have never ever in my 23 years in 
this Assembly seen those doors locked to the public, when 
people came to this Assembly to have their voices heard. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, you cannot welcome some people, you 
cannot welcome people who are Save our Schools to the 
Assembly, farmers to the Assembly, chamber of commerce 
people to the Assembly that were opposed to the most available 
hours — we cannot welcome those people and then not 
welcome other people when they have a problem with the 
government. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I do speak with some, a bit of authority on 
this. I was the Health minister when those nurses were ordered 
back to work. I was the Health minister when they were in this 
Assembly and those members asked us questions, and at no 
time were those women that provide 24-hour-a-day care, 
365-day-a-year care to the people of our province, not once 
were those doors locked to those people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so this is the fourth day. In three days I have seen things 
that I have not seen before. I‘ve seen a Throne Speech that 

looks back, not forward. I see a Premier that lays the glove first 
in this Assembly when he promised us he wasn‘t going to do 

that. And then I saw the front doors locked and then I saw signs 
that said, authorized personnel only, going to the cafeteria. And, 
Mr. Speaker, I find that unacceptable in a free and democratic 
society where we have access to this Assembly, where people 
can come and have their voices heard regardless of whether or 
not the government likes it or not, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you cannot treat people differently. You cannot 
have one set of rules for one group of citizens and then another 
set of rules for another group of citizens. Now I know that 
members opposite, they have a propensity to like people that 
have a lot of money — you know, rich people, people that are 
. . . 



October 27, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3267 

An Hon. Member: — Like you. Like you, Pat. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Or they say like me. Okay, I‘m a 
middle-class woman. I am. But I don‘t consider myself rich. I 
don‘t have a business. I don‘t run an oil company. I don‘t own a 

gold company. I don‘t own a potash company. I‘m not a 

chamber of commerce member, Mr. Speaker. But I come from a 
working background. I was a teacher. I was a person who 
provided education to students. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what I find so insulting, what I find so 
insulting is that these men and women, they decided that they‘re 

going to take on working people in this province. 
 
You know, I have nephews. I have nephews that work in the 
construction industry. You know, they‘re carpenters and they‘re 

plumbers and they‘re pipefitters. And you know what, Mr. 

Speaker, they‘re proud. 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Order. Order. Order. 
Thank you. I would like to hear the member‘s speech. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. You know, I have family 
members, Mr. Speaker, that are in the construction industry. I 
have some family members that own construction companies, 
and I have other family members that work in those 
construction industries. And, Mr. Speaker, historically they 
have belonged to the Carpenters‘ Union, the plumbers and 

pipefitters union, the Sheet Metal Workers, the millwrights, and 
so on and so forth, Mr. Speaker. They have belonged to their 
particular union group that represents their craft — their craft. 
 
And what the members opposite have done with Bill 80 is that 
they‘ve said that that craft doesn‘t matter any more. It doesn‘t 

matter that a union can come in and totally change the way that 
most people who are in the trades are represented in this 
country unless they live in Alberta. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think what we should be thinking about is 
how do we enhance the skills of people that are in the trades. 
That‘s what I think we should be thinking about. I think what 
we want to make sure is that we have more journey people, not 
fewer journey people. I think that we should encourage people 
to become experts in their craft or their trade. That‘s what I 

think because I know that when that plumber comes into my 
home to do work in my home, that the work is going to be 
properly done. When they come in and do pipefitting in terms 
of natural gas, I know that the work is going to be properly 
done. And when they come and do carpentry work — and 
there‘s now journey people who are painters and drywallers and 
so on — that the work is going to be properly done. 
 
But what I don‘t understand is, who is asking for the way that 

we‘ve organized the trades in this province to be changed? 

That‘s what I don‘t understand. And you know what? Those 
people who are in those trades don‘t understand it as well. And 

the people that own some of those companies that have worked 
with those trades, those unionized trades for decades, don‘t 

understand it as well. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I know the members opposite said before 

the election that they were going to go to war with people who 
are working people, people who are organized. Now, Mr. 
Speaker, I don‘t think, I don‘t think that you can have a decent 

civil society when you pick some people who you are more 
interested in looking after and helping than others. And I think, 
Mr. Speaker, it speaks to the whole issue of leadership and it 
speaks about to decency and it speaks to not being mean and 
ugly to people, and mean spirited to people that you don‘t 
necessarily identify with. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I thought that when we got elected that we 
worked to the best of our ability to represent as many people as 
possible. Mr. Speaker, in my constituency I can speak to people 
who are politically active Sask Party people, Liberals, New 
Democrats, and I try and represent them all, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, when I was in cabinet, I tried to represent business 
people when it came to changing corporate capital tax and 
corporate income tax . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And oh, 
well you know, there you are. You see? There you are. 
 
And so here we have a government that just wants to represent 
the one aspect of society, and I find that very, very difficult to 
take. Oh, you see the member opposite, this speaks to their 
meanness, Mr. Speaker. This speaks to their meanness. They 
don‘t want to hear that the idea is to represent as many people 

as possible. And that speaks to the kind of person that that 
particular member is. Now I know he‘s a bit sensitive because 
he‘s under a little bit of heat because of H1N1, and I‘m sure 

there‘s going to be more heat that‘s going to be on him in the 

next couple of days. But you‘re going to have to get used to it, 

Mr. Member. You‘re going to have to get used to it. Oh yes. 
You‘re going to have to get used to it. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we have a 15-page Throne Speech, a 
15-page Throne Speech, and they spent most of that Throne 
Speech looking back on the past two years. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it‘s interesting. Think about this 

government. They come to office in November 2007 and 
there‘s $1.9 billion in the bank, $1.9 billion in the bank. That 

was as of the mid-year financial report which went to the end of 
September, and $1.9 billion according to the Minister of 
Finance. And then we have escalating commodity prices. And 
at the end of the year they had a $1.8 billion surplus and a huge 
Fiscal Stabilization Fund. And then in 2008-09 they had a 
surplus of $2.4 billion. Now, Mr. Speaker, has there ever been a 
government in the history of the province that has had over $5 
billion in the kitty? Can you imagine? 
 
[20:30] 
 
And then they think that they‘re miracle workers because they 

reduced the debt by $2.3 billion. Well I think that‘s a 

no-brainer, Mr. Speaker. That‘s a no-brainer. 
 
And they had a $1.6 billion Fiscal Stabilization Fund, but now 
it‘s down to 800 million and I‘m waiting with interest to see 

what the Minister of Finance is going to say. And if, you know, 
maybe in mid-November . . . That‘s the mid-year, 
mid-November, maybe the third week in November. I have a 
hunch that they probably won‘t release that until after we 

adjourn on December 3rd. I‘m going to be interested to see 

when the mid-year financial report gets released. Usually it‘s 



3268 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2009 

released in November, but I think these guys might delay it 
until after December because the legislature will be adjourned. 
 
Because I suspect, Mr. Speaker, that their deficit is going to be 
close to $1 billion — $1 billion. And why is that? The reason is 
that they overestimated the potash. Potash. I think they had it 
about 20 per cent of their revenue stream was going to come 
from potash. And what did we say? We said . . . [inaudible] . . . 
Why are you doing this? Where are you getting this 
information? And what was their answer? Oh, we‘re optimistic 
there‘s going to be a deal with China. 
 
Now did they check to see to figure out that China had just 
opened a big potash mine in December of 2008? No. Did they 
look at was happening across the globe in terms of potash sales? 
No. Did they have any intelligence in terms of what was 
happening in China? The answer is no. 
 
And so we have a problem, Mr. Speaker. We have problem in 
that we probably have a deficit of close to $1 billion in this 
province. And why would that be? We‘ve had unprecedented 

revenue, and they‘ve spent money like there is no tomorrow. 
And they‘ve spent money in the last two years. And I guess the 

question is, what are you going to do next year? And that‘s why 

we have a Throne Speech that says not much about next year. 
 
Now what we do know is that they‘re going to reduce wait 
times in the province to three months. It‘s going to take them 

four years. But a few days before they announced this, they cut 
the money to the ambulatory surgical care centre here in 
Regina. They‘ve had two years to put it together — haven‘t 
done it. 
 
And then they decided that they‘re going to change the needle 

exchange program. All of the evidence — this gets to the 
mean-spiritedness — all of the evidence, their own report from 
their own consultant that they paid thousands of dollars to have 
them tell them the needle exchange program works. It works. 
Don‘t change it; don‘t change it. Well what are they going to 

do? They‘re going to cap the needles that people get. And it‘s 

not about good public policy. It‘s not about leadership. It‘s 

about mean-spiritedness. It‘s about mean-spiritedness. It‘s not 
about leadership and good public policy. And I think the 
Minister of Health knows that. I think he knows that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we have people that come into our 
constituency offices all the time and, Mr. Speaker, what are 
they talking about? They‘re talking about affordability. They‘re 

talking about escalating utility costs. They‘re talking about 

wages that aren‘t going up to meet those escalating costs. 

They‘re talking about the price of food, gas, repairs — 
everything has gone up. And did this government once talk 
about or address affordability in this Throne Speech? The 
answer is absolutely no. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, they did refer to immigrants, and I do want 
to talk a little bit about the people who have come to our 
province. People have worked very hard to change the 
immigrant nominee program so that more people would come 
to the province. And a lot of those people have been working in 
the service sector and what they‘ve found is they‘ve found their 
hours reduced. And we need to spend more time through the 

Ministry of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 
making sure that those folks are being properly treated because 
I can tell the members opposite that there are some difficulties 
among a number of immigrants that have come under the 
immigrant nominee program, particularly in the service sector. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when you come to this province and you 
think you‘re going to be earning $13 an hour and you‘re earning 
$9.65 an hour, minimum wage, there‘s quite a difference. And 

when it costs you 700 or $800 for an apartment and you‘re 

earning minimum wage, Mr. Speaker, it‘s kind of difficult to 

make a living. And so I would say to the members opposite that 
we need to do some follow-up work with employers in the 
province to ensure that those immigrants that have come here 
under the immigrant nominee program are being properly 
treated because the last thing that this province needs, the last 
thing that this province needs is to develop a very poor 
reputation internationally and to have those folks that have 
come here under the immigrant nominee program go back 
home, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I was particularly interested in what the 
members opposite had to say about agriculture. And I‘m no 
longer the Ag critic, but I can tell you that . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . The Ag critic is the Leader of the Opposition. 
And what I can tell the members opposite is that there‘s still a 

lot of pain in the cattle industry. There‘s still a lot of pain in the 
hog industry. And, Mr. Speaker, you know, I have people that 
contact me that are getting prices, 1987 prices — over 20 years 
ago — those kinds of prices in terms of today when they sell a 
steer or a heifer. 
 
Now what do they talk about? They talk about previous 
announcements. We all know they‘re moving the AgriStability 

program to Melville. We all know that they changed crop 
insurance. We all know that there is an agricultural Crown land 
sale — not too many people buying it. We know about the 
gopher control rebate program. We know about the farm and 
ranch water infrastructure program, and we know that there‘s 
been support to the cattle and hog industry. Now what the 
members haven‘t done is talk about the way forward; but 22, 23 
per cent of the crop still on the ground in this province; and we 
have a hog industry and a cattle industry that is hemorrhaging; 
and all the government did was regurgitate what they have done 
in the last couple of years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, some of my colleagues have certainly gone 
through this Throne Speech. And I think there were only five 
new initiatives, five new initiatives, and the rest of it was all 
regurgitation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think I have spoken my 25 minutes. I want to 
thank the Minister of Health for giving me the opportunity to 
speak in the Assembly. I know that he‘s under a lot of pressure 

in the days ahead . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Order please. It‘s not 
increasingly difficult — I can‘t hear at all. And when the side 
conversations are louder than the member presentation, it‘s 

unfortunate for those of us who want to hear the member speak. 
So would you please allow the member from Nutana to 



October 27, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3269 

continue uninterrupted. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the Minister of 
Health for giving me the opportunity to speak in the Assembly. 
I know that he wanted to speak. I know the Minister of Health 
is under a great deal of pressure, personal pressure given the 
situation in health care these days. Some of us have had that 
experience before, but I really do want to say to the Minister of 
Health that, you know, just chill out, take a bit of a deep breath. 
Life is going to be okay. You don‘t have to get mean and ugly 

and nasty, that life will be okay once we get through the H1N1 
crisis, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So with that I‘ll take my seat. And it‘ll be interesting to hear 

what else they have to say about the Throne Speech because so 
far all we‘ve heard them talk about is what the NDP did for 16 

years and what they‘ve done the last two years. They haven‘t 
told us how they‘re going to move forward with $1 billion 

deficit and some of the economic issues that this province is 
facing. And all you have to do is look at the latest Statistics 
Canada to know that there are more people unemployed. There 
are more bankruptcies. Retail sales are down. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Doom and gloom. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, they say doom and gloom. I think 
that‘s reality. And the question will be, how are you going to 

manage the situation, and how are you going to lead us out of 
this? 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 
from Kindersley. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It‘s my 
pleasure this evening to rise to my feet and enter the debate on 
the Throne Speech. Mr. Speaker, while I am doing that, I will 
certainly want to take the opportunity to talk a little bit about 
my constituency and the people that help in our office, the CAs 
[constituency assistant] that I have in my office in Kindersley. 
 
I‘m very proud to represent the constituency of Kindersley off 
and on now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, since 1991. The election of 
‘91 was an interesting election; the ‘95, ‘99, and then stepping 

aside in 2002 and then coming back in the last election. 
 
The people of Kindersley have been very, very good to me over 
the years, Mr. Speaker. It‘s been a pleasure to represent that 

constituency, a constituency that has a tremendous amount of 
vibrancy, a large agriculture base — both grains and oilseeds, 
cattle. Lots of diversity in terms of the oil and gas sector in that 
area. A constituency that one could be . . . any member of this 
Assembly would be proud to represent, I‘m sure. And I 

certainly am as well. 
 
All of us in the legislature are supported by a number of folks. 
And certainly the people in my office, in the constituency office 
in Kindersley, Susan and Sherri, do a tremendous job of looking 
after the day-to-day work that all MLAs are faced with in their 
constituency — fielding calls from people, visiting with people 
when they come in. They do a tremendous job of looking after 
the affairs of the constituency, and I‘m extremely grateful to 

their assistance. 
 

Mr. Speaker, in addition to that, in my office here in Regina, we 
are certainly supported by a great number of folks who are 
tremendous in terms of their ability. And I‘m again very 

fortunate to have, you know, a number of folks working in 
there. I think in fact I have the Leader of the Opposition‘s 

former employee in my employ now, and it‘s interesting some 

of the discussions that we have from time to time. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in addition to that, of course you are always 
blessed by having a very, very supportive family that is very 
helpful in terms of your operations, in terms of your business — 
in my case, our farming operation. My son is taking over the 
operation. We‘re extremely pleased about that. It‘s going a lot 

better than I expected, and I‘m sure a lot better than he expected 

in terms of that, Mr. Speaker. So I‘m very, very happy about 

that. And incidentally, Mr. Speaker, when I‘m talking about 
agriculture, I want to make it clear that there‘s a lot of people 

out there in agriculture that are, right now across this province, 
either are on combines and trying to get the last bit of their 
harvest off or they‘re anxiously looking at the weather 
forecasts. 
 
You look at what you see around Regina these days, and water 
in the fields, raining all day most of the day here in Regina — 
very, very difficult and anxious times for family members. I 
have a brother-in-law that farms just north of the city here a 
little bit. I think he‘s got 5 or 6,000 acres to go, and I certainly 

feel for him and his family right now, recognizing the challenge 
that they are going through and certainly the challenges that 
many, many producers across this province are. 
 
But the good news, Mr. Speaker, is that people in agriculture 
are a very resilient bunch, and they will be working long and 
hard. The other evening in the Kindersley area I‘m told that 

farmers were combining till 2, 3 o‘clock in the morning, many 
of them — long after, long naturally after the sun went down 
and a long, cold evening out in the field dumping, you know, 
unloading grain and all of that kind of stuff. It‘s not much fun 

when you‘re under the gun under those kinds of circumstances. 
 
[20:45] 
 
I would hope members opposite, many who don‘t have a 

connection to agriculture, would understand the challenge that 
many farmers are faced with in terms of dealing with it, Mr. 
Speaker. So we certainly are on this side of the House well 
acquainted — many, many members have agriculture 
backgrounds and would know the challenges that the ag 
community is going through. 
 
The other thing that I‘m always amazed, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

in the legislature is how freely the opposition members are 
prepared to give people in agriculture advice. I‘m always 
amazed by that — people who haven‘t had a connection to 
agriculture in a long time. I mean I think agriculture people are 
pretty, you know, pretty open-minded. They‘re prepared to take 
some advice from time to time. But I suspect when they hear 
members from downtown Regina giving them advice about 
AgriStability, AgriInvest, whether it‘s going to be beneficial to 

have those operations housed in Saskatchewan or not. And 
they‘re saying, what difference does it make? 
 
Well I can tell you, Mr. member from Coronation Park, that it 



3270 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2009 

means a lot to farmers to have some of those things housed in 
Saskatchewan. And the reasons are really quite simple. It‘s 

because when farmers want to phone up and ask questions 
about the programs, they want to know that there‘s someone on 
the other end of the line that actually understands what they are 
talking about. 
 
And so when you‘re talking to somebody in Winnipeg or 

someone in Ottawa and they‘re asking you questions about how 

could your grain possibly go from no. 1 to no. 3 and they 
simply do not understand the question, it‘s a little bit frustrating 

for someone that‘s come in from harvesting till 2 o‘clock in the 

morning and has to get on the phone at 8 o‘clock the next day to 

try and get a hold of somebody in these programs to ask them 
some questions, and then have someone ask that kind of 
question of you. 
 
It will be in this province. We will find that we‘ll make sure 

that there are people that the Minister of Agriculture will have 
in his employ in these operations that will actually understand 
how that could happen. And it will be, I think, a very, very good 
thing for the people of Saskatchewan. It‘ll be much more 

responsive, much more timely, and a much better program 
because it‘ll be designed by the cabinet and the caucus of this 
side of the House. 
 
Actually it will be designed, the changes will be designed by 
people that know just a little bit about the subject when it comes 
to agriculture rather than the members opposite. And they‘re 
talking about GSP, not realizing that it‘s actually GPS [Global 

Positioning System]. When you‘re talking about that, the 

Leader of the Opposition I think was the one that said that. So 
when they understand some of those things, a little about it, it 
would be helpful in terms of that kind of advice from the 
members opposite. And it‘s troubling for people in agriculture 

when they‘re advised by folks on that side of the House about 

these kinds of things. 
 
I want to — while I‘m speaking and while I think of it — I want 
to take the opportunity to welcome the new members to the 
legislature. We have the new member for Saskatoon Riversdale, 
a very nice young lady. I‘ve had occasion to meet her and greet 

her and welcome her to the Assembly. It‘s going to be an 

interesting time I think for her. I suspect she‘s already learned a 

few things about the legislature, and we would want to take the 
occasion to welcome her. 
 
I would also want to welcome the new Leader of the 
Opposition, the gentleman that‘s come back from a executive 
position in an oil company. I think if I‘m not mistaken, I believe 

it was a government relations position with a oil company in 
Calgary. I would want to take the opportunity to welcome him 
back to the legislature. 
 
He‘s no stranger to this Assembly, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I guess 
it was pointed out by one of the members that he‘s been in the 

legislature in serving parts of five decades. I‘ve been here a 

little while, but I think I‘m only working on my second one 

right now, Mr. Speaker. But five decades is a long, long time. 
He‘s seen a lot of things. I suspect he would like to see the 

clock turn back in a lot of areas, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
He always — Mr. Speaker, I‘m going to be a little careful about 

how I say this because I don‘t want to offend the member 
opposite — he always refers to me as a good friend of his. I‘m 
not quite sure politically why he does that. We‘ve always been 

on opposite sides of the House, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We have 
had a little, you know, opportunity to have a few discussions 
from time to time. 
 
Generally speaking, when you talk about good friends, you 
would normally associate it with speaking with someone more 
than once or twice a year. It‘s usually the kind of thing that you 

might occasionally, you know, go out for dinner or have them 
over to your house — those kinds of things. That‘s just 
something that really hasn‘t happened a lot. 
 
I have a great deal of respect for the Leader of the Opposition. I 
think he‘s, you know, he‘s probably represented the 

constituencies he‘s had represented for a long time pretty well, I 
suspect. I don‘t agree with his philosophy. And, Mr. Speaker, 

he‘s simply on a different wavelength than I am politically. I 

just simply do not agree with the policies that he‘s been a part 

of over the years. Whether its nationalization going back to the 
early days of his career, whether it‘s some of the things he‘s 

talking about these days, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it‘s just 

something that I‘m not sure why some people would think that 

we are very close friends. I think I would characterize it a little 
bit more as a casual acquaintance, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But nevertheless, I want to welcome him back to the legislature. 
I hope he has the opportunity to serve to as the Leader of the 
Opposition for a long, long time, Mr. Speaker. And I suspect 
given the way things look in Saskatchewan these days, I think 
he likely will be in opposition for a long, long time, and at some 
point they‘ll be going through another leadership campaign. 
 
I think they made a mistake, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the 
leadership. I think they should‘ve reached back to a younger 

person to represent the leadership aspirations of that party. I 
think it would‘ve served them better. Frankly when you look at 

the election results in the two by-elections, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I think you can see that in any reasonable analysis of 
this, with anybody with any degree of political acumen would 
look at this and say the NDP didn‘t do all that well, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 
 
You backed up a long ways. And it would like the equivalent 
of, it would be like the equivalent of the Saskatchewan Party 
just barely squeaking in a by-election in Kelvington-Wadena or 
in Cannington or some of the other constituencies, or 
Kindersley perhaps. But nevertheless, when you look at the 
results, and when you look at the results and you run them all 
across the province of Saskatchewan, I think what you‘ll find is 

is that many, many members are probably wondering about 
their future in this Assembly. 
 
And given the attitude of people across Saskatchewan these 
days, I suspect many members opposite, even though there‘s a 

great deal of bravado about the election results in those two 
constituencies, when you win Riversdale by 350 votes, I think 
you realize, Mr. Deputy Speaker — as anybody on that side that 
has a moment of honesty in terms of looking at these results — 
would realize that that‘s not a very strong result. And when you 

look at the northern member in his seat just barely squeaking in, 
you realize how perilous your seat is at the moment, sir. 



October 27, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3271 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, what I‘ve noticed probably most in the 
last couple of years across Saskatchewan, that I think as a 
member that‘s been in the legislature for a period of time, is the 

change in attitude that people have in this province. All across 
Saskatchewan you are seeing that change in attitude that we 
haven‘t witnessed, I don‘t think, in decades. We‘re seeing a 

level of optimism, a level of hope. People now are very proud 
about Saskatchewan. We‘re seeing people moving back from 

other provinces — even the Leader of the Opposition — 
moving back to Saskatchewan. Because it‘s a changed 

province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It‘s a place where people want 

to stay now. 
 
When you go to your constituency, and you‘re in the 

constituency, and you‘re talking to people, talking to young 
people across Saskatchewan, I remember many occasions 
speaking to graduating classes in my constituency — and on the 
odd occasion, in other constituencies as well — and you‘d ask 
the young people, almost plead with them, what are you 
thinking about doing? Are you going to stay in Saskatchewan? 
 
And it wasn‘t all that many years ago — about three — when 
you would talk to young people in Saskatchewan and they‘d be 

saying to you, I‘m probably leaving Saskatchewan. I don‘t see a 

future for me here. I don‘t see opportunity for me here in 
Saskatchewan. And it was sort of about 7 out of 10, 8 out of 10, 
occasionally unfortunately, 9 out of 10 young people would 
look you straight in the eye and say, I don‘t see opportunity for 

me. I‘m leaving Saskatchewan. I‘m going to Calgary. I‘m going 

to Edmonton. I‘m going to Red Deer. I‘m going to British 

Columbia. I‘m going anywhere but staying in Saskatchewan. 

And that was always very, very difficult for all members. And I 
suspect all of the members opposite have had similar 
experiences until we‘ve seen the change in the last few years. 
 
We‘ve see that attitude change where there‘s hope and there‘s 

optimism. And young people now, young people now, when 
you ask them that very same question, are saying things like I 
see opportunity here in Saskatchewan. I see great things for our 
province. I see the opening up of our economy. I see a 
pro-business attitude from the government that‘s welcoming 
people to our province, welcoming investment to 
Saskatchewan. And now they want to be a part of that. And 
that‘s why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you see the population growth 

in Saskatchewan. You see young people staying in staying in 
Saskatchewan. You see investment in Saskatchewan like you 
haven‘t seen in a long time. 
 
Just today was another good example of that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker: the Premier and I were in Saskatoon, and we had the 
occasion to welcome another company‘s significant ramped-up 
investment into Saskatchewan. PetroBakken, a company from 
Alberta, is looking at Saskatchewan. And they want to try out 
the THAI [toe to heel air induction] type of technology that they 
have developed — toe, heel, air induction program. They‘ve 
developed a way of extracting more oil from the reservoir in 
what was formerly thought to be depleted oil fields of 
Saskatchewan, ramping up production dramatically. 
 
And where, when they looked at all of the places, and they‘re 

invested all across the world — Petrobank is soon to be known 
as PetroBakken, actually — when they had looked at all of the 
places across the world where they could have looked at this as 

a first type of a project, which one did they pick? They picked 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And one of the reasons that the senior executives, the president 
was there, CEO [chief executive officer] was there, and the 
COO [chief operating officer] was there, the vice president of 
heavy oil development for their company was there, and he said 
there are a number of reasons why we came to Saskatchewan. 
First of all, there‘s a positive business climate in Saskatchewan. 
Second of all, in terms of the permitting process, it took us six 
weeks to get the permits approved in Saskatchewan. 
 
When the media asked the vice-president of heavy oil 
development, are you looking at these types of development in 
other places? And he said, well our first choice is 
Saskatchewan. We‘re going to be ramping up in Saskatchewan 

over a time, a great number of wells. We expect we may be up 
to a thousand at some point in time in this type of oil 
development that we‘re working on. We‘re also looking, we‘re 

looking at projects in Alberta, and we‘re looking at projects in 

British Columbia, but our first choice is Saskatchewan. 
 
They asked them then, how are the approvals going in Alberta? 
And they said, well we‘re over a year now and still haven‘t got 

approval. In British Columbia, I think it was eight months, still 
haven‘t got approval. 
 
In Saskatchewan it was six weeks, and they had the appropriate 
approvals to move forward with a very, very exciting 
development for our province, looking at recovery rates of 70 
per cent possibly. They are very, very optimistic that they‘re 

going to see that in a reservoir where you would normally 
expect recovery rates to be 8, 10, maybe 12 per cent if you‘re 

lucky. 
 
So it‘s this type of technology that‘s unlocking these new 

developments in the Viking formation, in the Waseca 
formation, in the Bakken formation. And it‘s those types of 

things that we are seeing across Saskatchewan, where 
companies are coming in and they‘re saying it‘s the attitude in 

Saskatchewan that‘s making a difference. It‘s the opportunity in 

Saskatchewan that‘s making a difference. And they want to be a 

part of this. 
 
And that‘s why . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Of course, it‘s a 
resource. Without a doubt it‘s the resource that they want to 
come here to Saskatchewan. We‘re blessed with those 

resources. But we‘re also, when you ask the companies, they‘re 
saying there‘s resources in many, many places in the world, but 

when they look at the rankings of places where there are 
resources, when they look at those kinds of things, they‘re 
saying Saskatchewan ranks right up there with the best places in 
the world to invest. 
 
And that‘s why you‘re seeing that type of investment here in 
Saskatchewan. That‘s why you‘ll continue to see that kind of 
thing. That‘s why you‘re seeing companies ramping up the 

level of investment that you see in Saskatchewan. And, you 
know, as we see prices changing and moving up a little bit all of 
the time in the last few months, you‘re going to start seeing 

more and more development. 
 
[21:00] 



3272 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2009 

And what we also see is, when you talk to these senior 
executives they will say to you, it‘s very, very important that 

they understand that there‘s a stable royalty regime. They want 

to make sure that they have an opportunity to recover their 
investment and make a return on their investment. And that‘s 

what they see as an important thing. They are also interested in 
what they see from the opposition these days. And we‘ll be 

talking a lot more about that in the future, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
you can be sure of that. We want to make sure that the members 
opposite understand that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you look at other opportunities in 
Saskatchewan, I know the Premier met with a couple of young 
people in Saskatoon today to talk about a new development that 
they had. We think it has great potential in Saskatchewan as 
well, and their first choice. They have opportunity to 
manufacture and develop this project. I think they‘re looking at, 

they were working in . . . Which country was it? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Korea. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Korea. That‘s right. They were looking at 
operations in Korea, but they really want to have those 
operations headquartered in Saskatchewan — young people, 22, 
23 years old that want to stay in our province, want to help 
build Saskatchewan. And that‘s the kind of atmosphere that we 

see in our province that hasn‘t been in this province for a long, 

long time. And it‘s great. We are extremely grateful to see 

people that want to take the opportunity to stay in our province, 
help build Saskatchewan, and work towards a brighter future 
for our province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as the Minister Responsible for Energy and 
Resources, I want to talk a little bit about the budget in terms of 
potash royalties because I think it‘s important that we get this 
on the record. The government went through the budgeting 
process as you would normally go through it. We looked at the 
recommendations from the Department of Energy and 
Resources, from the Minister of Finance‘s office. We asked for 

similar process that the previous administration went through. 
 
You ask a number of independent analysts to provide you with 
information about what they think are their best estimates. You 
talk to the companies themselves, the three potash producing 
companies in Saskatchewan — PCS [Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan Inc.], Agrium, Mosaic — and asked them what 
their recommendations are. You talked to the people at 
Canpotex who sell abroad the potash for these three companies, 
and you ask them all of those kinds of things. And then you 
start trying to determine what their estimates of this are going to 
be. 
 
They came up with estimates ranging from about $600 all the 
way up to about $850 would be the price per tonne that they 
would be selling it for, they expected. They also expected that 
they would be selling in the neighbourhood of about 10 million 
tonnes of product on a worldwide basis to countries like Japan, 
to countries like India, China, and others. A large market for 
potash is in the United States. The corn belt is a large consumer 
of potash. 
 
Incidentally, Saskatchewan is a real small player in terms of the 
use of potash — lots of use of phosphorus, lots of use of 

nitrogen, small player in terms of potash use in Saskatchewan. 
Our soils simply aren‘t deficient in potash to a great degree. 
There‘s a little bit used certainly in canola production where 

you might look at adding, you know, 10, 20 pounds or 
something like that. But when it compares to phosphorus or to 
nitrogen, it‘s a very small component of the nutrient blend that 
you would add to your production base. 
 
So you ask all of those analysts, you ask all of the various 
ministries about what their views on this will be — what kind 
of production are you likely to sell? — and then you come up 
with a forecast of what it might be. Well, Mr. Speaker, we did 
that. We took a very, very small ―c‖ conservative approach. 

They were estimating it was going to be about 650 price and 
ramping up from there. And we‘ll provide all of the analysis for 

the member opposite that‘s cackling like a hyena in the back 
row. But the fact of the matter was is that there was a number of 
analysts that provided that kind of representation to the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
So you look at that; you look at those recommendations. From 
the 650-plus range we thought we had to be prudent and we 
pared it back to about 565, I think it was — $560 a tonne. We 
looked at the production and the amount of sales that they were 
expecting. We reduced that by somewhat too, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
And then what happened? What happened was that frankly the 
Canpotex company, the organization that sells on behalf of the 
three companies in the international market, we saw sales to the 
US [United States] just be scaled back dramatically. From there 
we saw the sales to India scaled back dramatically. We saw 
sales to China that still have not materialized in a sale, a 
contract with them. And frankly it resulted in a very, very 
significant loss of revenue for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And of course, and of course there will be always 
second-guessing with respect to that. I guess I would liken it to 
something that people in agriculture would be very familiar 
with. When you seed a crop, you make the best efforts that you 
could possibly make. You go out and seed, you fertilize, you do 
all of the things, you go through all of the steps, but there are 
some things that are a little bit out of your control. And if you 
look at people in the Kindersley area this year, they would 
know exactly what I‘m talking about. 
 
When it doesn‘t rain and when you‘ve got no crop whatsoever, 
it doesn‘t matter what you budgeted for. It doesn‘t matter what 

you budgeted for. You just simply are wrong. And it‘s just 

simply it isn‘t raining and you aren‘t going to have a crop. And 

that‘s just the end of the story. 
 
But when it comes to this, it‘s a very similar situation, where 

you make the best estimates you possibly can make. You use all 
of the analysis of companies that are in the business. Some of 
them, you know, you look at companies that have been in 
business for 35 or 40 years, senior executives that know this 
business better than anyone. You‘ve got to take their advice on 

some of these kinds of things. You took their advice exactly the 
same way that the NDP opposite took their advice over the 
years. 
 
And when you ask . . . and now, now what‘s happened is the 



October 27, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3273 

senior executives are saying, well we fell on our face. We were 
wrong. We thought we were going to sell a large contract to the 
Chinese and it just simply did not happen. We expected, we 
expected that the US economy was going to be such in 
agriculture that we were going to sell a large volume into the 
US. That didn‘t happen. In 35 years, in 35 years of forecasting 

they realize, more than ever, that they were completely wrong 
in their estimates. 
 
And if we were out 100 million or 200 million or something 
like that, you could say, well maybe you were a little too 
optimistic or whatever. But when it‘s ramped back to the extent 

that it is at this point, I think any reasonable person in 
Saskatchewan would look at it and say, if we would have came 
— as the member opposite is intimating over there — and just 
said we‘ll just average it over the last few years, we‘ll take that 

average and that‘s what we‘ll go with, we would have been still 

wrong by hundreds of millions of dollars. 
 
And so the situation is something that we have to be mindful of, 
Mr. Speaker. But the good news in Saskatchewan is, is that this 
government has planned for that kind of eventuality. This 
province has the fiscal ability to deal with that kind of 
devastating reduction because we‘ve had a prudent approach to 

the finance of this province for the last couple of years and 
that‘s why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we still are confident that the 

budget can be balanced in Saskatchewan. 
 
We are still confident that we‘re on track in terms of the debt 
paydown in this province. We‘re still confident that we can 

carry forward the property tax changes that we have made. 
We‘re very, very comfortable in terms of that, Mr. Speaker, and 

we expect, or hopeful that we will see a return to more normal 
markets in 2010, and we look forward to that because clearly 
it‘s a very important component of the fiscal situation of our 

government, of any government in Saskatchewan. 
 
Members opposite that sat on the Treasury Board would know 
very well that it was a big part of their revenue base in 
Saskatchewan. It will be a big part of any government‘s revenue 

base for a long time in this province. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the Throne Speech you saw 
something that you rarely see in the political world, and that‘s a 
political party saying, we were wrong. We were wrong; we 
accept the responsibility for that. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan I think have understood the 
situation much better than the members opposite would ever 
want to admit. I think the people of this province understand it. 
I think they trust the Minister of Finance. I think they believe 
the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan when he‘s talking 

to them about it, and he‘s straight with them. He‘s honest with 
them and he provides the information that they‘re looking for in 

terms of understanding the situation. 
 
And that‘s why you don‘t see the kind of concern, feigned 

concern that the members opposite have about the budget of 
this province. That‘s why we‘re confident that the people of 
Saskatchewan will recognize the challenges before us and 
continue to support the government of the day, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 

I want to close by saying that we are still optimistic in 
Saskatchewan that we will have a very strong agenda as laid out 
in the Throne Speech. We‘re going to be tackling some very, 

very important areas that are of concern to people in the health 
care field when it comes to wait-lists. 
 
Any member of this Assembly, I suspect, would know of 
people that have been waiting a long, long time for surgeries 
that are very, very important to them. That‘s something that we 

have decided is a very, very significant area of concern to the 
people of Saskatchewan. We‘re making the commitment to deal 

with that. I‘m very confident, Mr. Speaker, that we can. And 
we‘re going to use all of the ways that we have at our disposal 

to try and work on that. 
 
It won‘t be based on philosophy, Mr. Speaker. It won‘t be based 

on whether it is, as the members opposite want to portray it, as 
privatized health care services or anything else like that. It 
would be based on need, necessity, understanding people‘s 

circumstances, understanding the health challenges that they 
have, and trying to do something other than just come forward 
with uninformed rhetoric about how this is going to somehow 
or another deteriorate our health care system. 
 
Well when you have a person that‘s in dire need of health care 

services, I don‘t think they really care a great deal about the 

philosophy that the NDP want to suggest is the be-all and 
end-all when it comes to health care services. They‘re much 
more interested in a government that takes a compassionate 
look at this and says, we have to do something for the people of 
this province who helped build this province. 
 
So you‘re going to see a government move forward with that. 

I‘m very confident that the Minister of Health will be dealing 

with this in a very straightforward manner, Mr. Speaker, and it 
is for that reason and many, many others that I remain very, 
very supportive of the government of the day, of the Premier of 
this province. And it is that reason, Mr. Speaker, and for the 
hope and the opportunity and the optimism that we see in 
Saskatchewan, that I‘ll be wholeheartedly supporting the main 

motion and voting against the amendment from the members 
opposite. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 
from Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Before I 
begin I would like to thank and acknowledge the work of my 
colleagues from both sides of the aisle. And I also want to 
welcome and congratulate the new members opposite, and I 
trust that all of us in this room are determined to make life 
better for all Saskatchewan people. And I look forward in 
working in co-operation with all of you. 
 
Now I‘d like to make mention of my family support: my 

husband Doug and my four children, Matt and his wife Katie, 
Brigitt, Lacey, and Markus. And also of my constituency 
assistant, Marcus Abrametz. And Marcus takes very good care 
of my constituents when I‘m away, and we really appreciate 
him. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I‘m going to speak about several issues 

that are being experienced in my community and my 



3274 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2009 

constituency of Saskatchewan Rivers and how they‘re being 

addressed by our government. But I also want to say I have a 
great job. I really enjoy my job and I‘m grateful for the 

opportunity to serve the people of the province and of my 
constituency of Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
[21:15] 
 
And I would also like to express my gratitude to . . . and the 
co-operation of the people of my constituency for their 
understanding about my roles and how I have to be away from 
home and work as an elected official. I also appreciate all the 
staff, the staff here and at home, which render this valuable 
support in the spirit of democracy and of guiding the 
fundamental principles of being an elected official. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it‘s a pleasure for me to stand here today and 

reply to the government‘s Throne Speech. And I do believe our 

government is going to keep moving forward — forward with 
policies that ensure a balance between a growing economy and 
ensuring that everyone in Saskatchewan sees the benefits of our 
economy. 
 
The honourable opposition is welcome to try and critique 
Saskatchewan‘s fiscal management, but I know that the people 
of our province will simply look at the facts as our record 
speaks for itself. Our province is poised to be the only one in 
Canada without a deficit. 
 
And a study issued last week by the Toronto Dominion Bank 
reported that our country‘s federal and provincial deficits may 
possibly reach $100 billion. Saskatchewan however will be the 
only province able to avoid a deficit, and I think the citizens 
will see this news at face value. Since our province will be the 
only one in Canada in the black, the people from Saskatchewan 
can form their own conclusions. 
 
I believe Saskatchewan will remain confident in serving its 
citizens with the lowest unemployment rate in the country, a 
strong provincial economy, provincial tax cuts, and a 40 per 
cent debt reduction in only two years. 
 
When our government took office we inherited a public debt of 
more than 7 billion. Now we promised to pay down the 
province‘s debt by 250 million within our first year in office 

and dedicate half of all budget surpluses to debt reduction. So 
we greatly exceeded our plan to pay down the province‘s debt 

by 250 million within our first year in office. And in our first 
year in office we reduced the debt by $5,000 a minute, 
$300,000 an hour, or 7 million a day. And this means that we 
can now devote a greater portion of people‘s tax dollars towards 

the programs and services that they want and deserve, and less 
towards paying interest charges left to us by previous 
governments. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, last October our government announced 
the largest single-year income tax reduction in Saskatchewan 
history. So overall we‘re putting 7 million back into the hands 

of Saskatchewan people through tax reductions. As our 
province continues to grow and move forward, the importance 
of bringing those who left behind is increasing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for the first time in a generation, people are 

coming back home. And from my own family we welcomed a 
new baby grandson, Casey Matthew Wilson, in January, and 
he‘s the fifth generation on our farm. So like many young 
people in our province, my son had to leave Saskatchewan for 
Alberta to find employment. And he always wanted to come 
home but, because of the previous government‘s policies, the 

jobs were not here. 
 
And welcoming newcomers is what I‘ve personally been busy 
with, Mr. Deputy Speaker, very literally. Since I was appointed 
as the Legislative Secretary to the minister in charge of 
Immigration, I‘ve been active in immigration communities 

throughout the province. Diversity and growth will prove to be 
our strength. And I‘ve been welcoming groups of newcomers 
from near and far, a concept unfathomed under the NDP. And I 
have met with recently arrived immigrants who came from 
neighbouring provinces as well as neighbouring continents. 
 
I was especially happy to have made the acquaintance of Marge 
Nainaar, the executive director to the Prince Albert 
Multicultural Council. And she has been recognized over the 
years, and I‘m proud to have her in my community. She greeted 

me very warmly at Tapestrama in Prince Albert, and I had a 
chance to enjoy cultural music, dance, and some really good 
food. Now I‘d like to take this moment to recognize Marge 

Nainaar, as she should be praised for her many 
accomplishments and her continued goals to foster multicultural 
harmony in our province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I‘d like to think of myself as being very 

multicultural, as I have a background of Austrian, Polish, 
German, and Norwegian. And my husband is Irish and English. 
So when I tell people this, I‘m greeted with great surprise when 
making the acquaintance of some immigrants with less diverse 
backgrounds. So my children just call themselves Canadians. 
 
I believe diversity is our strength, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I 
look forward to a more diverse, welcoming Saskatchewan in 
our future. Now for the past decade our province has been not 
as nearly welcoming as it should. And in order to accommodate 
newcomers, planning and infrastructure are needed. We all 
realize that infrastructure is . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Members, I call the 
members to order, please. Order. Order. Order. There is very 
many interesting conversations going on, but the member from 
Saskatchewan Rivers has the floor and we‘d like to hear her. 
 
Ms. Wilson: — Thank you. Thank you. Now with our 
government lowering taxes, investing in infrastructure, and 
rebuilding rural Saskatchewan, jobs and investments are 
following. And my son was able to find a job here in 
Saskatchewan. And I‘m happy to have him home. 
 
I‘d also like to speak today about the proud history of 
agriculture in my constituency of Saskatchewan Rivers. Now 
five families from our riding this year were awarded the 
Century Family Farm Award. And I look forward to more 
recipients next year. Now my grandson will be a fifth 
generation on our family homestead and I‘d like to work very 
hard to ensure that he has a respectable province to call home. 



October 27, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3275 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, as a cattle rancher I‘m very proud of our 

government‘s accomplishments when it comes to our 

producers. I believe our government is moving forward by 
making support for our agriculture industry a priority with 
reforming crop insurance, support for our cattle and hog 
producers, and improving service to our producers. We here on 
this side of the House believe that agriculture contributes to our 
economy as a direct result of the hard work of Saskatchewan 
farmers and ranchers. 
 
Now Saskatchewan has made a name for itself as a reliable 
supplier of quality agriculture products and we can thank our 
producers for that. I also think the review of the crop insurance 
program is very good. 
 
As a livestock producer and a pet owner, I‘m passionate in my 

care towards animals and wildlife. Last month I brought 
greetings to the local SPCA [Society for the Prevention of 
Cruelty to Animals] and it was called Walk for Paws. And this 
SPCA branch serves not only the city of Prince Albert but also 
many neighbouring RMs [rural municipality] in my riding. I 
think a community can be judged by how well they care, not 
only for each other, but for their animals as well. So we must 
speak for those who cannot speak for themselves. And I think 
we also have to speak for those who cannot feed themselves or 
look after . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Order please. Would 
the members care to carry on their conversation behind the bar 
so the rest of us can hear this speech? The member from Sask 
Rivers has the floor. 
 
Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan has 
some of the most beautiful landscapes in the country. And I‘d 

like to point out that the snowmobile competition in my area, 
where recreational snowmobilers show off their skill and 
experience, has hundreds of visitors come. 
 
And also in my riding of Saskatchewan Rivers, I believe we 
have some of the best parks and lakes in the country. And one 
particular area is Waskesiu which is both a lake and a town 
flourishing within the borders of the Prince Albert National 
Park. And this park covers over 38,000 kilometres of beautiful 
wilderness. So I encourage every member of the Assembly to 
spend a weekend in Waskesiu, and I guarantee you‘ll fall in 

love with the area and want to come back again and again. 
 
So to ensure that people‘s experiences while visiting our parks, 

heritage sites, and museums are enjoyable and memorable, our 
government has committed a lot of money. So our government 
believes that Saskatchewan has some of the most beautiful 
parks in the country, and attendance was up in the parks across 
Saskatchewan this summer. So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, last year 
more people than ever enjoyed the natural beauty that 
Saskatchewan and my riding has to offer. 
 
Our government will create more opportunities for people to get 
out and enjoy the beauty of Saskatchewan. By the beginning of 
2010 camping season, our government will have added 600 
electrified campsites. Yes. And our new provincial cultural 
policy will enhance the distinct character of our unique 

Saskatchewan communities. 
 
And in my humble opinion, there‘s no place in the world that I 

would rather live or raise my family than right here in this great 
province of Saskatchewan. On the other hand, we know that 
everyone cannot be lucky enough to live here with us. For those 
people who don‘t live in Saskatchewan, we would like to make 

vacationing as memorable and enjoyable as possible. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, our government has also taken many steps 
towards improving our health care system. And we have 
strengthened cancer care. We‘ve added more training seats for 

doctors and nurses, and we have also added 13 new long-term 
care homes for seniors. We want to see care restored to 
medicare. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we all know, October is Breast 
Cancer Awareness Month. And it‘s important to bring 

awareness and to encourage women over the age of 50 such as 
myself to take action and commit to getting a mammogram 
every two years. And in my riding we have the Prairie Women 
on Snowmobiles Ride which will finish in Big River this year. 
This is the 10th anniversary of the ride and is an important 
fundraiser for breast cancer research. And this is something 
special to me because of my personal experience with breast 
cancer in the family. In 1992, my mother died from breast 
cancer. And because of this, I put a tremendous value into 
research. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, our government has also committed to 
reducing wait times for treatment in this Throne Speech. At the 
U of S [University of Saskatchewan] our government and our 
minister participated in the sod turning for the construction of 
the E wing phase of the U of S academic health sciences 
project. The construction of this facility enhances the 
world-class life science cluster at the University of 
Saskatchewan, thereby helping to ensure that Saskatchewan 
continues to lead the country in key areas of health sciences 
research and boost our prosperity today and for the future. 
 
[21:30] 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when this is . . . Deputy Deputy Speaker, 
when the Saskatchewan Party formed government, we 
developed a plan to rebuild Saskatchewan‘s crumbling 

infrastructure by investing in both provincial and municipal 
projects. Since forming government, we‘ve committed 2.5 
billion in the province‘s infrastructure for such things as 

highways, schools, health care facilities, and municipal projects. 
Now to meet this challenge, the Ministry of Highways has 
developed Saskatchewan‘s first rolling five-year capital plan for 
highway construction. 
 
I‘d like to dwell on some positive news that has come out of 

Saskatchewan Rivers since the new government took office. 
Now for anyone who has visited the Murray Point provincial 
campground as I do every year, you will see the state of 
disrepair in which the road was left under by the previous 
administration. 
 
Now historically, prior to the NDP‘s gravel conversion, the 

Murray Point access road served as an entryway to the 
impressive Emma Lake and everything that it has to offer. Now 



3276 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2009 

this road was converted to gravel under the previous 
administration and many people felt it was a slap to the face. 
Local businesses along with Emma Lake residents have 
struggled with this hardship since that terrible decision. The 
road was dusty and dangerous and quite insulting to the people 
of Lakeland. And what is more disgraceful is that this decision 
was made in light of the important geographical location of this 
road. It leads to a provincial campground and recreation site and 
is used by thousands of eager tourists and residents every year. 
 
But I am very pleased to announce, as the MLA of that area, 
that resurfacing of this road has already begun. So no longer 
will visitors and tourists be greeted by a dusty, unwelcoming 
highway because this resurfaced highway represents 
Saskatchewan‘s vision of moving forward — a bold, fresh 
effort to welcome newcomers to our province and specifically 
to show the care that our most popular tourist destination 
certainly deserves. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the significant investment will improve 
infrastructure in our province and will have a real and lasting 
impact by creating local jobs, as well as building safer roads 
and bridges for our Saskatchewan communities. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, for 16 years, municipalities‘ requests for 
funding fell on deaf ears, especially in rural Saskatchewan who 
have gone without for so many years. Mr. Deputy Speaker, our 
government is moving forward to help communities to grow 
during this current . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. I said order. Respect 
the member that has the floor. I recognize the member from 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Ms. Wilson: — Our government has announced 100 million 
municipal economic enhancement program, which is 
unconditional infrastructure funding — no political strings 
attached. Because of this funding, nearly 800 communities now 
have money and hands to make their cities, towns, and RMs 
better places to live in the province. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this has had an impact in my area, 
where several communities used it for projects like water and 
waste water and our roads. To make the most impact on the 
communities, we needed to accelerate the process, and we did 
just that. We will ensure that municipalities in Saskatchewan 
will move forward and prosper in the years to come. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I‘m very proud to announce that one of 

the 12 recipients of the Saskatchewan Order of Merit resides in 
the constituency of Saskatchewan Rivers, and I‘d like to take 
the opportunity to recognize his achievements today. Mr. Arne 
Petersen of Emma Lake was awarded the Order of Merit in 
recognition of his many achievements in my community and 
his, and also in the province as a whole. 
 
So over the years, Mr. Petersen has created hundreds of local 
jobs through his entrepreneurial endeavours, and countless 
others have benefitted from his impact on the forestry industry. 
Elk Ridge Golf Resort is among the most impressive of Mr. 
Petersen‘s achievements. For those of us who have been lucky 

enough to visit this resort, which is located in the riding of 
Saskatchewan Rivers, you will bear witness to an impressive 
display of what our province is capable of. 
 
The setting of this resort highlights another of our province‘s 

best resources, our outdoors. And Mr. Petersen‘s appreciation 
for beauty, sport, and the outdoor wilderness ensured minimal 
environmental impact during the development of this resort. 
And this resort employs hundreds of people and was recognized 
by the Canadian Professional Golf Association as the 2007 
resort of the year. 
 
Mr. Petersen has devoted great time and effort to various 
charities as well. He‘s a man of great talent and vision, and he 

could have chosen more welcoming horizons. And I‘m proud to 

call him my friend. So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I‘d like to 
congratulate him and his team of employees for their hard work, 
dedication, and vision over the years. 
 
Now to conclude. I‘m very excited and optimistic about our 

Saskatchewan, our new Saskatchewan. And from what I see in 
my constituency, most of the people in the community feel the 
same. Even though there is a tough recession, Saskatchewan is 
seen as a beacon of hope on national and even international 
news reports. 
 
I represent dozens of smaller communities and towns, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and we‘re excited at the prospect of more 

growth. Work has already begun in many regards. Roads are 
being paved. The Garden River RM will finally receive a 
much-needed bridge. Community sports arenas are being 
improved on in Big River and Buckland. Tourist hotspots such 
as the Emma Lake and Candle Lake, Sandy Bay campground 
will finally receive makeovers. 
 
So Saskatchewan is growing and exceeding, and for the first 
time in decades is leading other provinces in growth and job 
creation. Saskatchewan is preparing for future generations, a 
province of opportunity and hope. With this new government, 
Saskatchewan is now being seen as open-minded and more 
optimistic, a province that continually is making more sense. 
 
Saskatchewan is the envy of the country. No longer will our 
province be derided for missed opportunities; Saskatchewan is 
the opportunity. I will be voting against the amendment, and I 
am in favour of the Throne Speech. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Quennell: — Thank you very much. Thank you very 
much, Mr. Speaker. It‘s a pleasure to rise this evening. I 

appreciate that members are perhaps a little tired, a little 
impatient, and want to get home. It might be showing a little bit, 
Mr. Speaker, in the deference they are showing to people who 
in this . . . on their feet. 
 
But this is an opportunity, my only opportunity, to respond to 
the Speech from the Throne. And I want to do that on behalf of 
the constituents of Saskatoon Meewasin. The speech, Mr. 
Speaker, is called ―Moving Forward,‖ which is sort of 

Orwellian language for a speech that perhaps speaks less of the 
future than any Throne Speech I‘ve ever seen presented in this 



October 27, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3277 

legislature, by either Sask Party government or an NDP 
government. 
 
Perhaps it speaks less of the future than any Throne Speech ever 
has, Mr. Speaker. It speaks almost entirely to a selective 
history, a revisionist history over the last two years, Mr. 
Speaker, and very little to the future. But if you want to 
misdirect from that, I suppose a good title is ―Moving 

Forward.‖ And the government chose a quote, an interesting 

choice from a self-proclaimed socialist, Albert Einstein, as to 
formulate the principle that if one wants to not stand still, one 
must move forward. And the quote is, ―Life is like riding a 
bicycle. To keep your balance, you must keep moving.‖ 
 
There are a number of formulations of that principle, that if one 
doesn‘t want to get stuck, one doesn‘t want to end up standing 

still, one has to keep moving forward. And Premier Grant 
Devine was famous for saying in his day, don‘t say whoa in a 

mudhole. 
 
And you would have thought, Mr. Speaker, you would have 
thought, Mr. Speaker, that a Saskatchewan Party government 
would have chosen a local conservative formulation of the 
principle as opposed to the description of the principle by a 
self-declared socialist, Albert Einstein. 
 
But you can understand, Mr. Speaker, as to why, as to why the 
government would not want to be drawing attention to the 
record of the Devine government because we have learned this 
fall that the . . . And it‘s not simply the opposition, as I will 
point out, it‘s not simply the opposition, but the glaring 

similarities between how this government budgets and how 
Grant Devine budgeted, particularly in the late ‘80s, had 
become evident to a wide part of the Saskatchewan population, 
Mr. Speaker. Not just, not just to the opposition as the members 
opposite would suggest, but to others as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is a government that seems to be running out of ideas and 
money at about the same time, Mr. Speaker, and it‘s not just the 

opposition that says so. I rarely have occasion to quote from my 
hometown newspaper, but when I do, I like to take it, Mr. 
Speaker, and in a response to the Throne Speech, the editorial 
board of The StarPhoenix said on Thursday, October 22nd, 
2009, ―For a party still so relatively new at the task, the 

government‘s speech from the throne spends an inordinate 

amount of attention looking back [Mr. Speaker].‖ 
 
In the rear-view mirror. A government that wants to talk a lot 
more about the last two years than they want to talk about what 
they‘re going to do, Mr. Speaker. As I said, a government that 

seems to be running — perhaps coincidentally, perhaps not — 
out of ideas and money at the same time. 
 
So let‘s for a moment join the government in its two-year 
review, Mr. Speaker. Its record, and we heard tonight and we 
have heard in response to the Throne Speech from government 
members about this select project or this select statistic, Mr. 
Speaker, but let‘s look at the overview. 
 
Over 4,700 layoffs in Saskatchewan in 2009; 700 fewer jobs 
year over year; loss of 3,700 full-time jobs year over year; loss 
of 10,000 full-time jobs in August and September of 2009. 
 

Latest unemployment figures from September show EI 
[employment insurance] recipients have increased by 44 per 
cent year over year; a record-setting — not the only record, Mr. 
Speaker, this government has set — but a record-setting 
unemployment with 14,000 EI recipients in May of this year; 
decline in youth employment of 6,000 jobs year over year. 
 
And there‘s been a lot of back patting and cheerleading on the 

government benches about youth and what‘s been done for 

youth and how much things are better for youth in the province 
of Saskatchewan, but the facts show otherwise, Mr. Speaker — 
a decline in youth employment and a significant decline in 
youth employment in the province of Saskatchewan. Youth 
employment is up 8.5 per cent, which is an increase from 2008 
where this youth-friendly government had it at 7.3 per cent. 
 
A 142.4 per cent increase in EI recipients under the age of 25 
between July 2008 and July 2009. It‘s fortunate that this 

government cares so much about youth and cares so much 
about their employment, or can you imagine what the increase 
in EI recipients under the age of 25 would have been if they did 
not care, Mr. Speaker? 142.4 per cent increase over the year, 
Mr. Speaker. And this is an important number, Mr. Speaker, 
when the Minister of Energy and Resources and others rise up 
and say, it‘s not our fault that the projections were all wrong. 

It‘s not all our fault. I don‘t think the minister used these words, 

but he came pretty close to calling it an act of God, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
[21:45] 
 
The projected economic growth in 2009 is point five per cent, 
Mr. Speaker. That is a number worth remembering because, Mr. 
Speaker, in March when the government was projecting 
economic growth four times that, 2.1 per cent, Mr. Speaker, the 
private sector forecasts averaged together were point six three 
per cent. Point five per cent — what actually has happened so 
far — is a lot closer to point six three per cent, very far away 
from the 2.1 per cent. 
 
The Minister of Energy and Resources didn‘t want to explain 

how that number was calculated, Mr. Speaker, but it seems like 
it was calculated the same way that the potash revenues were 
calculated. You take all analysis that‘s been provided by the 

private sector and you times by three, or by four, to get the 2.1 
per cent growth in 2009, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An increase in corporate bankruptcies, but an even greater 
increase in personal bankruptcies in 2009, and then a 1 per cent 
increase in inflation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I‘ve had occasion in this House when we‘ve been 

discussing the history of the province of Saskatchewan, and 
sometimes the members opposite like to go back 16 years. They 
don‘t like to go back much further than that. And sometimes 

they only go back a couple years. But I ask this question 
because it‘s a short historical question. It‘s a brief time. When 

was the last time that Saskatchewan was both a have province 
and the most affordable place to live in Canada, Mr. Speaker? 
When was the last time that was true? In 2007 before the 
Saskatchewan Party government was elected. 
 
We have the 1 per cent increase in inflation. It doesn‘t sound 



3278 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2009 

like very much, Mr. Speaker, but two things about that: first of 
all, the only province with inflation this year; secondly, Mr. 
Speaker, largely within this government‘s control. Much of this 

inflationary increases were housing costs around utilities, Mr. 
Speaker. And now we have a government that is talking 
seriously about a SaskPower increase every year — every year 
— of 8 per cent until the price of electricity in this province 
doubles, Mr. Speaker. And they‘re proud of it. They‘re proud of 
it, Mr. Speaker. They have excellent reasons for it, I am sure. I 
just don‘t understand what they are. 
 
Now remember, Mr. Speaker, the figure point five per cent 
economic growth and the figure 1 per cent increase inflation. 
Back in the ‘70s if you managed to pull off in your economy, an 

economy that was frozen, an economy that wasn‘t growing but 

still had inflation, it was called stagflation, Mr. Speaker. And 
Saskatchewan is the home of stagflation. We are the only place 
in the country with stagflation and the stagflation is in large part 
caused by the government and their approach towards utility 
rates — dramatically different than their approach when they 
were in opposition, dramatically different than when they said 
that there should be subsidies, that there should be rebates, Mr. 
Speaker, dramatically different. 
 
Now that people are suffering inflation and an economy that‘s 

not growing, in which unemployment is growing, in which EI 
recipients are growing, they no longer believe in those policies 
of rebating the value, rebating to natural gas customers. They 
no longer believe in holding down the cost of utility rates, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So that‘s sort of a two-year history and that‘s a two-year history 
of a government, Mr. Speaker, that inherited an enormous 
surplus — the largest surplus that this province has ever seen 
inherited by a new government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I think it was Peter Drucker who said that doing things 
right is management; doing the right thing is leadership. And 
this government and this Throne Speech falls on both counts — 
both doing things right and on doing the right thing. Mr. 
Speaker, this is a political government. And that‘s not a 

criticism. Most governments are, to some extent or another, 
political governments. But this is a very political government, 
Mr. Speaker. For all its talk about bold visions and bold plans 
and bold new ideas, well, Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech 
shows how bold and how new the vision of this government is 
— hardly a new idea in it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is a government that‘s very concerned about political 

management and very concerned about politics and now finding 
themselves on the wrong side of public opinion. That‘s what 

this government is about, Mr. Speaker. And there‘s something 
to be said for that, Mr. Speaker. I mean, in a democracy, you‘re 

making most of the people happy most of the time. If you can 
do that, there‘s something to be said for that. It‘s not 

particularly leadership necessarily, but there‘s something to be 
said for it. And this government has made relatively few 
blunders in that respect. 
 
I think the cancellation of Station 20 that brought 2,500 people 
out on the streets of Saskatoon is an example of a blunder. But 
there haven‘t been a lot of those. 
 

This is a government that‘s capable of reversing itself, turning 
on a dime. And I would use an example of that, the Bill in 
respect to receiving profits from criminal notoriety. One week, 
well no, it‘s the convictions and the principles of this 

government that such a Bill would be wrong. And then on 
Monday of the next week, it‘s the conviction and the principle 

of this government that such a Bill would be correct, you know, 
be the right thing to do. Very adept at making those kind of 
turns when they have to make them to be on the right side of 
public opinion, to be on the right political side of the issue. 
 
So you can‘t fault, I suppose, a political government — as 
political as this one is — for not showing leadership, Mr. 
Speaker. I mean it‘s the last thing they want to do. But you have 
to judge them by what kind of managers they are, Mr. Speaker. 
You have to judge them on management. If they can‘t do the 

right thing, Mr. Speaker, if they‘re not interested in what the 

right thing is, if the right thing changes from one week to the 
next, you have to judge them on how well they manage. 
 
And perhaps what is most disturbing about the gross 
miscalculation of what the economic growth in Saskatchewan 
would be in 2009 and what the potash revenues would be in 
2009, is not just the miscalculation itself and throwing the 
whole budget into disarray and having to essentially cancel 
programs like the children‘s hospital in Saskatoon that you‘ve 

been promising to the people of Saskatoon — I mean that‘s 
probably the most distressing part of it, clearly — but also is the 
surprise, feigned or otherwise, by ministers of the Crown that 
this could possibly happen, from the Premier, the Minister of 
Finance, Minister of Energy and Resources. Well who told us? 
Who told us that this could possibly happen, that we could be so 
far off? Who told us that? 
 
Well you know, it didn‘t come as a surprise to the opposition. 

And I rarely take the opportunity to quote myself in the House, 
Mr. Speaker, but on March 24th, 2009, I spoke in response to 
the budget. And this is what I said, Mr. Speaker: 
 

First that the budget is not realistic, Mr. Speaker, is 
probably the most simplest and easiest of the propositions 
to argue for, and I‘ll be very brief on it. Speakers have 

commented on, and I imagine will continue to comment 
on the discrepancy that exists within the budget document 
of the Ministry of Finance forecast — which doesn‘t seem 
to have any basis or any explanation for it — of 2.1 per 
cent, and the private sector forecasts, none of which was 
as high as 2.1 per cent. It‘s not like the government picked 
the highest of private sector forecasts. None of them were 
as high as that, but the average was 1 per cent. 
 
So the Finance forecasts the Minister of Finance puts 
forward as the core assumption of his budget for economic 
growth in the province of Saskatchewan, 2.1 per cent, is 
twice the private sector forecasts. Well the private sector 
forecasts have been downgraded since the budget came 
down and that‘s, you know, we don‘t expect the Minister 

of Finance to have a crystal ball, but we are now debating 
a budget that forecasted growth in the Saskatchewan 
economy at 2.1 per cent. We all hope that that‘s correct, 

but the private sector forecasts are for point six three per 
cent on average, Mr. Speaker. 
 



October 27, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3279 

So the government‘s forecast of budgetary growth is now 
three times what the average is for private sector forecasts. 
And we question whether that assumption is realistic, 
when it is off the private sector forecasts by a factor of 
three, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There‘s been some debate about the value of revenues 
from potash to this budget and to the assumptions of the 
budget, and that 18 cents on the dollar of revenue for this 
budget comes from potash — potash one way or the other, 
Mr. Speaker — and the government and particularly the 
Minister of Energy and Resources says that we do not 
need to be too concerned about the cutbacks in production 
of potash . . . that‘s not where the money comes from; it‘s 
based upon sales. 
 
Now you take that to its logical extreme and you stop 
producing potash at all; as long as we‘re selling potash, it 

doesn‘t matter if we‘re actually producing any. But of 

course you have to produce potash to sell potash and 
ultimately production does matter at some point. It may 
not matter in the short term but ultimately it does matter. 
 
The strategy as I understand it, Mr. Speaker, in relation to 
potash production is that there‘s a great deal of concern in 

the markets about the sustainability of the current price — 
that the Chinese want to buy potash but they don‘t 
necessarily want to buy potash at the current price. 
Brazilians want to buy potash but not necessarily at the 
current price. And of course every economy in the world is 
strained and less able to purchase what they might want to 
purchase than they have been before. And so the strategy, 
as I understand it in the case of potash, is to hold up the 
price, sustain the price by cutting production, actually, and 
therefore hold up the government revenues as well as 
company revenues. 
 
Now the winner, if the strategy works, is first of all potash 
companies, Mr. Speaker, because the price doesn‘t drop, 

and secondly the government because the price doesn‘t 

drop. And as the minister points out, most of the revenue 
is based upon price and on the sale taking place at that 
price, that current price, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The only losers in this strategy, if it works, are the laid off 
potash workers. And, Mr. Speaker, because of course 
they‘re not producing potash, they‘re part of the strategy 

to cut production and keep the price higher by cutting 
supply, Mr. Speaker, in supply demand, keeping the price 
up. And that works for the company, that works largely for 
the government. It doesn‘t work for the potash workers 

that are laid off and, if the strategy fails, Mr. Speaker, then 
it doesn‘t work for anybody. 
 
And if the price drops anyways, Mr. Speaker, then 
unfortunately so do the revenues of the province and in a 
significant way. 

 
Now I don‘t have access to all the sources that the Minister of 

Energy and Resources had and that he commented upon in his 
speech today, and I‘m not the expert in commerce and 

commodities that the Minister of Energy and Resources is. But I 
could tell you on March 24, 2009 — and I did, Mr. Speaker; I 

did tell you that on March 24, 2009 — that those numbers were 
unrealistic and that budget was unsustainable. 
 
And so the expression of surprise that now comes from 
government benches, as if they had never heard this before 
when they heard it from the Finance critic and they heard it 
from a number of members across the way, and they heard 
exactly what I quoted this evening back then, Mr. Speaker. 
Their expression of surprise is a little bit hard to understand, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I‘m not alone in my concerns about the government‘s 

ability to manage. I did say further on March 24, 2009: 
 

. . . is reminiscent of the early Devine years where after a 
while it did get a touch of unreality, Mr. Speaker. Where 
revenues would be forecast to almost meet expenditures, 
Mr. Speaker, but there was no basis for those forecasts and 
every year included not only overly optimistic forecasts 
but an explanation as to why last year‘s forecasts were so 

far off the mark. 
 
Very much like the explanation we heard tonight from the 
Minister of Energy and Resources, Mr. Speaker. Not only an 
optimistic projection about next year, but an explanation about 
why they were wrong last year. And that will be very familiar to 
anybody who was living in the province in the late ‘80s, Mr. 

Speaker, and paying attention to the way the Devine 
government was budgeting. 
 
And as I said, Mr. Speaker, I‘m not the only one to make the 

comparison, which I think is rather a glaring and obvious 
comparison. Mr. Mandryk, a columnist in The StarPhoenix, my 
home paper again, said that in respect to the budget, ―Devine 

comparison . . . apt.‖ And I quote from Mr. Mandryk: 
 

The least flattering comparison for the Saskatchewan 
Party government — and the one that its supporters bristle 
at most — is to be measured against Grant Devine‘s 
Progressive Conservative regime of the 1980s. 
 
This month‘s first-quarter budget update, which showed 
the government‘s overestimation of resource revenues 

meant a budget shortfall of $415 million, all but invited 
precisely such a comparison. 
 
At least it should. This happens to be the biggest 
government miscalculation since Tory finance minister, 
Gary Lane‘s budget of 1986. 

 
This is from August 25, 2009. 
 
[22:00] 
 
The member from Rosemont and Mr. Mandryk may have an 
argument about whether it‘s the second biggest miscalculation 

or the biggest miscalculation, but they‘re playing in the same 
leagues, Mr. Speaker. They‘re playing in the Grant Devine 

school of economic league of government financing and 
government budgeting. 
 
Mr. Mandryk goes on to say: 
 



3280 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2009 

The problem Wall faces is two-fold. 
 
First, his government is now completely reliant on the 
private sector to provide such forecasts after it purged the 
Energy ministry and others of civil servants who 
supposedly did not share the Saskatchewan Party's vision. 
The loss of professional objectivity in the civil service is 
the same mistake the Devine government made, which 
proved to be costly. 
 
Second, that Saskatchewan Party's ―vision‖ for province 

has been exceedingly rose-coloured . . . [Mr. Speaker.] 
 
And that‘s the problem with the forecasts. That was the problem 
with the predictions, not that they were misled by Canpotex, not 
that they were misled by, as we know, those of us who have 
served in government and sat on Treasury Board, fairly 
conservative — and I mean that in the best sense of the word, 
Mr. Speaker — fairly conservative officials in the Ministry of 
Finance. 
 
It wasn‘t the fault of those officials. It wasn‘t the fault of private 

sector forecasters that this government managed finances, the 
people‘s finances, the people‘s treasury so badly, Mr. Speaker, 
so badly that Mr. Mandryk is forced to concede that the Devine 
comparison is apt. 
 
And now we have recently learned that there have been 1,300 
reported cases where staffing fell below the level that 
government says is safe in our health care facilities. The 
Minister of Labour says it doesn‘t matter that the work levels or 

the staff levels have fallen below safe levels according to our 
essential services legislation because it didn‘t happen during a 

work stoppage, Mr. Speaker. If that‘s not the most ridiculous 
thing I‘ve heard in this House, it is very close, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The service isn‘t essential, Mr. Speaker, today. It isn‘t essential 

yesterday. It isn‘t essential tomorrow. It isn‘t important for the 

safety of Saskatchewan patients and Saskatchewan citizens 
unless there‘s actually a strike. And then we‘ll have that health 

service level. But we won‘t have it otherwise, Mr. Speaker. It‘s 

an Alice-in-Wonderland view of what essential services is 
about, Mr. Speaker. This is not good management. It‘s not 
doing things right, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now in respect to leadership, doing the right thing, Mr. 
Speaker, we don‘t see a lot of leadership in the speech. As a 

matter of fact we don‘t see a lot of vision in the speech. We 

don‘t see a lot of new ideas in the speech. One of the few, one 
of the few ideas for the future in Saskatchewan contained in the 
Throne Speech called ―Moving Forward‖ is to restrict access to 

clean needles, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there is a group of people in our province 
who are citizens of our province. They don‘t pay income tax for 
the most part — didn‘t before this government‘s income tax 
reforms, didn‘t before the NDP government‘s income tax 

reforms. Many of them don‘t vote, Mr. Speaker, and they 

certainly don‘t contribute to political parties. They are still 
citizens and they are in, according to the definition in the 
Scriptures and common law, our neighbours. They are our most 
disadvantaged and vulnerable neighbours. They are descendents 
of generations of poverty and exclusion and unfortunately they 

are often seen as social problems, but they are not. They are 
inflicted with social problems. They are inflicted with crime. 
They are inflicted with substance abuse. They are not those 
problems. 
 
And while we walk around this legislature wringing our hands 
every time we pass one of the dispensaries for antiseptic soap 
concerned about H1N1, these are communities in which 
hepatitis C and HIV [human immunodeficiency virus] are 
epidemic, Mr. Speaker. And so we have in the Throne Speech, 
which I‘m sure is a very political decision — I‘m sure they‘re 
on the right political side of this issue — in respect to the 
province‘s needle exchange program, ―. . . a need to balance 
harm reduction and improved health outcomes with broader 
concerns . . . [Mr. Speaker].‖ 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is apparently the government‘s hope that if you 

do not give a sufferer of substance abuse a clean needle that, to 
quote the Throne Speech, there‘ll be ―more frequent contact 

with health professionals,‖ Mr. Speaker. I fear that the 
government will be no more successful in winning a war on 
drugs on the backs of drug addicts, than they were in holding up 
the price of potash by sheer force of willpower, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I fear that women who were put out on the street for sale when 
they were children will not, when confronted with the 
government‘s refusal to provide them with a clean needle, seek 

more care from health professionals. I fear, Mr. Speaker, that 
instead they will seek a needle where they can get one, and that 
this government‘s desire to balance harm reduction and 
improved outcomes for those people with broader concerns, Mr. 
Speaker, is immoral, and is to sacrifice the health and lives, in 
some cases, of our most vulnerable citizens and neighbours to 
politics and to political management. 
 
And this is not hysteria on my part. Or if it is hysteria on my 
part, Mr. Speaker, it is not merely on my part. And I quote 
again from the same StarPhoenix editorial, Thursday, October 
22nd, 2009. Not a radical journal, Mr. Speaker, but my 
hometown paper: ―A government proposal to change 

Saskatchewan‘s needle exchange program is also bound to draw 

friction, principally because it is wrong-headed and could 
ultimately lead to disaster,‖ Mr. Speaker. 
 
What would have been doing the right thing? What would have 
been leadership, Mr. Speaker? If they are concerned — as they 
should be — about substance abuse, if they‘re concerned about 
the prevalence of needles, if they‘re concerned about dealing 

with the issue of drug use in the province of Saskatchewan, 
illegal drug use in the province of Saskatchewan, what about 
addiction counsellors at the needle exchange sites instead of 
saying, no, we‘re closed today. You could catch HIV. You 

could catch hepatitis C from a dirty needle, but we‘re closed 

today. 
 
What about instead of that policy, Mr. Speaker, a policy that 
had addictions counsellors at those needle exchange sites? Or 
what about working on the methadone wait-list, Mr. Speaker, 
the methadone therapy wait-list which I understand is four to 
five months, Mr. Speaker. So we‘ll say, the government will 
say no you can‘t have a clean needle, but you can get into 

methadone therapy if you can stay away from dirty needles for 
five months, maybe, if you‘re lucky, Mr. Speaker. What about 



October 27, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3281 

that? That would‘ve been leadership, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now that would have cost money, and I appreciate that you 
have to make decisions about how you‘re going to spend your 

resources. Government is about choosing, and I can understand 
the government didn‘t want to make these choices, not a lot of 
politics in those choices, Mr. Speaker. But if you don‘t want to 

make those choices, at least don‘t do what the government is 

proposing as one of its handful of new ideas — limit clean, safe 
needles to the most vulnerable people in our province, people 
already inflicted with high crime rates, substance abuse, 
hepatitis C, HIV. Why contribute to that problem, Mr. Speaker? 
Why play politics with that problem in a speech that you want 
to call ―Moving Forward‖? 
 
The Saskatchewan Party can‘t do things right, not when it 
comes to government finances, not when it comes to safety in 
our health care system. The record does not show management. 
The Throne Speech does not show leadership. The Throne 
Speech does not address doing the right thing, Mr. Speaker. The 
record doesn‘t show management. The vision doesn‘t show 

leadership. I will not be supporting the motion. I‘ll be 

supporting the amendment. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Certainly 
pleased to be able to enter into the debate even though the hour 
is late. And I recall many years ago when I was involved at a 
local level with a committee of our local municipality — at that 
time I believe we were called the ag committee — and our 
major function was to organize the annual spring ratepayer 
supper. And there was a group of us that were fairly young in 
those days and quite enthusiastic .And we had a lot of good 
ideas, but we never could seem to agree on the number of guest 
speakers that we should have at these functions, so we generally 
would invite them all. And so the evening was started off with 
the social hour. The bar was open. The ladies of the community 
would prepare always a great supper, and then we would expect 
these people to sit and listen to all our great guest speakers that 
we‘d lined up for the evening. And on more than one occasion, 

not only the ratepayers of the municipality seemed to think the 
evening was quite long, but so did our guest speakers. And now 
I can sort of realize what at least the guest speakers were up 
against. 
 
The evening is late, we‘ve had a number of speakers today 

address the Throne Speech. And so it‘s somewhat difficult to 

come up with some new positions, I suppose, on the Throne 
Speech although even it is a great Throne Speech. But I will try 
to cover a couple of topics that pertain to the constituency. 
 
I should start by welcoming the new members to the legislature 
— the member from Douglas Park who is certainly not new but 
starting a new session in a new position, and the new member 
for Saskatoon Riversdale. Certainly I have to congratulate both 
of them. Although we probably don‘t agree on all the issues and 

all the philosophies, we are here to serve the people of this 
province in the way we see fit. And I think each of us in this 
Assembly do that in our own particular way. 
 
As other members have done, there are people that I need to 

thank. I certainly must thank the voters and the people of Last 
Mountain-Touchwood for their continued support. I have to 
thank the two ladies in my constituency office who point me in 
the right direction and make sure I‘m prepared for the various 

constituency events and make me aware of the calendar that I 
have, that being Carol Mellnick who has been with me since I 
was first elected, and a new addition to the constituency office 
is Sandra Geber — both very capable constituency assistants 
and serve the citizens of Last Mountain-Touchwood very well. 
 
Also as all members realize that without our family‘s support, 
we couldn‘t be doing this job here, and so I would like to 

certainly thank Marlene and the rest of my family for the 
support they‘ve shown me over the years and helped me to 

serve the people of the constituency and the province. 
 
Now I‘m sure members have heard me give the statistics and 
the background of Last Mountain-Touchwood on a number of 
occasions, but in case they forgot, I may remind them of the 
political history of the constituency. For quite a number of 
years, the constituency of Last Mountain-Touchwood was a 
swing constituency. It was one of those swing ridings that 
would elect a member to the government‘s side of the House. 

So when the government changed, there was always a member 
from the constituency sitting on the government‘s side of the 
House. And that continued for quite a number of years — I 
believe 30 or 40 years — until 1999 when we changed that and 
we were just, I always say, we were a little ahead of our time. 
Now we‘ve gotten back into sync, and there‘ll be a member of 

the Saskatchewan Party representing that constituency for quite 
some time. And they will be sitting on this side of the House, 
because the voters are very discerning voters there. They‘re 

very politically astute. They know the issues. They understand 
the issues, and they make their choices wisely, and they vote for 
those members and those political parties by and large. 
 
[22:15] 
 
Certainly both political parties, main political parties that we 
have in our House today have their core supporters. But then we 
also have a vast majority of voters who are in the middle of the 
political spectrum, and they vote for the political party that they 
believe will deliver good government. That‘s their primary 

objective. Politics isn‘t the first thing that they think about when 

they wake up in the morning, but they understand what‘s going 
on, and they certainly keep their ear to the ground. And that‘s 

the way it should be. They demand to be served. They expect 
their issues to be taken forward, and we try to do that through 
my constituency assistants and myself. We try to do that on 
their behalf. 
 
As all members have, they have a number of issues in their 
constituencies that they have spoken about, and I will take this 
opportunity to do that. One of the experiences that I had just 
very recently was to visit our school, one of the schools in my 
constituency, and it was an evening event. The school had 
organized an information evening for parents and students of 
the school. They had cake and coffee. They had a program and 
told the people present about the program for the year, the 
initiatives that they are undertaking. 
 
And there was one initiative that really caught my attention. 
The school had visited a neighbouring school — I believe it was 



3282 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2009 

last spring — and there was a guest speaker at the neighbouring 
school who spoke about an initiative that this individual had 
organized and taken to help underprivileged and destitute 
children in Africa, in fact in Kenya. And this individual, a 
writer from Central Canada, had been travelling in Africa and in 
Kenya, met a couple of children in a small community who 
were orphaned, and he soon realized and was told that there was 
a vast number of orphans, I believe, because of the devastation 
of AIDS [acquired immune deficiency syndrome]. 
Grandmothers were looking after these children, trying to do 
their best. And so when he got back to Canada, he decided that 
he was going to do what he could to help these children. And so 
he went to work and he partnered up — he may have had some 
connections — and he partnered up with aid agencies in Kenya 
and formed an organization or a charity called The Creation of 
Hope. 
 
And he went about this. This individual, his name is Eric 
Walters and he went about this a little bit differently. He said 
I‘m going to involve the schools and the young people in our 
schools in Canada and see if they can‘t help these young people 

in Kenya. These people were destitute. They had no place really 
to live. They had no food or just barely enough to get by day to 
day. And he was able to put together an organization whereby 
all the money that the schools raise, every dime of it, goes to the 
recipients. 
 
There‘s administration costs, which are very low, are looked 

after by other people in other agencies, and he involved a 
number of schools. It started in Ontario, and then it progressed 
west. And the school that I happened to be in was the first 
school to take up the challenge in Saskatchewan. And I‘m very 

proud to say that that was my own hometown school, Cupar 
School, the school that I had attended many years ago and who 
currently are . . . one of our granddaughters is attending. She is 
living with us, with grandma and grandpa. She‘s probably at . . . 
well I know by now, she‘d be in bed. And she keeps grandma 

company while I‘m away attending to the business of the 
province. 
 
And this all came about because of the group of students from 
the school. And one of the staff members decided that this is 
something they should be doing and they were, as I said, the 
first school in Saskatchewan to take up the challenge. 
 
They have now got other schools in the province and I think it‘s 

a . . . Every once in a while we, in public life and in our 
constituencies, run across these great stories, and I was so 
pleased to be able to come across that right next door. My office 
is only a short block away from the school, but yet as you 
know, we quite often, we don‘t have time to make the rounds as 

we should, and so it was a pleasant surprise, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Another issue that constituents talked to me about is of course 
the current topic that‘s in the news, and we‘ve discussed and 

has been raised in this House, is the whole area of H1N1 and 
immunization. And people are concerned and undecided as to 
whether they should be immunized or not. And there are 
discussions about whether the information they received, 
whether they received enough information, and whether they 
should be vaccinated. They‘re consulting their family 

physicians. And occasionally they‘ll ask an opinion of myself 

as to whether they should be vaccinated. And I said, well I 
certainly am no expert in this area. But what I do tell them is 
that they should pay attention to the people with the 
information, the knowledgeable people in this area. 
 
And to that extent, I recently saw an interview with a Dr. Don 
Low from Toronto, who is the head of the microbiology 
department at Mount Sinai. And this individual was the lead 
person when Toronto had that whole issue of SARS [severe 
acute respiratory syndrome]. And he‘s well-known, a 
knowledgeable person across the country and North America. 
 
And this individual, Dr. Low, made it abundantly clear that for 
the average person he could see no reason why they shouldn‘t 

be vaccinated. He said the risks are negligent as far as being 
vaccinated and the benefits are great. He said why would you 
want to put yourself through suffering the flu and being sick for 
four or five days? As another doctor recently who was 
interviewed on one of the media outlets said, he was flat on his 
back for five days. He said, he basically asked the question, 
why would people want to go through that when there‘s a 

simple answer? 
 
I don‘t think all the ads or the spots on TV showing the needle 

going into the arm is particularly helpful for those of us who 
really don‘t like to have needles administered. But I think we‘ll 

bite the bullet, at least in my own case, and go ahead and be 
vaccinated when the opportunity presents itself. 
 
Another one of the issues, in fact probably as far as a 
constituency issue, is there are a couple of highways that I have 
spoken about numerous times in this Assembly that are in the 
constituency. And I would like to report that there has been 
some work going on, on one of the highways, Highway 310. 
The other highway, which the former administration turned 
back to gravel, it is in the works, and I know that we will see 
some things happening there in the not too distant future. But it 
is a concern. And people are, as I mentioned earlier, they 
understand but they are impatient. But they do understand that 
there‘s a lot of work to be done and that eventually it‘ll be our 

turn. 
 
The major industry in Last Mountain-Touchwood, because it is 
a rural constituency — the largest community I believe has a 
population of about 850 people — so agriculture is by far the 
major industry in the constituency. And as many members have 
already talked, spoken, it‘s been a very, very interesting year in 

agriculture in Last Mountain-Touchwood. We were a bit more 
fortunate than perhaps the other parts of the province, 
particularly the west central part of the province. We didn‘t 
really suffer. The drought parts of the constituency had a slow 
start, but the rains came along and actually the crops are very 
good. Harvest, I would say, is about 80 per cent completed, 
perhaps 85. There are pockets where there‘s lots more harvest 
to be done. But other pockets there, they‘re virtually complete. 
 
But it has been a challenging year. The crops — the yields were 
good, the quality was great up until October the first. And I 
certainly can identify with producers who have, say, 25 to 30 
per cent of their crop out. With today‘s cost of production, 

there‘s a lot of money tied up in those unharvested acres. And 

it‘ll sure . . . If weather doesn‘t turn around, it‘s going to create 
some hardships for a number of producers. 



October 27, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3283 

And of course the livestock industry, particularly the beef 
industry — that‘d be the industry that I would be most familiar 
with — they‘ve been struggling for well over a year with 
depressed prices, trade impediments. The country of origin 
labelling issue in the US has certainly compounded issues, and 
it‘s been a challenge. 
 
And the producers, earlier on in the year and late last year, 
certainly have let me know — and have let members on this 
side of the House, and I‘m sure perhaps have spoken to some of 

the members on the other side of the House — about the 
difficulties that they were facing. And this government did 
come through with some help and recognition of the problem, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. And they appreciated that. 
 
I had a great number of calls at the constituency office in the 
early part of the year raising the issue of low prices and the 
number of difficulties in the beef industry. And then after the 
Minister of Agriculture made the announcement of $40 an 
animal, I must say that a number of those producers phoned 
back, and we‘re very thankful. It‘s not often in public life that 

we get a thank you, and I can tell them that it was greatly 
appreciated, them phoning back and expressing their 
appreciation. 
 
In agriculture there‘s been a number of challenges that have 
developed recently in the grain and oilseed sector and 
particularly in the oilseed sector in canola. Just last week, China 
announced that they would not be accepting any canola exports 
after the middle of November that could not guarantee that the 
seed was 100 per cent free of blackleg. Now blackleg is a 
disease of canola that‘s been around for quite some time. The 

plant breeders of the canola industry have been very good in 
developing the varieties that have been resistant, but in order to 
. . . It would be impossible for any exporting nation and any 
exporter to sign a certificate declaring that the seed that‘s being 

shipped is 100 per cent free of blackleg. 
 
And so this had an immediate effect in the markets, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. The markets dropped dramatically when this 
announcement was made. There‘s been a very small recovery, 

but it certainly has created a great deal of uncertainty in the 
canola markets. And this is something that producers certainly 
don‘t need. 
 
There‘s the durum market. The EU [European Union] has said 
that there‘s going to be a 25 per cent tariff on durum in exports 

to that community, and that‘s a recent announcement. That‘s 

something that producers don‘t need because there has been a 

significant decrease in commodity prices from a year ago. 
Granted, the production costs have dropped somewhat, but with 
the challenges of an incomplete harvest and so on, those are 
things that producers don‘t need, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
There are a number of issues that I‘d like to speak about that 
were contained in the Throne Speech, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
I see the clock is ticking down, and I suppose I‘ll have to do 

that tomorrow. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The time of adjournment having been 
reached, this House now stands adjourned until 1:30 tomorrow 
afternoon. 
 

[The Assembly adjourned at 22:30.] 
 
 



 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 
  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3255 
  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3258
   Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3262 
  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3265 
  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3269 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3273 
  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3276 
  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3281 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Crop Insurance Corporation 

 
Hon. Bill Boyd 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Power Corporation 
Minister Responsible for Uranium Development 

Partnership 
Minister Responsible for Innovation Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Research Council 

 
Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 

Minister of Enterprise 
Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. June Draude 

Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 
Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 
 Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

 
Hon. Rod Gantefoer 

Minister of Finance 
Government House Leader 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 
Hon. Jeremy Harrison 

Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 
Hon. Bill Hutchinson 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 
Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 

Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 
 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Don Morgan 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 
 

Hon. James Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Capital Commission 


