




















































Hansard: May 14, 2009


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 64A  THURSDAY, MAY 14, 2009, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3097 

 May 14, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

rise to introduce to you and through you to the members of the 

Legislative Assembly a group of students that are seated in the 

east gallery, this group of grade 8 students, I think 15 or 16, 

from the Regina Christian School located in the constituency of 

Regina Douglas Park. They’re grade 8 students. They’re 

accompanied by their teacher, Mr. Geoff Glasspell. 

 

I’ve met with Mr. Glasspell’s students in the past, and I know 

that I can look forward to a very well-informed group of young 

students with lots of questions. And I look forward to doing that 

at the conclusion of question period. And I would ask all the 

members to join me in extending them a very warm welcome 

today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, in the west gallery there is a group of young ladies and 

gentlemen from A.E. Peacock Collegiate in Moose Jaw. These 

are grade 12 students from the social studies 30 class and their 

teacher, Ms. Carrie Kiefer. The students are currently studying 

governance in Canada, which prompted them to come to their 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

A.E. Peacock Collegiate is a very well-known school and 

participates in the Student Vote program that corresponded with 

the last federal election. They’re also active in a lot of school 

activities. Last year their football team won the provincial 

championship, and their junior girls’ baseball team won the city 

championship. As well, this Assembly will remember that the 

Junior Achievement awards for their company Jarfuls which 

was a big winner in this year’s Junior Achievement Business 

Hall of Fame and awards earlier this spring. 

 

So I’d ask all of this Assembly to welcome the students from 

A.E. Peacock Collegiate in Moose Jaw. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With permission for 

extended leave please. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave for an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 

to introduce to you, through you, and to all members of the 

Assembly someone that is seated in the east gallery. He’s a fine 

resident of the constituency of Regina Walsh Acres. He works 

tirelessly on behalf of the people that he represents in his 

organization and the best interests of Saskatchewan people as 

well. 

 

He is Lee Harding, and perhaps you could stand and give us a 

quick wave. He is the Saskatchewan director of the Canadian 

Taxpayers Federation. He was visiting this morning with our 

Leader of the Opposition, Lorne Calvert, and delivered 1,200 

petitions on behalf of taxpayers of Saskatchewan. And I thank 

him for coming to the Assembly today, and I hope he enjoys the 

proceedings. 

 

While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to quickly 

thank another group of individuals that sits here with us, day in 

and day out. They are very dedicated individuals in terms of 

providing us with prayer and guidance. And I want to extend 

my thanks on behalf of the official opposition to the members 

of the House of Prayer and thank them for their guidance and 

their prayers, and we certainly appreciate their dedication to the 

province of Saskatchewan which is obviously very deep. 

 

And while I’m on my feet yet, Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to 

introduce four people that are seated in the Speaker’s gallery. 

We have four legislative interns with the Saskatchewan 

legislative internship program. They are obviously no strangers 

to the Assembly, and perhaps they could stand as I call their 

names. It’s Andrew Restall, Michael Radmacher, Dawn 

Gibbons, and Nicole Leach. 

 

These interns are invaluable to the assistance of the MLAs 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly] that they have chosen to 

work with on both the side of the government and of the 

opposition. It’s an outstanding program that we have the 

privilege of being involved with, and we have wonderful 

conversations and discussions and assistance from these interns. 

And I hope their experience was as fulfilled as ours was in 

terms of being able to work with them. 

 

So I’d like to ask all my colleagues to welcome these guests to 

the Assembly today and thank all of them for their dedication to 

the province in the work that they each do in their individual 

ways. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Humboldt. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s truly an 

honour for me today to stand and introduce a very, very special 

person in my life — seated with the staff from my office who 

are also very special because they help me out each and every 

day — is my daughter, my middle daughter Shannon. And so 

I’m truly a little bit surprised to see her here today, but 

delighted to have her watch the proceedings. So if everyone 

would join me in welcoming my daughter Shannon to her 

Legislative Assembly. 



3098 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2009 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Members, as well I’d like to introduce a few 

individuals who have joined us, in fact that good-looking group 

of young men and women in the second row in the Speaker’s 

gallery. They’re individuals from visitor services, the summer 

group that are with us. And as you may or may not be aware, 

beginning Sunday the Legislative Building will be open from 8 

a.m. till 9 p.m., seven days a week for the summer months to 

accommodate the many individuals who take the time to come 

and tour the chambers. 

 

And so I am pleased to introduce four new information officers: 

Alexander Brazil — maybe we could have them stand as I 

introduce them — Amanda Dancsok; Brittany Love; Troy 

Smith; and returning information officers, Marita Clark and 

Alyssa Pittet. As well joining them today is Melanie Marchuk, 

Arnold McKenzie, and Lorraine deMontigny. And I invite 

members to extend a warm welcome to the individuals from 

visitor services. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to welcome to the 

Assembly today, and would invite members to join me in 

greeting them, my two closest political advisors. They are, Mr. 

Speaker, seated in your gallery. They are today watching 

carefully over the activities of government. I would like to 

introduce and welcome my wife Betty and our grandson, Levi 

Anderson Calvert. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition that speaks to the need for the Government of 

Saskatchewan to recognize the essential role of all health care 

providers as valued members of the health care team. 

 

This speaks specifically to SEIU [Service Employees 

International Union] west members that are employed at the 

Cypress, Five Hills, Heartland, and Saskatoon regional health 

authorities and speaks to the valuable care that they provide to 

citizens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it also speaks to that there needs to be a realization 

that utilization and the full value of the range of professional 

skills needs to be recognized and that this promotion can only 

be achieved through a commitment to adequate funding and the 

installation of good faith in the collective bargaining process. 

 

And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to maintaining quality health care 

service and job security for all public health care 

providers. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present on behalf of citizens in Harris, Plenty, 

Cabri, Saskatoon, Maple Creek, Delisle, Milden, Rosetown, and 

Dinsmore. Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 

petitions in support of indexing the minimum wage. Mr. 

Speaker, we all understand that indexing the minimum wage 

would ensure minimum wage earners would be able to maintain 

a standard of living as the cost of living increases, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to indexing Saskatchewan 

minimum wage to ensure that the standard of living of 

minimum wage earners is maintained in the face of 

cost-of-living increases. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the petitions are signed by residents of Shellbrook. I so 

present, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of wage equity for CBO 

[community-based organization] workers. And we know that 

workers in community-based organizations in Saskatchewan 

have traditionally been underpaid, and many continue to earn 

poverty-level wages. I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the development and 

the implementation of a multi-year funding plan to ensure 

that CBO workers achieve wage equity with employees 

who perform work of equal value in government 

departments. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these citizens come from Melville, 

Balcarres, Lipton and Fort Qu’Appelle. Thank you very much, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 



May 14, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3099 

yet another petition, as I have every day of this session, on 

behalf of rural residents of Saskatchewan who question why the 

Sask Party government is leaving them behind with respect to 

safe and affordable water and who, as of yet, have not had any 

commitment whatsoever of any kind from the government. And 

the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to financially assist the town of Duck Lake 

residents for the good of their health and safety due to the 

exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency and that this government fulfils its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good 

residents of Duck Lake, Saskatoon, Mistawasis, Beardy’s, and 

Prince Albert. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition in support of fairness for Saskatchewan 

students through the necessary expansion of the graduate 

retention program. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately expand the graduate retention 

program to include master’s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are 

university students here in the province, as well as a number of 

health care professionals with graduate degrees and are 

practising here in Saskatchewan. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

to pave Highway No. 135 that runs through Pelican Narrows, 

Saskatchewan. The petition is signed by the leadership and 

community members of Pelican Narrows First Nation, the 

village of Pelican Narrows, and area. The prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to pave the 7 kilometres of Highway 135 

through the community of Pelican Narrows, as committed 

on August 24, 2007. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by the good people of Pelican Narrows and area. I 

so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 

rise in my place and present a petition on behalf of 1,200 

Saskatchewan residents who have signed this petition. Mr. 

Speaker, these signatures have been collected by the Canadian 

Taxpayers Federation in our province. They essentially call on 

the government to keep its promise and provide relief to 

Saskatchewan motorists with the price of gas through a 

reduction in the fuel tax. Specifically the petition is to 

government to “Reduce the provincial gas tax from 15 cents per 

litre to 8 cents per litre.” 

 

I present these on behalf of 1,200 Saskatchewan people whose 

residences are across this great province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Acknowledging Academic Excellence 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’m proud to rise today to recognize outstanding Saskatchewan 

students who have been recently honoured for their academic 

excellence. 

 

Carly Priebe of Saskatoon Sutherland constituency is a 

University of Saskatchewan student, world-class triathlete, 

dedicated coach, and winner of the prestigious Vanier Graduate 

Scholarship. This scholarship awards leading doctoral students 

with $50,000 a year for up to three years and has been 

compared to the world renowned Rhodes and Fulbright 

Scholarship. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it also gives me great pleasure to highlight the 

achievements of three students who have been recognized for 

their exceptional dedication and hard work in their academic 

pursuits. These students are Lea Klump of Winston Knoll 

Collegiate, located in my constituency of Regina Qu’Appelle 

Valley; Kaitlin Sherven of Athol Murray collegiate of Notre 

Dame in the constituency of Indian Head-Milestone; and Lisa 

Poon of Campbell Collegiate, located in the constituency of 

Regina South. These impressive young people were recipients 

of the Millennium Excellence Awards. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with outstanding young people like Carly, Lea, 

Kaitlin, and Lisa, we can be sure that Saskatchewan students 

are truly the next generation of outstanding researchers, 

professors, and industry leaders. I ask all members to 

congratulate these exceptional students. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 



3100 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2009 

Battlefords Business Excellence Awards 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once again to 

congratulate The Battlefords Chamber of Commerce for another 

very successful event, the 2009 Battlefords Business Excellence 

Awards, better known as BBEX, which for 16 years now have 

been recognizing the contributions that local business have 

made to the quality of life in The Battlefords. 

 

One of the annual highlights of the event is the recognition of a 

heritage business — a business that has served the people of 

The Battlefords continuously for many, many years. This year, 

the award was presented to Bee J’s Office Plus, a stationery and 

office equipment store that is not only locally owned and 

operated, but today continues to expand and serve a large area 

throughout northwest Saskatchewan. 

 

Other successful businesses recognized at this event held 

Tuesday night, May 12, include Business of the Year, Lakeland 

Veterinary Services; Award for Customer Service, Battleford 

Super A Foods; Award for New Business, Crandleberry’s 

Restaurant; Award for Community Involvement, RBC Financial 

Services; Award for Export Achievement, Envirosafe 

Chemicals Canada; and Award for Marketing, Blue Rentals. 

 

All these businesses, their owners, and employees have served 

The Battlefords extraordinarily well during the past year. And 

the BBEX committee of The Battlefords Chamber of 

Commerce has done a good job in bringing the attention of the 

community to their good works. I ask all members of the 

Legislative Assembly to join me in congratulating this year’s 

award winners and thanking the BBEX committee for their very 

successful efforts in providing this well-deserved recognition. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 

 

Physician of the Year 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to honour a family doctor from southern Saskatchewan that 

has been named our Physician of the Year. Earlier this month, 

Dr. Werner Oberholzer from Radville was presented with this 

award by the Saskatchewan Medical Association. The award 

was presented during a two-day meeting of the Saskatchewan 

Medical Association’s assembly where approximately 80 

doctors gathered from throughout the province. 

 

Dr. Oberholzer is a respected and admired member of his local 

community and of the medical profession. He is dedicated to his 

job and strives to provide the best patient care possible, rising 

up to every challenge he has faced. Dr. Oberholzer and his wife, 

Dr. Helms, have been working in Radville since 1999, 

providing a vital service to the rural community. Mr. Speaker, it 

is physicians like Dr. Oberholzer and Dr. Helms that help build 

communities and sustain them while ensuring a top-notch 

medical care is available when we need it. Being named the top 

physician in our province by his peers showcases the excellence 

of his work as our province is home to many outstanding 

physicians. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask all members to join me in 

congratulating Dr. Oberholzer on receiving this recognition. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Norwegians Celebrate Constitution Day 

 

Mr. Nilson: — [The hon. member spoke for a time in 

Norwegian.] 

 

On Sunday it’s going to be May 17, and Norwegians over the 

whole world will be singing their national anthem to celebrate 

Constitution Day in 1814. In Saskatchewan we have many 

residents who are descendants of Norwegians, and they 

celebrate May 17 here in Saskatchewan as well. And we know 

that there’ll be parties in various places. 

 

There are many Norwegians around the world. In fact I think 

there are more Norwegians who live outside of Norway than 

live in Norway now because of immigration across the world. 

But we in Saskatchewan are proud to have the highest 

percentage of Norwegians in our population of any province in 

Canada. 

 

So with those members of the legislature who celebrate this 

with me — the member from Regina Coronation Park, the 

member from The Battlefords, the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place, member from Saltcoats, the member from 

Saskatchewan Rivers, as well as the spouse of Mr. Speaker — 

we all wish all Saskatchewan people a happy Constitution Day. 

Hej, hej, Syttende Mai. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Weyburn. 

 

Leadership Campaign Controversy 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Dwain 

Lingenfelter was trying to make a political comeback. He was 

running to replace the former NDP [New Democratic Party] 

premier, but first he had to beat three other candidates — two 

men and a woman. Suddenly controversy erupted over 

allegations that Mr. Lingenfelter’s campaign had improperly 

bought memberships for some people so that they could vote. 

At first he denied the allegations, but a party investigation 

found that Lingenfelter’s campaign had bought memberships. 

The NDP disqualified those memberships and promised new 

rules to prevent that from happening in the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you’re probably thinking that I’m talking about 

the events of the past two weeks, but I’m not. All of this 

happened 21 years ago in 1988 when Lingenfelter was running 

for the NDP nomination in Regina Elphinstone, which just goes 

to show the NDP have learned exactly nothing. It’s the same 

old problem with buying memberships. It’s the same old 

Lingenfelter. And it’s the same old NDP, only this time it was 

worse — more phony memberships, more cash to pay for the 

phony memberships, more of a mess for the NDP. But, Mr. 



May 14, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3101 

Speaker, what else would you expect from a tired, old party that 

is clearly stuck in the past? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Understanding Ministerial Portfolios 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder how it is that the Sask 

Party cabinet makes any decisions. I mean it’s not as if the 

ministers seem to know what’s actually going on in their 

portfolios. It’s one thing to have Robert Watson, the president 

of SaskTel, camped out in this building when we’re asking 

questions about SaskTel privatization. We all know the Minister 

of CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan] 

couldn’t answer those questions. And we’ve accepted that the 

minister of parks and recreation has such a lack of 

understanding of her portfolio that the deputy minister has to 

answer every single question that the media asks. 

 

But the Minister of Environment set a brand new low yesterday, 

Mr. Speaker. When asked questions about her portfolio, she 

turned not to a department official. No, she turned to a political 

hack in her office to answer the media. A political staffer, Mr. 

Speaker, answered the media’s questions on behalf of the 

minister. Finally we understand why the political speech writers 

in the Sask Party government get paid so much, Mr. Speaker, 

because they’re expected to know more than the ministers. Of 

course with some of these ministers, I guess that’s not asking all 

too much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Government Record 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I would . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Sutherland. 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Thank you. Today I would like to share our 

government’s record — the largest income property tax cut in 

Saskatchewan history, historic debt reduction in infrastructure 

spending, a new children’s hospital in Saskatoon. We are 

building schools, nursing homes, and fixing hospitals and 

highways. Saskatoon and St. Louis will have new bridges. 

Regina will be home to world-class transportation hub. Funding 

for agriculture’s at a historic high. 

 

Mr. Speaker, under this government, Saskatchewan’s now a 

leader in Canada. We are leading in economic and job growth. 

Saskatchewan people are earning more, and they’re taking more 

of what they earn home. We are making life more affordable for 

Saskatchewan people. Thanks to our tax cuts, 80,000 people 

will no longer have to pay provincial income tax. We 

introduced a new low-income tax credit and benefits under the 

seniors’ income plan, and they have doubled. Shelter rates, the 

employment supplement and training allowance for low-income 

people, the food allowance for group homes, and funding for 

community-based groups are all up. Just yesterday we 

announced a new income program for people with disabilities, 

something they had been waiting years for. Saskatchewan today 

is a growing, vibrant, confident province. We are on the right 

track, moving forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I see across the way that they have turned Sask 

Party green with envy. Mr. Speaker, this is our record in just 18 

months, and we’re just getting started. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Outsourcing and Crown Corporations 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. For 10 of 

the past 11 weeks, the New Democratic Party opposition has 

been asking questions of the government. Our goal has been to 

raise issues of importance and interest to the Saskatchewan 

people and to hold the government accountable not only for 

their election promises but for their management of public 

resources. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan who have been watching question 

period throughout this 11-week time period know that our 

questions have been direct and often specific, but there have 

been very few answers specific to the questions asked. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, today in question period, on this the 

last day of the spring session, in order to seek real answers to 

our real questions, we are going to seek answers to questions 

previously asked for which Saskatchewan people have been 

denied a real answer. We are giving the Saskatchewan Party a 

second chance. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Taylor: — For example, Mr. Speaker, we asked this 

question on March 4 and the people of Saskatchewan received 

no answer. So I ask it again today: how can outsourcing at 

SaskTel be consistent with the Sask Party pledge that they are 

going to grow the Crowns and that the Crowns will serve the 

people of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

delighted to talk about the Crown corporations and this party’s 

record regarding those Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker, on 

this the last day of the House. 

 

Let’s talk about SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance] — 

amongst the lowest rates in the country. Let’s talk about ISC 

[Information Services Corporation of Saskatchewan] — service 

standards within one day for . . . 

 



3102 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2009 

The Speaker: — The minister responsible for the Crowns. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Let’s talk about all the Crown 

corporations, Mr. Speaker. Let’s talk about SaskEnergy — 

7,500 new connects, the lowest rates in the country in 2008, Mr. 

Speaker. Let’s talk about SaskTel. Let’s talk about 100 per cent 

high-speed Internet coverage in the province of Saskatchewan, 

98 per cent cellular coverage. Let’s talk about STC 

[Saskatchewan Transportation Company]. The only new route 

in 30 years was done by this government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Let’s talk about affordability, Mr. Speaker. Let’s talk about 

SaskPower rates. Let’s talk about . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The minister’s time has elapsed. I recognize 

the member from Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Nuclear Development 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, we asked this question on April 

7 and the people of Saskatchewan received no answer, so I’m 

asking it again today. To the minister: what are the actual, not 

hypothetical, markets for nuclear power exported by a reactor 

based in Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is a 

hypothetical question, Mr. Speaker, so we’ll . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . It certainly is a hypothetical question. There is 

no nuclear reactor in the province of Saskatchewan and there 

are no specific plans to build one, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What we’re doing though is the most consultative process ever 

in the province of Saskatchewan with the people of 

Saskatchewan. We’re involving them as much as is humanly 

possible in a decision-making process as to whether there may 

be at some day in the fairly distant future a nuclear reactor in 

this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Minimum Wage 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — We asked this question on April 30 and the 

people of Saskatchewan received no answer, so I’m going to 

ask it again today. Saying he’s studying it is simply not an 

answer. 

 

To the minister: will the Sask Party commit today to indexing 

the minimum wage? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I’m delighted to talk about 

population growth, up over 15,000 people. I’m delighted to talk 

about employment growth, but I’m especially delighted to talk 

about wage growth, Mr. Speaker — average weekly earnings up 

by 3.5 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. It seems to me we have questions 

being asked where members felt they didn’t receive an answer 

before. And I would like the members to at least allow the 

minister to answer the question this time. 

 

[10:30] 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Any assistance I can help the members 

opposite to continue looking in the rear-view mirror, we’re 

going to just provide that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Eight hundred and four dollars, Mr. Speaker — $804 average 

weekly earnings. I think our track record is very solid. In 

addition to that, since coming into office over the last number 

of months, we’ve raised the minimum wage three times, Mr. 

Speaker. We’ve kept three more promises. And, Mr. Speaker, 

we’re delighted to say that this work continues. The work 

continues at a much greater speed than members opposite were 

ever able to pursue it in 16 years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Regina Correctional Centre Escape Report 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we asked this question on March 

16 and the people of Saskatchewan received no answer. To the 

Minister of Corrections: will he refer the unedited report of the 

escapes from the Regina Correctional Centre to the Information 

and Privacy Commissioner, or will he continue to hide the 

truth? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections and Public Safety. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As stated after 

the question was posed, and in the media, we said the members 

opposite have the right under The Privacy Act to make an 

application for the report. When they got the response from the 

ministry, if they were not liking the response, they then could 

go to the Privacy Commissioner and do that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Privacy Commissioner said in the media that for us to go to 

him first with our report would be very unusual in 

circumstances of this nature. So they have the process. They 

could follow it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Pay Equity 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, we asked this question on April 



May 14, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3103 

22, April 29, and April 30, and the people of Saskatchewan 

received no answer so I’m asking it again today. To the 

Premier: will the Premier commit to introducing provincial pay 

equity legislation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Ed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, most especially we can see 

that out of the more than 500,000 people working, the most 

recent numbers in Saskatchewan where we have First Nation 

and Métis people, 1,800 new employment opportunities and, 

Mr. Speaker, women’s employment opportunities up by over 

10,000, Mr. Speaker. We’re delighted with this progress. 

 

We know there’s more to do, Mr. Speaker, and this government 

endeavours to ensure that we make sure the people of this 

province remain the priority. And that includes sharing the 

prosperity right across the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

2010 Olympics 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We asked this 

question on April 28 and the people of Saskatchewan have not 

received an answer, so I’m asking again today. To the minister: 

what share of the $7 million being spent for the Vancouver 

Olympics is being invested in Saskatchewan athletes? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the members 

opposite are aware, that we have signed a contributing territory 

and province agreement with Vancouver Olympics, a $1.5 

million cost to that agreement — $750,000 of that 1.5 

agreement, dollar agreement with Vancouver Olympics is going 

to athlete development, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

SaskWater Operations 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, we asked this question March 24 

and the people of Saskatchewan received no answer. To the 

minister: will he guarantee to the people of Moose Jaw and 

SaskWater employees that he will not take a course of action 

that will lead to substantial layoffs at SaskWater? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s great to be able to continue our discussion on 

Saskatchewan’s Crown corporations. 

 

SaskWater has done a tremendous job in providing safe and 

reliable water for Saskatchewan people. As we’ve noted in this 

House, there’s been agreements that have been signed by 

members opposite, by the previous government, that were 

troublesome for SaskWater, troublesome for the community of 

Duck Lake. 

 

Mr. Speaker, thank goodness that that will not continue because 

this government is committed to ensuring that SaskWater and 

all Crown corporations provide the service at the lowest 

possible cost. 

 

There will be no equity stripping, Mr. Speaker. There will no 

infrastructure deficits, as we saw from the members opposite. 

There’ll be safe, reliable service for Saskatchewan people. 

That’s our commitment on the election day. That’s our 

commitment today. That’s our commitment going forward, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Greenhouse Gas Emissions 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we asked a question 

on May 11 and the people of Saskatchewan received no answer, 

and so we’re asking this question again today. And the question 

is to the Minister of the Environment: why was a 32 per cent 

reduction in greenhouse gas emissions achievable during the 

election campaign, but now it is not? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, we said all along that we 

will balance the economy with the environment. We have heard 

from business and industry that the 20 per cent target that we’ve 

adopted is still going to be a difficult one to reach, Mr. Speaker, 

but they indicated to us that a 32 per cent reduction would 

destroy them. 

 

So while the members opposite are leafing through their very 

well-worn copies of the Regina Manifesto and contemplating 

how to eradicate capitalism from our province, Mr. Speaker, we 

will continue to make life affordable for people in this province. 

We will continue to invest in business in this province. We will 

continue to promote jobs in this . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, we will continue to 

promote jobs. We will continue to promote business. We will 



3104 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2009 

continue to promote growth in this province, and environmental 

protection. Mr. Speaker, that will be our record. This is the 

NDP record, if they want their own yellow sheets. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Tendering of Contracts 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, we asked this question . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, we asked this question on May 6. 

The government assured the media and the people of 

Saskatchewan that the contracts in question were tendered, and 

that they would make those tenders available. To the best of our 

knowledge, this has not happened. 

 

To the minister: will he release the tenders for the contracts that 

were ultimately awarded to Garven & Associates? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, this firm has been doing 

work since about 2001 for the Government of Saskatchewan 

and the people of this province. The exact same format and 

structure as far as tendering of contracts has been used by this 

government as has previously, Mr. Speaker. 

 

These people do good work as it relates to regional economic 

development and a variety of related tasks. Mr. Speaker, we’re 

delighted with the work that’s under way, that stretches across 

various ministries, Mr. Speaker. And we’re very pleased that 

these people continue with that work. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Storage of Nuclear Waste 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we asked this question on April 

28, and the people of Saskatchewan received no answer. So I’m 

asking it again today. The Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

is clearly on record saying that the province is not going to store 

nuclear waste. But the Minister of Crowns says the province is 

going to consider nuclear storage. Which minister is correct? 

Which answer reflects government policy? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Well there is only one government 

policy on this piece. There’s never been any ambiguity on that. 

We’ve said from the outset that we believe that the people of 

Saskatchewan are not interested in storing spent nuclear fuel 

cartridges in the province, and so we are not interested in it 

either. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Delivery of Educational Programs 

 

Mr. McCall: — This question was asked on April 18 and the 

people of Saskatchewan received no answer, so we’ll try again 

today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To the Minister of Education: why did he let the Minister of the 

Environment cut the Project Wet and the Project Wild programs 

that are recommended by his own ministry, and which benefit 

almost 1,000 teachers each year? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, as we seek to find 

efficiencies in government, something that the NDP were not 

necessarily committed to, one of the proposals that we 

undertook was to allow third party organizations to deliver 

those education programs for us. They are conservation 

organizations that are operating in this province, Mr. Speaker, 

that have an amazing network. They have very committed 

people working for them. And we felt that it was completely 

appropriate for those organizations to deliver those programs, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So they will continue to be delivered at an actual cost savings to 

the government with absolutely no reduction in services to the 

people of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Water Supply for Saskatchewan Communities 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, we asked this question on 

March 25 and the people of Saskatchewan received no answer, 

so I’m asking it again today. 

 

To the minister: with a 10.2 billion surplus and a 12 per cent 

increase, will the Sask Party focus some of that spending to 

help Saskatchewan communities struggling to provide their 

citizens with their safe and affordable drinking water? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 



May 14, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3105 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Watching 

today’s question period might remind viewers of the end of the 

season when all you get is reruns because that’s what we’re 

seeing today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have provided historic increases in investment 

directly into municipalities for the benefit of their infrastructure 

through the Saskatchewan infrastructure growth initiative, 

through the municipal economic enhancement program, and 

we’ve given them more operating dollars than they’ve ever seen 

in their history through revenue-sharing increases. All of these 

financial resources are now available to people in communities 

all over Saskatchewan for drinking water and other vital 

infrastructure projects. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we asked this question on 

April 8 and the people of Saskatchewan received no answer, so 

I’m going to ask it again today. The Watershed Authority’s plan 

says that there are at least two other high-risk communities 

where the authority will be conducting an assessment. 

 

To the minister: what are the names of those communities? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan 

Watershed Authority is committed to offering free water testing 

for different communities. Those communities have not, we 

haven’t had formal agreement, so for us to actually announce 

publicly who those communities are would be inappropriate. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, if the NDP are concerned about water in our 

province, I have a document, an NDP document from January 

1999 which says, Mr. Speaker, and I quote, “In some situations 

such as in smaller communities, there are insufficient resources 

available to replace aging infrastructure and meet existing 

regulations.” So, Mr. Speaker, what they proposed to do in 

1999, and I quote, “establish a funding mechanism to support 

provincial water infrastructure.” That was in 1999. They never 

got it done. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Severance of Public Servants 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We asked this 

question on April 28 and the people of Saskatchewan received 

no answer, so I’m asking it again today. To the minister: will he 

confirm that the severance packages will not exceed 10 million, 

and will that include what we heard is a $1 million severance 

for John Wright? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I can advise the member 

opposite that that particular lawsuit, the one regarding Mr. 

Wright, has been settled for approximately $400,000. 

 

It was the intention, Mr. Speaker, to deal with all of the people 

that were let go on the changing over, to treat them all with 

dignity, compassion, and respect. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, that 

is in fact what this government has chosen to do. And I’m 

pleased to say that virtually all of the outstanding claims have 

now been settled, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Tuition Fees 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, we asked this question on March 

24 and the people of Saskatchewan received no answer, so I’m 

asking it again today. To the Minister of Advanced Education: 

which colleges will be hardest hit by his decision to hike 

tuition? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I can offer some quotes 

from former members of the NDP. And you know, Mr. 

Speaker, what we can say is $840 million invested through this 

ministry — 665 million invested directly to institutions. We’ve 

seen $23.5 million invested to offset tuition. We’ve seen 

increases in infrastructure — record this year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’re helping to ensure that we have excellence, that we have 

innovation, that we have inclusion, that we have effectiveness, 

Mr. Speaker. We do that through the investments and hard work 

of this ministry and this government. We’re working to ensure 

that we’re supporting our students, our scholars, our 

institutions, and as a result the people of this province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[10:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Enterprise Saskatchewan and Job Creation 

 

Ms. Junor: — . . . question on March 31 and the people of 

Saskatchewan received no answer, so I’m asking it again today. 

To the minister: did Enterprise Saskatchewan advise the 

government on its so-called economic stimulus package, and 

will Enterprise Saskatchewan be conducting an analysis of how 

many jobs the package will actually create? 

 



3106 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2009 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 

member for that question. And I can say this: that the work of 

Enterprise Saskatchewan is creating hundreds of jobs around 

this province and will create thousands in the near to medium 

future. And that work will continue to go on despite the 

resentment of our success from the members on that side of the 

floor, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

EZ Finder Phonebook and Crown Corporations 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we asked the question on 

March 12 and the people of Saskatchewan received no answer. 

To the minister: why did he report to this House that all 

prospective purchasers of EZ Finder Phonebooks had been 

contacted when in fact they hadn’t? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s a tale of two parties. It’s a tale of two views of 

Crown corporations in this province — one that would see 

greenhouse gas emissions go up by 67 per cent, one that would 

see the NDP government raise tuition fees by some 99 per cent, 

Mr. Speaker. That’s their record. 

 

They like to wrap themselves in the flag of the Crown 

corporations, Mr. Speaker, but what did they really do? 

Infrastructure deficits, equity stripping, no vision, no 10-year 

plan, no five-year plan, no four-year plans, no plans whatsoever 

for the Crown corporations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are leading the way, whether it’s SaskTel with 

100 per cent Internet coverage, any Crown corporation, we’re 

leading the way, Mr. Speaker. We’re very proud of our record, 

and we challenge the members opposite to dispute that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Consultation Meetings on Nuclear Development 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we asked this question 

on April 7 and the people of Saskatchewan received no answer, 

so I’m asking it again here today. To the minister: will experts 

be available at the UDP [Uranium Development Partnership] 

consultation meetings to answer the questions the public may 

have? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 

member for that question. I appreciate the opportunity to point 

out that there certainly will be expertise on hand to answer 

questions that the public may have at the consultation process 

that’s going to criss-cross this province as a result of the 

recommendations of the UDP report. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Support for Station 20 West and the West 

Side of Saskatoon 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, please do not hold this warm 

welcome against my time. Mr. Speaker, I came into the House 

today not with . . . at least not this one, a white sheet of paper. 

And I’ve endeavoured over the course of this question period to 

note the specific answers which government has provided to 

these many questions that have been asked — 19 in total. 

 

My scorecard says, the Minister of Sport answered her question. 

The Minister of Enterprise gave us half an answer. He gave us 

an answer, but we’re not sure what the answer of CIC would be, 

so I’d give him half a point. That’s one and a half, Mr. Speaker, 

out of 19. My page is still virtually clear. 

 

And the fact of the matter is, this is a serious issue with this 

government. They have not been open, they have not been 

transparent, and they have not been answering the questions of 

the public. And so, Mr. Speaker, I brought my own yellow 

sheets today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — And I note the government is well equipped 

with yellow sheets today too. I’ll ask the Premier to bring out 

his yellow sheet. The two questions I have today for the 

Premier, the first is this — and if I may coach the Premier a 

little, the answer is yes. 

 

My first question is this, Mr. Speaker. I understand that the 

Premier has been kind enough to write a letter of support to the 

people who are still at work building the Station 20 West 

project in Saskatoon. Because the Premier has made a decision 

and the government has made a decision to support 

Saskatchewan’s presence at the Olympics to the tune of $7 

million because they support that project, my question to the 

Premier: will he show the same level of financial support to 

Station 20 West in Saskatoon? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we will show more than that 

support for that member’s riding and for the people of the west 

side of Saskatoon who obviously face challenges on a daily 

basis. We’ll make that investment though at St. Mary School 



May 14, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3107 

and in an excellent housing project right around St. Mary 

School as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We wish those who are undertaking the Station 20 fundraising, 

we do wish them well. We’ve stated that we are going to 

continue to invest in that constituency on the west side of 

Saskatoon and now, just in the event that we are not going to 

get to have another question asked and answered, let me just 

say this, Mr. Speaker . . . And I agree. We should probably at 

least have one more question. But let me just say this. And I’m 

prepared to sit down, Mr. Speaker, if you’d indicate that we 

might get one more question and one more answer and . . . 

 

The Speaker: — One more. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — There we go. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Representation for Saskatoon Riversdale 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, thank you, Mr. Speaker, thank you 

very much. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I believe you are aware, I yesterday did as the 

legislation requires. I caused to be delivered a letter of my 

intention to you, sir, to resign as the member of the legislature 

for the constituency of Saskatoon Riversdale effective June 30, 

2009. 

 

My question to the Premier is this: will the Premier today give 

the people of Riversdale the assurance that they will be 

represented in this legislature by the time this legislature 

resumes its sitting in fall, and preferably by a New Democrat? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’m in a position to give an 

affirmative answer only to the first part of that hon. member’s 

question. In fact, I think we may be in for a bit of a surprise 

here, at least a close race. I know there’s a contested Sask Party 

nomination that’s going to be under way, actually is under way 

there right now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have noted over the years that in the past, 

certainly, in the past when NDP retiring politicians would have 

to move to Alberta for a job. I think of Mr. Anguish and Mr. 

Shillington. I think of Mr. Lingenfelter who has now come 

back. Mr. Speaker, I am very grateful today that all of us live 

and serve a province of Saskatchewan with such an economy, 

with such a robust, job-creating economy, that that hon. 

member will continue his career in another way right here in the 

province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Because I think it’s fair to say his efforts 

left the province better than he found them, and I know he’ll 

continue to contribute to Saskatchewan. And while he 

contributes, he will do so in a province where he’ll have to pay 

lower taxes, where the debt’ll be a little lower, the roads a little 

bit smoother, where there’ll be more nurses to provide health 

care if it’s needed, Mr. Speaker. And I look forward to future 

discussions between he and I on the future prospects of the 

province of Saskatchewan, his home. 

 

We wish him well. We’ll do so more formally later. Most of all, 

we’re glad he’s one of many who are staying and coming to the 

great province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would like to ask leave to move a motion concerning the order 

of business today. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The Government House Leader has 

asked for leave regarding a motion and the order of business 

today. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Order of House Business 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move: 

 

That this Assembly proceed directly to government orders, 

Committee of Finance; and upon completion of the 

appropriation Bill, leave to revert back to motions to 

return (debatable). 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved: 

 

That the Assembly proceeds directly to government 

orders, Committee of Finance; and upon completion of the 

appropriation Bill, leave to revert back to motions for 

returns (debatable). 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Committee of 

Finance. 

 

The Speaker: — Committee of Finance. I do now leave the 

Chair. 

 



3108 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2009 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Motions for Supply 

 

The Chair: — We’re in Committee of Finance now and I 

recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

move resolution no. 1: 

 

Resolved towards making good the supply granted to Her 

Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of the 

public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 2010, 

the sum of $9,545,542,000 be granted out of the General 

Revenue Fund. 

 

The Chair: — Minister of Finance has moved that, no. 1: 

 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 

the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 

2010, the sum of $9,545,542,000 be granted out of 

General Revenue. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Chair: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

move: 

 

Be it resolved towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 

the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 

2010, which to the extent that they remain unexpended for 

the fiscal year are also granted for the fiscal year ending 

on March 31, 2011, the sum of $282,304,000 be granted 

out of the General Revenue Fund. 

 

The Chair: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 

that, no. 2: 

 

Resolved towards making good the supply granted to Her 

Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of the 

public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 2010, 

which to the extent that they remain unexpended for the 

fiscal year are also granted for the fiscal year ending on 

March 31, 2011, the sum of $282,304,000 be granted out 

of the General Revenue Fund. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Chair: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

move that the committee rise and that the Chair report that the 

committee has agreed to certain resolutions and ask for leave to 

sit again. 

 

The Chair: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 

that the committee rise and that the Chair report that the 

committee has agreed to certain resolutions and ask for leave to 

sit again. Is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. 

 

[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Committee of the 

Whole. 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, the Committee of Finance has 

agreed to certain resolutions and instructed me to report the 

same and to ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the resolutions be read the first 

and second time? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the 

resolutions be now read the first and second time. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 

reading of the resolutions. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? I 

recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Later this day, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Later this day. I recognize the Minister of 

Finance. 

 

[11:00] 

 

APPROPRIATION BILL 

 

Bill No. 96 — The Appropriation Act, 2009 (No. 3) 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 96, 

The Appropriation Act, 2009 (No. 3) be now introduced and 

read the first time. 

 



May 14, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3109 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved that Bill 

No. 96, The Appropriation Act, 2009 (No. 3) be now introduced 

and read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? I 

recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, under rule 72(2), I move 

that the Bill be now read a second and third time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 

that Bill No. 96, The Appropriation Act, 2009 (No. 3) be now 

read a second and third time. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second and third 

reading of this Bill. 

 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Debatable) 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Return No. 35 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to move an 

order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 35 showing: 

 

To the government: The third party review that formed the 

basis for the decision to contract out SaskTel conference 

calling capabilities. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from The Battlefords has moved 

an order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 35. I recognize 

the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A third party review 

was not required for the decision to contract out SaskTel 

conference calling capabilities. Nothing has changed to the 

policies affecting the requirements for third party reviews by 

SaskTel during the term of this government. It is operating 

under the same policies related to third party reviews that were 

in place during the tenure of the previous government. It is also 

important to note that there were no job losses at SaskTel as a 

result of contracting out these services. People affected were 

given other responsibilities within SaskTel. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

move an order of the Assembly do issue for return . . . Oh, 

excuse me, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly is the 

motion moved by the member from The Battlefords regarding 

return no. 35. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — I believe the nos have it. I recognize the 

member from The Battlefords. 

 

Return No. 36 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

move an order of the Assembly to issue for return no. 36 

showing: 

 

To the government: the third party review that formed the 

basis for the decision to contract out SaskTel email 

services. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from The Battlefords has moved 

an order of the Assembly for return no. 36. I recognize the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A third party review 

was not required for the decision to contract out SaskTel email 

services. Once again nothing has changed to the policies 

affecting the requirement for third party reviews by SaskTel 

during the term of this government. It is operating under the 

same policies related to third party reviews that were in place 

during the tenure of the previous government. As was also the 

case with the conference calling, no jobs were lost at SaskTel as 

a result of contracting out email services. People affected were 

given other responsibilities within SaskTel. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion by the member from The Battlefords regarding an order 

of the Assembly to issue for return no. 36. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Return No. 42 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to move an 

order of the Assembly to issue for return no. 42 showing: 

 

To the government: the Kirsch report on forestry. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly is the 

motion by the member from The Battlefords regarding an order 



3110 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2009 

of the Assembly to issue for return no. 42. I recognize the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. According to rule 

21(1) returns are requested when, I quote: 

 

Seeking a document or detailed information of a lengthy 

nature from the government generally or, more 

specifically, from a Minister of the Crown . . . 

 

The requested document was not a government document. Mr. 

Kirsch’s recommendations were made while in his capacity as 

forestry critic for the official opposition. This was an internal 

caucus working document. 

 

The recommendations listed in this working document are 

certainly no secret. They were incorporated into the 

Saskatchewan Party election platform for the 2007 general 

election. This platform was widely accepted and supported by 

the people of Saskatchewan and we continue to work diligently 

for the continued support of Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly is the 

motion by the member from The Battlefords regarding the issue 

for return no. 42. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: —Aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — Those in favour, say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed, say no. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — I believe the nos have it. I recognize the 

Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we await 

the arrival of the Lieutenant Governor, I move that we recess 

until just before 11:30. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved a 

time of recess till the arrival of His Honour. Is the Assembly 

agreed with the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. The bells will ring just prior to the 

availability of His Honour. 

 

[The Assembly recessed for a period of time.] 

 

[11:30] 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. His Honour is here for Royal 

Assent. 

 

ROYAL ASSENT 

 

[At 11:31 His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 

Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 

to the following Bills.] 

 

His Honour: — Pray be seated. 

 

The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 

Assembly in its present session has passed several Bills which 

in the name of the Assembly I present to Your Honour and to 

which Bills I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 

 

Clerk: — Your Honour, the Bills are as follows: 

 

Bill No. 57 - The Land Titles Amendment Act, 2008 

Bill No. 69 - The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders 

Amendment Act, 2008/Loi de 2008 modifiant 

la Loi de 1997 sur l’exécution des 

ordonnances alimentaires 

Bill No. 50 - The Missing Persons and Presumption of 

Death Act 

Bill No. 70 - The Summary Offences Procedure 

Amendment Act, 2008 

Bill No. 46 - The Labour Market Commission Amendment 

Act, 2008 

Bill No. 86 - The Saskatchewan Financial Services 

Commission Amendment Act, 2009 

Bill No. 44 - The Agreements of Sale Cancellation 

Amendment Act, 2008 

Bill No. 45 - The Credit Union Amendment Act, 2008 

Bill No. 43 - The Trespass to Property Act 

Bill No. 51 - The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2008 

Bill No. 67 - The Education Amendment Act, 2008 

(No. 2)/Loi n
o
 2 de 2008 modifiant la Loi de 

1995 sur l’éducation 

Bill No. 79 - The Education Amendment Act, 2009 

(No. 2)/Loi n
o
 2 de 2009 modifiant la Loi de 

1995 sur l’éducation 

Bill No. 87 - The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2009 

Bill No. 88 - The Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 

2009 

Bill No. 59 - The Election Amendment Act, 2008 

Bill No. 60 - The Senate Nominee Election Act 

Bill No. 61 - The Local Government Election Amendment 

Act, 2008 

Bill No. 85 - The Municipal Grants Act 

Bill No. 68 - The Arts Professions Act/Loi sur les professions 

artistiques 

Bill No. 54 - The Vital Statistics Act, 2008/Loi de 2008 sur 

les services de l'état civil 

Bill No. 55 - The Vital Statistics Consequential Amendments 

Act, 2008 

Bill No. 47 - The Pipelines Amendment Act, 2008 

Bill No. 902 - The Stephen and Michelene Worobetz 

Foundation Amendment Act 

Bill No. 92 - The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2009/Loi 

de 2009 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour 

du Banc de la Reine 

Bill No. 93 - The Condominium Property Amendment Act, 

2009 

Bill No. 605 - The Traffic Safety (Maintenance Workers — 

Gallenger) Amendment Act 



May 14, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3111 

Bill No. 73 - The University of Saskatchewan Amendment 

Act, 2008 

Bill No. 76 - The Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment 

Act, 2008 (No. 2) 

Bill No. 84 - The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital 

Corporations Amendment Act, 2009 

Bill No. 71 - The Innovation Saskatchewan Act 

Bill No. 89 - The Education Amendment Act, 2009 

(No. 3)/Loi n
o
 3 de 2009 modifiant la Loi de 

1995 sur l’éducation 

Bill No. 90 - The Miscellaneous Statutes (Education 

Property Tax) Repeal and Amendment Act, 

2009 

Bill No. 94 - The Profits of Criminal Notoriety Act 

Bill No. 63 - The Saskatchewan Housing Corporation 

Amendment Act, 2008 

Bill No. 66 - The Witness Protection Act 

Bill No. 49 - The Ambulance Amendment Act, 2008 

 

His Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to these Bills. 

 

The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 

Assembly has voted the supplies required to enable the 

government to defray the expenses of the public service. 

 

In the name of the Assembly, I present to your Honour: 

 

Bill No. 96 - The Appropriation Act, 2009 (No. 3) 

 

to which I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 

 

His Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I thank the Legislative 

Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to this Bill. 

 

[His Honour retired from the Chamber at 11:37.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d ask 

for leave to move a motion, and I’d also ask for leave to have 

permission of the Assembly to use the member from 

Riversdale’s proper name. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has requested leave to move a 

motion, as well as to use the proper name of the member from 

Riversdale. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Farewell to Lorne Calvert 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. At the 

end of my remarks today, I will move a motion, seconded by 

the Premier, that the Assembly pay tribute to the Hon. Lorne 

Calvert for his 22 years of service to the people of our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today marks the last day Lorne Calvert will lead 

Her Majesty’s Official Opposition to do honourable battle in 

this House. Today is the last day we will hear his voice in this 

Chamber as the Leader of the New Democratic Party. But this 

is not the end of his guidance and influence. Lorne Calvert’s 

enduring support and friendship, I believe, will remain with us 

all. 

 

Lorne Calvert and I were both elected for the first time in 1986, 

when he was chosen as the member for Moose Jaw South and I 

was chosen as the member from Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

For some reason our leaders, both Mr. Romanow and Mr. 

Blakeney, always put us near each other in the House, and then 

in the case of Mr. Romanow, he had us sitting beside each other 

in the cabinet. We quickly shared a close friendship, the kind of 

friendship where you respectfully speak your truth to one 

another even when we disagreed. And, Mr. Speaker, I can say 

with certainty there were moments when Lorne Calvert and I 

vehemently disagreed with each other. Mr. Speaker, the truth in 

any kind of friendship can be difficult and sometimes it can 

even hurt, as my mother would say, but it’s the kind of 

friendship that I think will last a lifetime. 

 

We also over the years got to entertain each other with the trials 

and tribulations of our everyday lives, and entertain each other 

we did. Lorne is a leader who supported his colleagues, and 

Lorne was the kind of leader who was always forgiving. He is a 

kind, principled, honourable man who showed great humility in 

his triumphs and bore so many undeserved slings and arrows 

with grace. Though a passionate and formidable debater, he 

always rose above nastiness, remembering to treat others 

without malice. 

 

It is these personal qualities that I believe helped us win an 

election in 2003 when all the pundits thought we weren’t going 

to win, and it’s these qualities that helped us form an opposition 

in 2007 when I think some of our colleagues across the aisle 

thought we just might disappear. Thanks in large part to Lorne 

Calvert, we’re still standing on this side of the aisle and getting 

a bit more used to our role as critic of government. 

 

Lorne Calvert administration reshaped our province through his 

vision of social progress made possible through economic 

progress. We heard time and time again, whether it was in the 

cabinet, in a meeting with the chamber of commerce, in 

meetings with the United Church of Canada, or in meetings 

with community-based organizations, Lorne Calvert’s words 

that there could be no social progress without economic 

progress. Lorne’s vision helped to create a new social and 

economic environment that paved the road home for so many of 

our young people. I think one of Lorne Calvert’s proudest 

accomplishments is that in the year 2007, over 15,000 people 

came to the province and our population grew. 

 

We saw improvements to our tax and royalty regimes, diversity 

in our economy, protection of our natural environment — 

particularly the Great Sand Hills — and commitment to work 

with First Nations and Métis communities. Lorne Calvert paid 

attention to post-secondary education and training to prepare 

students for employment in our booming economy. These really 

are the hallmarks of the Lorne Calvert administration. New 

immigrants from within Canada and from abroad also learned 

of a welcoming province where they could find work and build 



3112 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2009 

new lives. 

 

Under Lorne Calvert, Saskatchewan emerged a proud province. 

And he wasn’t afraid to advertise all of the glories of our 

province, even when he was being criticized, because he 

thought it was important that people within our boundaries 

understood the greatness of our province. 

 

He also spent time developing our rich assets with an eye to 

social progress so that all of our citizens would share in our 

growing prosperity. Given more time, I believe that there was 

much more to accomplish to create the perfect province or as 

Tommy Douglas would say, the New Jerusalem, but I guess 

we’ll have to wait for another day, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Lorne Calvert did the preliminary, essential work for the 

abundance we now enjoy in Saskatchewan. In his steady and 

unassuming way, he shifted ground, providing us with 

tremendous wealth and a vision for an even better province. 

And for that we owe him our many thanks. 

 

My personal debt to Lorne Calvert can only be paid with my 

immutable loyalty and friendship to him, to Betty, and to his 

family. Mr. Speaker, there are few friends that we develop in 

political life. We develop a lot of acquaintances, but I can say 

with certainty a friendship has been developed — a friendship 

that I believe will last a lifetime. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 

Premier: 

 

That the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan hereby 

pay tribute to the Hon. Lorne Calvert for his 22 years of 

service to the people of Saskatchewan as a member of this 

Assembly, for his leadership and dedication to the public 

good, for his humility and faith in the equality of all 

people, for his many contributions to making 

Saskatchewan a better place to live, and for his abiding 

belief in social and economic justice for all. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana: 

 

That the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan hereby 

pay tribute to the Hon. Lorne Calvert for his 22 years of 

service to the people of Saskatchewan as a member of this 

Assembly, for his leadership and dedication to the public 

good, for his humility and faith in the equality of all 

people, for his many contributions to making 

Saskatchewan a better place to live, and for his abiding 

belief in social and economic justice for all. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the Premier. 

 

[11:45] 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s an 

honour and a privilege for me to be able to participate in the 

debate and second the motion of the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana on behalf of the government, more specifically on 

behalf of Saskatchewan Party MLAs who are here in the 

Chamber today. 

 

October 20, 2008, there’s a very, very interesting editorial in the 

op-ed pages of the National Post which I read, and was a little 

bit kind of vexed about frankly, Mr. Speaker, a little bit 

frustrated even a little bit by it, although I believed it to contain 

truth. The editorial, the opinion from the editorial board of the 

National Post was, they were weighing in on the legacy of 

Lorne Calvert, if I can continue with the hon. member’s request 

that we would use proper names. 

 

It’s a pretty interesting editorial. I’m not sure if Mr. Calvert has 

even yet read it. I don’t think . . . He strikes me, I don’t know 

this to be certain, but he strikes me as the kind of individual that 

doesn’t worry too much what’s written about him, whether it is 

positive or negative. But he may or may not have. 

 

It begins interestingly. It says: 

 

For better or worse, the leadership of the Saskatchewan 

New Democrats is a role whose symbolic significance in 

the Canadian imagination well exceeds the importance of 

either the province or the party to the country’s daily 

affairs. 

 

Quite a kudos, frankly, from the National Post, which may not 

be sort of the flagship of socialist support in Canada, but 

certainly kudos for the New Democratic Party. 

 

No one contends for the . . . throne of Tommy Douglas on 

a mere whim [it goes on to say]. Its occupant is 

traditionally expected to continue Douglas’s legacy of 

policy innovation and keep the fires of democratic 

socialism burning in the heartland. 

 

Now, on behalf of a group of women and men who tend to want 

to put out some of those fires at every occasion, it is difficult to 

argue with what the rest of the editorial goes on to say. And I 

won’t read it all into the record, but for those members who 

have not read it, I invite you to google it and to go online and 

read this from, again it’s October 20, 2008 National Post. It 

does conclude this way. It says, “Today, Saskatchewan is a 

place with an exciting future.” 

 

Those are words that could not have been written without irony 

just a few years ago and Lorne Calvert deserves part of the 

credit for that change. You know, Mr. Speaker, I think all 

members on this side of the House agree with that. I had the 

chance to just moments ago discuss, I guess, my views for 

whatever they’re worth, of Mr. Calvert’s legacy with our press 

gallery here at the Legislative Assembly. And I highlighted too 

his economic achievements. 

 

Something that perhaps maybe tends to be forgotten, or maybe 

there’re just other achievements that people focus on with 

respect to Mr. Calvert’s career and his leadership as Premier, 

but we agree on this point — that you simply cannot fund 

quality of life. You can’t provide infrastructure; you can’t hire 

nurses; you can’t pay teachers what you’d like to pay or ensure 

that post-secondary education is affordable without a growing 

economy. And to the extent that that sort of was the bulwark or 



May 14, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3113 

the foundation for Mr. Calvert’s approach and vision to public 

policy and the development of specifically taxation policy, we 

benefit from those decisions today. There’s absolutely no 

question about it. 

 

There are other things that are important to a growth agenda in 

our view, in my view, Mr. Speaker. But none as important, I 

think, as a competitive tax system, as a tax system that makes 

sure we welcome investment. We don’t punish capital 

investment unnecessarily. And those changes didn’t occur, 

didn’t happen from a centre, centre-right party necessarily. 

They didn’t come from a leader of a “conservative” 

government. Those changes that have, I think, set the table for 

the feast that we are grateful for today, those changes were 

made by the government of Mr. Calvert, the hon. member that 

we salute today. 

 

And were that the only achievement — and certainly it is not 

the only achievement — but were that the only achievement of 

Mr. Calvert, that’d be enough. That’d be enough for all of us to 

say today, thanks. 

 

There are a number of other attributes that I’d like to touch on if 

I can, Mr. Speaker, my observations if I can. And then I know, 

more importantly, there are members on that side of the House 

that would wish to enter this debate — though I don’t think 

there’ll be much debating on this point anyway — and so I want 

to make room for them. But a couple of other observations, if I 

may. 

 

Because of the aforementioned tax changes that he undertook, I 

think it’s fair to say that Mr. Calvert is a man of courage. That 

he probably has a certain amount of toughness to him that 

maybe people don’t recognize, because he would have had 

those in his party who would have been vehemently opposed to 

those business tax cuts. Cutting the corporate capital tax — 

those words might have been an anathema to many in the party, 

I’m guessing. And so I would say that we know that he is a man 

of courage and he’s tougher perhaps than anybody understands 

because those changes happened. And as I recall, none of the 

members opposite voted against those changes when they were 

the government. Those changes passed. 

 

I think we can all agree that he is a man of integrity. And while 

I’ll be very frank and say that maybe on occasion I would have 

taken exception with a certain turn of phrase he may have used 

in the heat of debate or even a tactic in a campaign or part of a 

communication, part of a campaign, I don’t think any of those, 

none of those circumstances would lead me to believe, or 

anyone else, that they were in any way an indictment, if you 

will, of his character. Because I think we understand him to be a 

man of integrity. 

 

He was a leader of a political party though, and political parties 

compete — and they compete hopefully fairly. And I think that 

has also been his legacy, that sense of fair competition and the 

integrity and the honesty with which he’s approached his public 

life. No one can doubt his sense of service and dedication of the 

province. I’m getting just a little bit of a glimpse of that over 

the last 18 months, just about the schedule, for example, and 

sacrifices made in terms of family and other issues. 

 

And I’m also mindful of the fact that Mr. Calvert begun his 

career on the government side anyway. I know he was an 

opposition member. I was an erstwhile young staffer, as 

members opposite every once in a while will point out, when 

Mr. Calvert was first elected. Well I wasn’t here yet. I was still 

in university, but shortly thereafter was. So he was in 

opposition. 

 

But when he was first part of a new government in the ’90s, 

there was some herculean tasks that faced the government and 

very, very difficult decisions to be made. I freely admit that we 

have not — and I’m glad we have not — faced that scale of 

challenge as a new government. But because of the glimpse I’ve 

had of that time — I guess looking in the rear-view mirror, 

trying to understand what was going on — would tell me that 

this is a man of great service and dedication and resolve. And I 

think that that was the case when he was first elected to a 

government and obviously carried through as leader of his party 

and premier. 

 

And I would also say this finally of Mr. Calvert. I don’t think 

there is a more underestimated politician in Canada perhaps 

than Lorne Calvert. And every day for about four years — from 

2003 to 2007 — was a reminder for many on this side of the 

House that we were some of perhaps a group that is too large 

who underestimated the abilities, the political abilities and just, 

you know, the abilities I guess in leadership of Mr. Calvert. I 

think that’s fair to say. 

 

The hon. member from Nutana referenced the 2003 election. I 

tend to think that our side — and I played a role in this as well, 

obviously, as a candidate and someone that was helping 

develop policy — I think our party helped in the ’03 election. 

And the hon. members are thanking us and we say, you’re 

welcome. But I do believe a part of it was perhaps an 

underestimation of the man that we honour today. Now there 

can be no underestimating about the accomplishments and the 

dedication. And we’ve already touched on that. 

 

And so just before I offer a bit of a close, I also want to 

acknowledge, on behalf of the opposition, Mr. Calvert’s family, 

Betty and the family. And his grandson is here as well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well when the legislature is working right, 

Mr. Speaker, and when we have groups of students into the 

office that Mr. Calvert was in — and now I’m an honoured and 

temporary tenant of now — I show them a drawing that my son 

has done. He doesn’t do much more art or drawing, Mr. Calvert, 

because it’s not cool any more. But he used to do a lot of it and 

he did animation and he liked to animate the Looney Tunes. 

And I think we all can probably recount far too many of those 

cartoons — probably verbatim — at least, full disclosure, I 

probably can. 

 

But one of my favourites and one that I asked him to depict was 

of that cartoon — if I may on a very serious occasion — that 

cartoon of Ralph and Sam. Ralph was a sheepdog and Sam was 

a coyote. And they spent those series of episodes beating each 

other over the head and Sam would try to steal the sheep and 

Ralph would try to protect the sheep. And they went at it 

hammer and tong for three minutes every Saturday afternoon. 

And then at the end of the day they would say, good night 



3114 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2009 

Ralph, good night Sam. And they would, I guess, resolve to 

come back and do it again — but leave as friends. 

 

And, you know, when this place is working right — and it 

doesn’t work right every day — when it’s working right, we go 

at it hammer and tong and we have debates and we disagree. 

But when it’s working right, we acknowledge the fact that we 

are all here for the same reason. We think maybe we ought to 

get to places a different way and maybe at a different speed. But 

we’re here for the same reason. And so when it’s working right, 

we should say, good night Ralph and good night Sam. And so 

because of the leave that the hon. member for Nutana has asked 

for, we can say thank you, first of all, to Mr. Calvert and also, 

good night, Lorne. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And it 

truly is a privilege and an honour to be able to rise and make a 

few short comments this afternoon, and try as I may over the 

past day to think of, how do you speak about someone’s career 

in the legislature and in public life in a few short minutes? And 

it’s pretty difficult. 

 

You look at a young man that came from very humble 

beginnings, born to a working-class family on South Hill of 

Moose Jaw, went on to a role as the MLA in Moose Jaw South 

— then referred to as Moose Jaw South, now Moose Jaw 

Wakamow — then to Saskatoon Riversdale and eventually to 

hold the office of the premier of the province of Saskatchewan. 

This journey alone speaks to the many, many accomplishments 

and stories that are held over that period of time. 

 

I thought about talking a little more precisely to some of the 

accomplishments in Moose Jaw. We just have to look at our 

downtown. We look at redevelopment of a CPR [Canadian 

Pacific Railway] rail station that was sitting empty for many 

years and a number of other developments that have really 

meant the renewed success and the renewal of our community 

in Moose Jaw. 

 

I could also speak about a premier who had to make some very 

difficult decisions during some tough times to build a brighter 

future for all of us right across the province. And we went on to 

see Saskatchewan proudly become a have province and an 

economy that was changing and adapting to the demands of the 

world. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I could also talk about a few more personal 

comments that come to mind. I could tell a story about a certain 

phone booth in a certain small community that was a bit of a 

campaign. I could also talk about Mr. Calvert’s famous or 

infamous mechanical skills and the escapades of the Calvert 

family as they travelled around in their favourite mode of 

transportation, a series of buses — bigger buses and not always 

better buses — as they travelled around. Or I could touch on the 

member’s artistic and creative talents as a painter that has a 

direct connection to the Moose Jaw murals and a letter on those 

murals. Or we could talk about his musical talents playing the 

piano at a number of occasions or being part of the famous 

Loose Jaws from Moose Jaw. 

 

But what really strikes each of us who’s had the privilege of 

serving with this man is his undying commitment to and 

enjoyment of and respect for not only this province but the 

people of this province who truly make Saskatchewan. So try as 

I may, I have to give back to Mr. Calvert something that he has 

mentioned on a number of times, an Eastern proverb which in 

translation reads: 

 

I fell asleep and I dreamed that life was happiness. 

I awoke and I found that life was service. 

I served and found that service was happiness. 

 

So to Lorne Calvert and to his family and on behalf of many, 

many people not only in this legislature but in my constituency 

and across the province, thank you for realizing that your 

happiness was in the service to the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan. And best wishes for your future and we hope to 

hear from you often. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition, the very Hon. Lorne Calvert. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have given some 

consideration to the motion that is before the House. I am prone 

to support it. 

 

Although I must say, Mr. Speaker, it is an interesting 

circumstance when listening to the debate around this motion. It 

has the sense of a condolence motion, and one is not usually 

present in the Assembly for that kind of motion. I express my 

deep appreciation to the members who have spoken to this 

motion today and to the members on both sides of the House 

who have spoken to me over the course of the past few days and 

weeks. These comments and these thoughts are very 

appreciated. 

 

[12:00] 

 

I sincerely appreciate the Premier’s comments today. I did 

appreciate his and their help in 2003, less so in more recent 

times. But I sincerely appreciate both the gesture that the 

Premier’s made today and, Mr. Speaker, made yesterday in 

terms of a more personal visit that we had. 

 

In this place, Mr. Speaker, and across these aisles, we are 

political foes and we are political friends. And even in the 

height of our deepest disagreement, there is a unity, I believe, 

among us of a love for this province and its people. There is a 

unity in the common experience we all have as public life 

figures and elected members. And when we leave this place, I 

think we are more sensitive to that which makes us one as 

opposed to that which makes us separate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to note that, since question 

period, others have joined us in the gallery. This has been a day 

of some surprise for me. I’m so pleased to note that in the east 

gallery, Mr. Speaker, some former senior public officials in the 

government that I led, members today of our own caucus, the 

staff. I was so surprised to see in the rotunda just moments ago 



May 14, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3115 

— not expecting this — some of my very best friends and 

constituents from the constituency of Riversdale. And to 

identify one particularly, Ms. Yvonne McCowan who has 

served all of my time in Riversdale as our constituency 

assistant. So I thank you all for being here. 

 

I can’t take a lot of time today, but I must say this, members, 

about my constituency assistant, Yvonne McCowan. I’ve told 

this story on a number of occasions in Saskatoon, but I tell it 

here again today. When I was first elected in Riversdale and 

establishing an office, as many of us do, I posted an ad. We 

interviewed a number of people for the position of constituency 

assistant. We narrowed it down to three people. I was to 

conduct an interview with the three. On that given morning, 

Yvonne was first on the list. She brought some cinnamon buns. 

Yvonne, before her work in the constituency office, has done 

work in baking. In fact she had a little business called Yvonne 

Kneads Dough. After the cinnamon buns, there was no need to 

conduct any further interviews that day. I so much appreciate 

the fact that these friends have joined us here today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Having heard some of those comments that 

have been made today by my colleague from Nutana, Moose 

Jaw Wakamow, and the Premier, I offer this little bit of advice 

to all members, something which I read some time ago. This is 

an advice to all members. Remember this: you are never as 

good or as bad as they say you are. Lest we sometimes lose 

touch with reality in this work or sometimes succumb to 

depression, just remember we are never as good or as bad as 

they say we are. 

 

Although I must say, Mr. Speaker, I’m kind of pleased that 

Betty was in the gallery to hear these comments. With her more 

inside knowledge, she may not have been quite as generous. 

 

And if I may say, Mr. Speaker, how pleased I am to have in the 

gallery today our grandson, Levi. I will tell members that last 

Sunday, being Mother’s Day, we were together, and I suggested 

to Levi that perhaps he may want to join us here today, knowing 

that Levi has been my political advisor. He helped me call two 

elections — one win, one loss. Not bad for elementary school. 

In any event on Sunday, when I suggested to Levi that perhaps 

he would like to join us here today — this would be grandpa’s 

last day — he paused, thought about it a bit and said to me he 

wasn’t sure about that because he has a perfect attendance 

record at school, and he didn’t particularly want to ruin that. 

Lesson number one in politics: keep reality always in mind. 

 

But later in the course of the day he considered this further and 

decided, yes; he perhaps would like to be here because, 

members, Mr. Speaker, this is what he said: “Grandpa, I think I 

would like to visit that yelling place.” I have some education to 

do with my grandson. The parliament is the talking place. 

Although I must say, members, in question period today you 

did not disappoint my grandson. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I came to this House in 1986, I could not 

have imagined, would never have imagined this day nor the 

many days that have intervened. I could not have imagined a 

journey that has been as long and as varied and as rewarding. 

As Allan Blakeney often said to we who joined his caucus in 

1986, there isn’t a bad seat in this House. Having occupied 

many of them, I agree. There is, Mr. Speaker, not a bad seat in 

this House, for we enter this place only, only because of the 

confidence of our neighbours who entrust us to lead in the 

matters that concern the province we share and love, and that’s 

true no matter what seat we occupy in this legislature. They are, 

as the Premier has indicated, they are all temporary seats. But 

for a season, we are entrusted by our neighbours to together 

lead this province. To be entrusted to lead is a rare privilege. 

 

Robert Cooley has said this on the subject of leadership: “The 

first responsibility of a leader is to define reality. The last 

responsibility of a leader is to say thank you. In between you 

become servant and debtor.” 

 

With greater or lesser success, I have endeavoured to define 

reality for my season in this legislature. I have heard it reflected 

again this morning. I saw reality in the simple equation that we 

cannot make social progress without economic progress. But 

the equation, Mr. Speaker, does not stop there. The equation is 

concluded by saying, but we should not make economic 

progress that does not result in social progress. We should never 

make economic progress just for the sake of economic progress. 

It ought to result in a better life for the many. 

 

That was my reality, Mr. Speaker. And with greater or lesser 

success — and history will judge how we were able to 

accomplish towards that reality — but I am pleased, Mr. 

Speaker, and proud that at the end of our term in government I 

believe a single mom working in this province had a better 

chance to get a job than she might have when first we came to 

government. History will be the judge of the rest. 

 

In the first speech I ever made in this legislature, I quoted 

Roosevelt. I quote him again today, you know: the test of our 

progress is not in whether we have added more to the 

abundance of those who have much, but on how we have met 

the needs of those who have little. And history will be the judge 

of my time and our time here. 

 

So if the task of leadership first is to define reality and then we 

become servant in pursuing that reality and then we become a 

debtor according to Cooley, well if I don’t know much about or 

can’t rule on how successful or not we were, I can rule on this, 

Mr. Speaker. There is one thing of which I am certain. I leave 

public life a debtor, a debtor to the people of this province, a 

debtor to my party, a debtor to this institution and all the 

opportunity it has afforded me. Mr. Speaker, because of our 

democracy, because of this institution, I had that great privilege 

of leading this province through our centennial, through the 

celebration of this province’s centennial. 

 

I, as the Premier now does, had the great opportunity to 

celebrate the Saskatchewan team, be it the Olympic team or the 

football team or the hockey team. And I had the great 

opportunity handed to me to celebrate the Saskatchewan artist: 

the Andrea Menards, the Theresa Sokyrkas, Megan Lanes, Kyle 

Riabkos; our poets, Gary Hyland, Robert Currie, Lorna Crozier; 

the Joe Fafards. 

 

I had that opportunity to celebrate the Saskatchewan artist and 

had the opportunity to celebrate the best of our people, whether 

it was through our Order of Merit or the Volunteer Medal, the 



3116 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2009 

Protective Services Medal, and I think of those ceremonies. The 

most meaningful for me was always the Literacy Award. I had 

that chance. 

 

And by virtue of this institution, Mr. Speaker, I had the chance 

to sit at the table with three different Canadian prime ministers, 

two American presidents, two Russian presidents, every 

member of the current royal family. By virtue of this 

democracy, I had the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to walk in the 

corridors of the White House and to walk in the corridors of the 

Kremlin and to walk in the corridors of the Great Hall of the 

People. 

 

And I’ve had the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to have the 

signature of Randy Travis on my guitar and the signature of 

four Rolling Stones on the guitar strap. And I had the privilege 

to stand on the stage of the Junos and get the bear hug from 

Tom Jackson. And I had the privilege, Mr. Speaker, to do the 

touchdown lap around Taylor Field with Gainer the Gopher. 

 

And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, how does this work? How does this 

work, that in some ways the most unlikely candidate for 

political office — never mind high political office — the almost 

accidental tourist, the son of a lumberyard worker from the 

south hill of Moose Jaw, how could all of this opportunity have 

happened? Because of democracy, this institution, our party 

process. 

 

I leave a debtor. But much more than those things I’ve 

mentioned, I leave the debtor because, Mr. Speaker, this 

institution and this democracy and this party process of ours 

gave me the opportunity to play “Guide Me O Thou Great 

Jehovah, Cwn Rhondda” on the pump organ in the church at 

Stanley Mission and then to have a feast of fresh, fresh pickerel 

in the pavilion that stands beside that church. And this 

opportunity that was handed to me allowed me to stand on the 

highest hill in the grasslands and go over to Eastend and touch 

the T. Rex. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve had the chance to ride in a bus over every 

pothole in Saskatchewan — each of them nicely pointed out to 

me by opposition members at the time we were in government. 

I have dined in virtually every Legion hall. I have met in our 

corporate boardrooms. I have sat in our classrooms. I have 

walked the picket line, and I’ve had soup in the church 

basement. And, Mr. Speaker, in that love-hate relationship that 

exists between a people and their politicians, I have known 

nothing but hospitality in this province. In fact I once said to my 

friends in Eastend, I have never met a friendlier or more 

hospitable people who never voted for me. 

 

I leave, Mr. Speaker, public life and this institution. I leave a 

debtor. And if according to Cooley, the last responsibility of a 

leadership is to say thank you, I have cause to say thanks. My 

thanks today to a free and persistent press, the journalists who 

preserve independent expression and accountability within our 

democracy. I will miss you. Sometimes. 

 

My thanks today to the officers of this legislature, including 

yourself, Mr. Speaker, and all who serve this legislature. Our 

democracy is protected by an institution that is greater than any 

one of us, an institution that outlasts any one of us, an 

institution that survives because of the people who serve this 

legislature in all its capacities. My thanks to those who work 

here to make it so. 

 

My thanks to those with whom I work today and have in past, 

those who have served in the constituency office, those who 

today serve in our caucus office, those who have served in the 

office of Premier when I was there, those who have served our 

caucus throughout. Mr. Speaker, many of these were 

co-workers and, as I leave, I am proud to say I now count them 

friends. 

 

[12:15] 

 

My thanks, as well, to the Saskatchewan public service known 

appropriately across this country as the best public service in 

Canada. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, a particular thanks to those I worked with 

most closely in cabinet and Executive Council — my deputy 

and deputies and associate deputies. My thanks to my elected 

friends, present and past. If I’ve been able to accomplish 

anything in public life, it was always in the context of a team, 

an elected team. As my friend from North Battleford says, if 

you find a turtle on a fence post, he didn’t get there by himself. 

We do not accomplish alone. And my thanks to my elected 

colleagues, to them I owe a great deal. And as the member from 

Nutana, I think, referenced in her remarks, you know in this 

politic, we make many, many acquaintances but very few 

friends. So to my friends on both sides, I say thank you. 

 

To my party, my deepest thanks. My party. You recruited me. 

You nominated me. You volunteered election after election on 

my behalf in Moose Jaw and Saskatoon. You’ve inspired me. 

You’ve tested me. You’ve challenged me. You made me your 

leader, and you’re giving me a gracious farewell. And so to the 

party I love and will always support, my thanks. 

 

And to my family — extended to the Calverts and the 

McCurdys and the Phillips and the Henders and the Sluzalos, 

and the Pangracs and the Davidsons — sometimes who were 

proud to be identified and other times embarrassed, always 

supportive, my thanks. And to my closest — to our 

grandchildren, our children, and my wife — my thanks. 

 

There’s not a bad seat, Mr. Speaker, in this House. And I’ve 

been privileged to sit in many of them. To you who will 

continue to occupy these seats, you are never as good as they 

say you are, nor are you as bad. Yours is the task now of 

leadership, of defining our realities, and then becoming servant 

and debtor, and when your time is right, to say thanks. So love 

this province, love its people, be true to your work, be true to 

this institution, be true to the people who brought you here. And 

to quote the Electric Light Orchestra, through all the chances 

and changes of life, political life: 

 

Hold on . . . to your dream 

When you see your ship go sailing . . . 

Hold on . . . to your dream. 

 

It’s your dream that brought you here. Hold on to it. And let no 

divide between us, internal or external, ever grow wider than 

that which unites us, which is the great people in the province 

of Saskatchewan who make this all possible for us. Hold on to 



May 14, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3117 

your dream. And may the God in whom I believe bless you and 

bless this province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I personally thank the members for their kind 

words shared for the Hon. Lorne Calvert for his time and years 

of service, not only in this Chamber but to our province. And 

the question now before the Assembly is the question presented 

by the member from Saskatoon Nutana: 

 

That the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan hereby 

pay tribute to the Hon. Lorne Calvert for his 22 years of 

service to the people of Saskatchewan as a member of this 

Assembly, for his leadership and dedication to the public 

good, for his humility and faith in the equality of all 

people, for his many contributions to making 

Saskatchewan a better place to live, and for his abiding 

belief in social and economic justice for all. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I request that this 

motion be passed nemine contradicente. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion is passed nemine contradicente. 

Thank you. I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Does that mean we won that vote? 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the question was, does 

that mean we won that vote? We all won that vote, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask leave 

to pass a motion regarding the end of session and to make some 

comments. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has asked for 

leave to move a motion of adjournment as well as make some 

closing remarks. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

House Adjournment 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again 

we come to the end of a legislative session. And it certainly is 

an appropriate time at the end of this 2009 spring session to 

thank a good number of people who have contributed to the 

success of this Assembly. 

 

First of all, Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank you and the 

Clerks at the Table and the Legislative Assembly staff. I’d like 

to thank all of the elected members, the Chairs and Co-Chairs, 

and members of all the committees that serve this Assembly. I’d 

like to thank the Hansard staff, the Journals staff, the broadcast 

services staff, the Sergeant-at-Arms and all the 

commissionaires, the building maintenance staff, the library 

services staff, the cafeteria, and the interns and the summer 

students. 

 

We’d particularly like to thank the Pages for all their efforts of 

trying to accommodate the needs of the members of this 

Assembly. I’d also like to thank staff in respective caucus 

offices, the staff in the Executive Council offices, and the staff 

in all the ministers’ offices as well, and particularly to thank the 

media for their attention and dedication to what we do in this 

Assembly. 

 

I would like to thank all of my colleagues in this Assembly on 

both sides of the House. And I’d like to especially thank the 

Opposition House Leader for the close and congenial efforts 

that we’ve made to make sure that the business of this House 

was conducted in an appropriate and time-sensitive manner. 

 

But most of all, Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank our families 

on behalf of the members of this Assembly. Our duties as 

members of the Legislative Assembly take us away from home 

far too often, far too long. And we leave behind our family 

members who support us even though we are away from them 

on many occasions. And so on behalf of all members of this 

Assembly, I would like to express my thanks to all of our 

families for their support, guidance, and continued inspiration 

and love. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move by leave of the 

Assembly: 

 

That when this Assembly adjourns at the end of this sitting 

day in accordance with the resolution of the Assembly 

adopted May 13, 2009, it shall stand adjourned until 10 

a.m. on October 21, 2009, unless earlier recalled by Mr. 

Speaker upon the request of the government; and if 

recalled, Mr. Speaker shall give each member seven clear 

days notice, if possible, of such date and time. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly is a motion 

presented by the Government House Leader. Will the members 

take it as read? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the Opposition House 

Leader, the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I wish to 

join the Government House Leader in expressing thanks to 

those who serve us — the officers and others so expressed by 

the Government House Leader — on behalf of the official 

opposition. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to publicly thank the Government 



3118 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2009 

House Leader, the member from Melfort, and his staff within 

government business for all the co-operation that we’ve been 

able to achieve, that he’s provided in order to ensure that this 

place runs smoothly. Mr. Speaker, I think to many members of 

the public this place often looks chaotic. But, Mr. Speaker, 

there’s a lot of order to the chaos that is perceived here, and that 

order exists because there is a great deal of behind-the-scenes 

co-operation between the government and the opposition. 

 

And it’s thanks to the people who work in government business, 

the Government House Leader and his colleagues, that ensure 

that we on this side of the House are able to understand how a 

day will function and what is achievable and not achievable in 

order to perform the functions that we must achieve. So I thank 

those responsible on the government side for that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to express my thanks to my leader, the 

member from Riversdale, for his confidence in me to manage 

the affairs of the House for the official opposition. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I want to thank my colleagues on this side of the 

House — and also include members on the government side of 

the House, Mr. Speaker — for their confidence in my ability to 

ensure that we do have the co-operation necessary to get the 

work done that needs doing here. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to express my thanks to those 

that the Government House Leader has already mentioned — 

our immediate families and, more importantly, Mr. Speaker, my 

own family who allow me to do the things that need to be doing 

here in the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish all members of the House a very successful 

and productive time away from this place. And as the motion 

indicates, I look forward to joining all members on October 21 

when we return to this place to conduct the business of the 

people of Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Before placing the question, I would ask leave 

just to make a short statement of thanks. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Thank you. As has already been expressed by 

the two House Leaders, we’ve extended thanks to a number of 

individuals, but I would personally like to extend my thanks as 

well as the Speaker of the Assembly. 

 

And first of all to the Government House Leader and the 

Opposition House Leader in their work and their co-operation. 

And even just a few moments ago, as we said our thanks to the 

member from Riversdale, without the leadership of both the 

Premier and the member from Riversdale as well, this job — 

sitting up here and trying to be the impartial person in the 

Chamber — would be a lot more difficult. And I recognize and 

I appreciate the co-operation of members, as has been already 

indicated. 

 

This is a place for political debate. You see the political 

spokesmen on the floor of the Chamber. And yes, the debate 

becomes quite passionate. But I want to express my thanks and 

gratitude for those moments as we become passionate, but as 

well of recognizing the decorum and doing our best to bring a 

mode of decorum to the Chamber, and I express my thanks and 

gratitude. 

 

Most importantly, we extend our thanks to the people who serve 

us. We serve. We’re here as servants. Those who elected us say, 

you’re our leaders. But in reality we’re servants. And then we 

have a number of people who serve us to help make us look 

even better. 

 

And to the Clerks at the Table, to our Sergeant-at-Arms and the 

legislative security and sessional security staff and the 

committee staff, we say thank you for your commitment and 

your dedication to the members of this Assembly. 

 

To the officials who appear before the committees, and as well, 

thank you to the Pages: Brianne Coffey, Megan Fraser, Tanessa 

Johnson, Samantha Kerr, Desiree McPartlin, and Raegan 

Woods. Thank you so much for your dedication as Pages to 

serve us this past session. 

 

I also want to extend a special thank you to the other members 

of this building, many whom we don’t see: those in the Dome 

Cafeteria for their work and dedication in the many meals they 

prepared for us, but even importantly for serving us in the many 

receptions that have been held in this building; to Government 

Services; branches of the Legislative Assembly — the Clerk’s 

office, and Office of the Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel, 

communication and technology services, financial and 

administrative services, Hansard, human resource and payroll 

services, Journals, Legislative Library, and visitor services. 

 

[12:30] 

 

And I would like to also add to our Journals and Legislative 

Library, and to the technicians a special thank you as well, as 

we’ve been working through the challenges of dealing with the 

additional lighting in the building. We say thank you. 

 

And I’d like to just complete my thanks by also extending 

thanks to our constituency assistants, families of MLAs, to my 

wife personally, my children, and as some other members have 

mentioned, grandchildren that I now get to enjoy. And if you 

don’t have them yet, yes, they’re a great pleasure to have and 

then to enjoy. 

 

So to each and every one of you and to our staff in our 

constituencies, we say thank you and we wish you a pleasant 

and enjoyable summer and opportunity just to enjoy the family 

and to enjoy your constituents. 

 

I present the motion by the Government House Leader by leave 

of this Assembly: 

 

That when this Assembly adjourns at the end of this sitting 

day in accordance with the resolution of the Assembly 

adopted May 13, 2009, it shall stand adjourned until 10 

a.m. on October 21, 2009, unless earlier recalled by Mr. 

Speaker upon the request of the government; and if 

recalled, Mr. Speaker shall give each member seven clear 

days notice, if possible, of such a date and time. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 



May 14, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3119 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The Assembly stands adjourned until the call 

of the Chair. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 12:32.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3097 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3097 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3097 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3097 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3098 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3098 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3098 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3098 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3098 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3098 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3099 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3099 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3099 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Acknowledging Academic Excellence 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3099 

 Battlefords Business Excellence Awards 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3100 

 Physician of the Year 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3100 

 Norwegians Celebrate Constitution Day 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3100 

 Leadership Campaign Controversy 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3100 

 Understanding Ministerial Portfolios 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3101 

 Government Record 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3101 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Outsourcing and Crown Corporations 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3101 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3101 

 Nuclear Development 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3102 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3102 

 Minimum Wage 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3102 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3102 

 Regina Correctional Centre Escape Report 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3102 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3102 

 Pay Equity 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3102 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3103 

 2010 Olympics 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3103 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3103 

 SaskWater Operations 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3103 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3103 

 Greenhouse Gas Emissions 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3103 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3103 

 Tendering of Contracts 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3104 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3104 

 Storage of Nuclear Waste 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3104 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3104 

  



 

 Delivery of Educational Programs 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3104 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3104 

 Water Supply for Saskatchewan Communities 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3104 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 3105 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3105 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3105 

 Severance of Public Servants 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3105 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3105 

 Tuition Fees 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3105 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3105 

 Enterprise Saskatchewan and Job Creation 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3105 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3106 

 EZ Finder Phonebook and Crown Corporations 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3106 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3106 

 Consultation Meetings on Nuclear Development 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3106 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3106 

 Support for Station 20 West and the West Side of Saskatoon 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3106 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3106 

 Representation for Saskatoon Riversdale 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3107 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3107 

MOTIONS 

 Order of House Business 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3107 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 Motions for Supply 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3108 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3108 

APPROPRIATION BILL 

 Bill No. 96 — The Appropriation Act, 2009 (No. 3) 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3108 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Debatable) 

 Return No. 35 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3109 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3109 

 Return No. 36 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3109 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3109 

 Return No. 42 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3109 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3109 

ROYAL ASSENT ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3110 

MOTIONS 

 Farewell to Lorne Calvert 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3111 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3112 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3114 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3114 

 House Adjournment 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3117 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3117 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3118 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 


