




















































Hansard: March 16, 2009


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 33A  MONDAY, MARCH 16, 2009, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2273 

 March 16, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

Clerk: — I wish to advise the Assembly that Mr. Speaker will 

not be present today to open today‟s sitting. 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Tourism. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a pleasure to 

rise today to introduce to you and through you to the members 

of the Legislative Assembly a number of guests we are very 

pleased to have with us here today. 

 

Many members met this group earlier today during a ceremony 

that took place. This group is seated in the Speaker‟s gallery, 

and I ask them to rise and give us a wave as I introduce them. 

 

I‟m very pleased to introduce Colten Teubert, a young man 

from White Rock, BC [British Columbia] who played defence 

for the Regina Pats. Colten has a great hockey resumé, having 

won a gold medal with Team Canada at the 2009 World Junior 

Championship in Ottawa, and of course the gold medal at the 

2008 World Under-18 Championship in Russia. Colten was 

drafted in the first round by the Los Angeles Kings in 2008. 

 

We also welcome Jordan Eberle, forward with the Regina Pats 

and one of the top scorers in the WHL [Western Hockey 

League]. Jordan‟s resumé is equally impressive in that he also 

won gold at the World Junior Hockey Championship in Ottawa 

last year. In that tournament, he scored the tying and winning 

shootout goal to help Canada defeat Russia in the semifinal. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — He also won gold at the 2008 World 

Under-18 Championship in Russia. Jordan was drafted in the 

first round by Edmonton in 2008. 

 

The next individuals are all involved in various ways with the 

World Junior Hockey Championship, which of course are 

happening in Regina and Saskatoon from December 26, 2009 to 

January 5, 2010. Should I repeat? December 26 to January 5. 

 

Mr. Nicholson, the president and CEO [chief executive officer] 

of Hockey Canada. Mr. Nicholson is in charge of all operations 

for competitions that Canada participates in internationally, 

including the Olympic Winter Games and the World Junior 

Championships. I would be remiss if I didn‟t also mention that 

during Bob‟s tenure with Hockey Canada, he has overseen 

Canada winning 49 medals in international competition since 

1990 — 33 which were gold, three Olympic medals, and 12 

World Junior Championship gold medals. 

 

Mr. Jack Brodsky, hails from Saskatoon, who is president of the 

2010 host organizing committee; Mr. John Lee, senior 

vice-president of the host organizing committee and president 

of the Regina host organizing committee. There are also 

executive committee members present and staff that are here 

with us today: Mr. Dave Pettigrew, Al Hubbs, Joe Bloski, and 

Hugh Vassos. Please give these folks a very warm 

Saskatchewan welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s my pleasure, on 

behalf of the official opposition, to welcome all of our special 

guests here today in the legislature. I think it‟s fairly clear to all 

of us that you are welcome here any day that you would like to 

come. We really appreciate having you here as part of the 

celebration of what it means to be Saskatchewan. And I think 

that what we‟re going to see next December and January is a 

little bit of a hint of how proud we are of this province. I think 

that that‟s a message that all of us want to convey. 

 

We especially want to give our thanks to the younger members 

up there, Colten Teubert and Jordan Eberle. We‟ve been very 

proud to have you as part of the Regina Pats, but more 

importantly as part of Team Canada this year, and all of us in 

Saskatchewan will be following your careers in the years to 

come. So greetings on behalf of the opposition. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Municipal 

Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It‟s 

my great pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all 

members of this Hon. Assembly Mr. Michael Fougere, a former 

colleague in municipal government, respected current member 

of Regina City Council, and currently also the president of the 

Saskatchewan Construction Association. Mr. Speaker, I ask all 

members to join with me in welcoming Mr. Fougere to his 

legislature. Thank you so much. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to 

introduce to you and to the other members of the Assembly, 

seated in the west gallery with Mr. Fougere is Monte Allan who 

is one of my constituents, active in the Construction 

Association, and also is the father-in-law of Tim Highmoor who 

is the chief of staff to the Minister of Agriculture. I‟m not sure 

whether he‟s down today to deal with construction associations 

or just to make sure that his son-in-law is doing what he‟s paid 

to do. In either event, please join me in welcoming Mr. Allan. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Northwest. 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, in your gallery I‟d like 

to welcome Brian and Barb Larratt and their daughter, Rebecca, 



2274 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2009 

and a member of their congregation, Mike Garbanewski. Barb 

and Brian are two of my most favourite pastors and they are 

from the Gateway Christian Fellowship here in Regina, and do 

great work for the folk of Regina. I‟d like to welcome you to 

your Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

rise to present a petition that speaks to the inadequate access to 

quality and affordable child care, and points out that it‟s a major 

roadblock for parents who want to access the labour market or 

to further their own education. It‟s well recognized, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that quality child care delivers significant economic 

and social dividends to our province. And it also recognizes in 

the petition that too many Saskatchewan families are struggling 

and unable to find quality child care for their children, and this 

limits their future in the province. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately add at least 1,000 new child 

care spaces in Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I so present on behalf of Saskatchewan 

families and our littlest of citizens. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

rise to present a petition calling for wage equity for CBO 

[community-based organization] workers. We know that many 

of the folks working in the CBO sector are traditionally been 

underpaid and continue to earn poverty-level wages. I‟ll read 

the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the development and 

implementation of a multi-year funding plan to ensure that 

CBO workers achieve wage equity with employees who 

perform work of equal value in government departments. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, these folks come from the 

communities in Saskatchewan, including Yorkton, Watrous, 

North Battleford, Assiniboia, Tisdale, Nipawin, and Saskatoon. 

Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from The 

Battlefords. 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of a new Saskatchewan 

Hospital. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners note that in February 

2006 the Government of Saskatchewan committed funds and 

resources to the development and construction of a new 

Saskatchewan Hospital at North Battleford. Mr. Speaker, the 

petitioners ask: 

 

. . . that the Legislative Assembly call upon the 

Government of Saskatchewan to immediately recommit 

funds and resources for the continued development and 

construction of a new Saskatchewan Hospital at North 

Battleford and provide the Prairie North Regional Health 

Authority with the authority necessary to complete this 

essential and much-needed project. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitioners are from the city of North 

Battleford and the town of Battleford. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a pleasure to 

stand today and present a petition in support of expansion of the 

graduate retention program. Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately expand the graduate retention 

program to include master‟s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals that signed this petition are 

students from the University of Regina and the University of 

Saskatchewan. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions in support of a reduction in the education 

portion of property tax. These are needed by Saskatchewan 

families and business, Mr. Speaker, who are hit particularly 

hard by the implications of reassessment here in 2009. The 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to stop withholding and to provide significant, 

sustainable, long-term property tax relief to property 

owners by 2009 through significantly increasing the 

provincial portion of education funding. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions, Mr. Speaker, are signed by concerned citizens 

here in Regina. I so present. 

 



March 16, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2275 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Glass Slipper Benefit 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Friday my wife 

and I had the pleasure of attending the second annual Glass 

Slipper Benefit for the Princess Shop. The Princess Shop is a 

non-profit organization operating in Saskatchewan, founded by 

Chantal Moloney and Ainsley Robertson. The purpose of the 

Princess Shop is to create enhanced graduation experiences for 

female students by providing them with mentorship, support, 

and the tools to succeed after graduation. 

 

Chantal and Ainsley recognized the need to provide assistance 

to young women who are not able to afford the expenses 

associated with celebrating the important milestone of 

graduation. In true Saskatchewan style, these two individuals 

settled on a mission and started pouring their energy and ideas 

into the creation of the Princess Shop. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Glass Slipper Benefit was a great success. The 

event was emceed by the talented Devin Heroux. Musical 

entertainment was provided by Cidne Treen of Saskatoon and 

Jodi King of Winnipeg. The keynote address was given by Miss 

Canada, Shannon Smadella. 

 

The night was documented by Shannon Brunner, who is the 

official photographer for the Princess Shop. The benefit was 

well supported by the Saskatoon business community, as 

evidenced by a great selection of silent and live auction items. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our province is at its best when we recognize and 

encourage the potential in our young people. I would ask all 

members to join me in thanking the Princess Shop for its role in 

fostering and celebrating success for so many young 

Saskatchewan women. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the 

Crowns. 

 

World Junior Hockey Championships 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I‟m thrilled to announce to all 

Saskatchewan hockey fans that the much anticipated 2010 

World Junior Hockey Championships is getting very close to 

arriving in our province. 

 

Earlier today the Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sports 

and I had the pleasure of welcoming Mr. Bob Nicholson and 

Mr. Scott Farley from Hockey Canada to our province today. 

 

All eyes will be on Saskatchewan between December 22 and 

January 5, 2010 to watch the top 10 international junior teams 

compete. Thirty-one games will be watched live by 330,000 

fans, and millions more will watch TSN‟s [The Sports 

Network] 12 live broadcasts as Team Canada strives for a sixth 

consecutive gold medal. Six in Sask, Mr. Speaker, is what 

they‟re calling it. 

 

The world will be watching the action closely, not realizing that 

more than 3,000 Saskatchewan volunteers will be working 

behind the scenes, making the tournament run flawlessly. Mr. 

Speaker, these volunteers are to be recognized and 

congratulated for the countless hours of their time that they 

donate to put Saskatchewan on the international hockey stage. 

 

And today I want to thank executive committee members Jack 

Brodsky, president; Joe Bloski, vice-president; John Lee, senior 

vice-president, Regina; Dave Pettigrew, senior vice-president 

facilities; Hugh Vassos, senior vice-president business and 

marketing; and Al Hubbs, senior vice-president Saskatchewan 

Hockey Association. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if it wasn‟t for all the volunteers, the province 

wouldn‟t be reaping the benefits of an estimated $30 million in 

economic impact. 

 

Mr. Speaker, each and every day we learn Saskatchewan is a 

very exciting place to be. The upcoming world championships 

will most certainly add to that excitement. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Breaking the Silence Conference 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It was my 

pleasure to attend the opening of the 12th annual Breaking the 

Silence Conference, along with the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. This conference has a proud history of meaningful 

education, awareness, and activism on issues of sexual 

orientation and gender identity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, far too often many gay, lesbian, bisexual, and 

transgendered people live with depression, isolation, abuse, and 

hurt. It is integral, Mr. Speaker, that our society and our 

institutions such as education build understanding, recognition, 

and affirmation on these issues. 

 

The conference was sponsored by the University of 

Saskatchewan‟s College of Education and an opening message 

was brought by acting dean, Dr. Vivian Hajnal. 

 

I want to recognize the many supporting organizations: the STF 

[Saskatchewan Teachers‟ Federation]; SIAST [Saskatchewan 

Institute of Applied Science and Technology] student affairs; 

the USSU‟s [University of Saskatchewan Students‟ Union] 

Pride Centre, Women‟s Centre, and Victim Advocate; the U of 

S‟s [University of Saskatchewan] department of women and 

gender studies, President‟s Advisory Council on the Status of 

Women, and the Women‟s Studies Research Unit; PFLAG 

Canada, Sexual Health Centre Saskatoon, Avenue Community 

Centre, AIDS Saskatoon, Turning the Tide, NDP [New 

Democratic Party] Rainbow Pride, and the Saskatoon Straight 

and Gay Alliance. 

 



2276 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2009 

I want to thank Don Cochrane, Kit Loewen, and the many 

organizers that ensured this conference‟s success. I ask all 

members of this Assembly to join with me in thanking the 

organizers, supporters, and leaders of Breaking the Silence. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw North. 

 

Contributions to Agriculture 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The 

family of Les and Judy Cochrane were recognized as the Moose 

Jaw Farm Family of the Year this past weekend by the Moose 

Jaw Exhibition Company. Each year the Moose Jaw Exhibition 

Company acknowledges a family that demonstrates a 

commitment to agriculture and their community in the Moose 

Jaw and surrounding area. 

 

Les and Judy Cochrane have operated their Rafter C Ranch 10 

miles west of Moose Jaw for more than half a century, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. Their son Wayne and his wife Lesley now run 

much of the farm operation along with their two children, 

Courtney and Devon. That‟s three generations, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

This weekend‟s special evening also recognized members of the 

District 8 4-H for their oratory compositions. Another highlight 

was the induction of Irene Bishoff and Glenda Hennenfent into 

the District 8 4-H Hall of Fame. 

 

Mr. Speaker, agriculture plays a significant role in the 

Saskatchewan economy, and our government recognizes that 

and takes actions to ensure the producers get the support they 

need. I would like to invite all members of this House to join 

me in congratulating the family of Les and Judy Cochrane, 

Irene Bishoff, and Glenda Hennenfent for the invaluable 

contributions they have made to the agricultural of 

Saskatchewan and the way of life. Thank you, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Young Entrepreneur Builds Business in Moose Jaw 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Recently, young entrepreneur Jillian Bilawchuk completed her 

first year as the owner of a retailing consulting business in 

Moose Jaw. Jillian returned to her hometown of Moose Jaw and 

ultimately charted her own business course as the inspiration 

and founder of Jillian‟s Design Elements. After finishing 

university, where she studied human ecology with minors in 

design and marketing, topped with an interior decorating 

certificate, she decided to become her own boss. 

 

Jillian believes everything happens for a reason, explaining the 

path her career has taken. What presented itself was an 

opportunity to become the local Benjamin Moore colour 

consultant, and before long she had taken the next step and 

opened a contemporary and unique store. Jillian‟s goal was to 

survive the first year, and with that behind her she hopes to 

continue building her business, which may lead to the 

expansion or even addition of another location. What began as a 

Benjamin Moore outlet now has the feel of a boutique with 

everything from furnishings and wall hangings to jewellery. In 

addition she operates an interior decorating consulting service 

alongside her retail operations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Jillian is just one of a number of young female 

entrepreneurs who have livened up Main Street in Moose Jaw 

and they are welcome to have there. Mr. Speaker, I ask all 

members to join me in congratulating Jillian and wishing her 

many more years of great business success. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Northwest. 

 

Social Work Week 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am pleased to rise 

today in the House to inform you that the government has 

proclaimed this week, March 15 to 21, as Social Work Week in 

Saskatchewan. As you may know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of 

my degrees is in social work. This proclamation is made in 

honour of the province‟s social workers and in recognition of 

the crucial and often challenging work that they do on behalf of 

the citizens of Saskatchewan. 

 

In the case of pensioners and other older adults living in our 

province, the compassion and expertise of social workers help 

them lead fuller lives and enjoy more comfortable and 

independent retirements. In addition to the tremendous 

dedication they provide Saskatchewan seniors, social workers 

provide an invaluable service to individuals requiring support 

and skills development within school settings, community 

organizations, hospitals, and the correctional system, just to 

name a few. Social workers also provide compassion and 

support to those who face the devastating circumstances of 

poverty, violence, and abuse. 

 

Saskatchewan social workers tirelessly contribute their time and 

energy to helping those within our province who have found 

themselves on the wrong side of advantage. This work is to be 

applauded, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and this proclamation is one 

small way our province can show our appreciation to hundreds 

of men and women who have dedicated their careers to helping 

others. 

 

I know all members of this House will want to join me today in 

recognizing the efforts of these dedicated professionals as part 

of Social Work Week in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from The 

Battlefords. 

 



March 16, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2277 

Affordable Housing in The Battlefords 

 

Mr. Taylor: — There are a number of issues that the people in 

The Battlefords want this government to act on in the very near 

future. Of course construction of a new Saskatchewan Hospital 

is high on everyone‟s list, as is education property tax relief. 

But also high on everyone‟s list is additional, adequate, and 

affordable housing. 

 

The Battlefords have seen a lot of pressure on housing in the 

last three years. The vacancy rate for rental accommodation 

throughout the city and town is very low. There is a lot of 

negative pressure on seniors; on students moving into town to 

take on new employment-related courses at North West 

Regional College; on immigrants who have been able to utilize 

the province‟s immigrant nominee program to secure jobs in 

The Battlefords; on young families who have moved to The 

Battlefords to take on some of the newly opened up jobs in the 

community; and on First Nations people who have come to The 

Battlefords for a variety of reasons, not the least of which are 

educational and employment opportunities. 

 

This government needs to announce new projects in The 

Battlefords with funds already allocated to The Battlefords. 

Prior to 2007 provincial election, $3 million was committed to 

The Battlefords for affordable housing. After the election the 

minister said the commitment would be honoured and 

applications for that funding were received. During the last 

year, no new projects have been announced — $3 million 

would be very helpful to provide additional, affordable housing 

units in The Battlefords. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I remain optimistic that the provincial 

government will keep their $3 million commitment and promise 

to the people of The Battlefords. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Hon. Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Western Economic Partnership 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, the Vancouver and national media had a lot to report 

about our Premier‟s visit to British Columbia last Friday. 

Vancouver News1130 reported, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the 

Premier “has joined a trade and labour agreement that already 

exists between BC and Alberta.” The Saturday Globe and Mail 

reported that Saskatchewan will be included in an Alberta-BC 

agreement that will take effect on April 1, the same day that 

TILMA [Trade, Investment and Labour Mobility Agreement] 

comes into effect. And the Canadian Press reported that “the 

three westernmost premiers pledged Friday to form an 

extensive economic partnership.” 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because Saskatchewan journalists 

were not afforded the opportunity on Friday to ask questions of 

the Premier, or premiers, I put a question to the Premier today: 

what commitments did the Premier of Saskatchewan make on 

behalf of Saskatchewan people when he was in British 

Columbia last weekend? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I want to 

thank the member for the question. Well, Mr. Speaker, we 

know we have a very effective press gallery here at the 

legislature and a very effective media right across our province. 

And in this particular instance, the story of what happened last 

Friday, the stories that have been reported here in the province 

are, as we can well suppose them to be, accurate. 

 

The stories that the hon. member was quoting from are not 

accurate. There was a little bit of work done with respect to 

TILMA on the Friday meeting — the agreement between the 

province of Alberta and BC. They were doing some 

finalization, were the premiers of those two provinces. 

 

We were not at the table, Mr. Speaker, because we are not a 

signator of TILMA. Mr. Speaker, what we will be doing though 

is pursuing a brand new economic partnership with BC and 

Alberta. In Western Canada, the three have provinces represent 

a half a trillion market of 9 million people, Mr. Speaker. It is a 

strength of the Canadian economy. It can be even stronger if 

we‟re working together. 

 

We signalled we‟re prepared to move forward with that 

co-operative work, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but only if the 

concerns we had about TILMA are addressed in any new 

agreement, Mr. Speaker. That was the promise we made in the 

campaign. That‟s the promise we‟ll keep. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Premier is right to 

raise the concerns about our municipalities, about our Crown 

corporations — a variety of concerns that Saskatchewan people 

have raised concerning TILMA. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, some might say . . . I think it was Juliet who 

said, you know, a rose by any other name smells just as sweet. 

Well I‟m not sure, I‟m not sure, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if the 

smell here is sweet or not. 

 

My question to the Premier is this: he has raised these concerns 

about the Crown corporations, about the municipalities. Has he 

raised those concerns at the table with the premiers of Alberta 

and British Columbia? Mr. Deputy Speaker, will the Premier 

inform this House whether the governments of Alberta and BC 

are prepared to amend their TILMA agreement to accommodate 

these concerns? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When our party, 

then in opposition in June ‟07, announced our position with 



2278 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2009 

respect to TILMA after the hearings that were called — 

appropriately, I think by the previous government — we said 

quite clearly that we couldn‟t sign on to TILMA for some of the 

reasons that the hon. member has just indicated. 

 

But the article that covered our announcement is quite accurate 

when it says, and I quote, it was from the Leader-Post, an 

article written by Angela Hall, when it says, “He said the . . .” 

 

He [being myself] said the Sask. Party is still in favour of 

working on trade agreements between [the] provinces, and 

would like to see occasional joint cabinet meetings 

between Western provinces, similar to what B.C. and 

Alberta . . . [has done.] 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have been consistent. I have been consistent 

with the position stated last June. We‟ve made it very clear to 

Alberta and BC that we have these concerns about the 

agreement. What we‟ve agreed to enter into though is a western 

economic partnership. And as a part of that, we are going to 

look at opportunities to reduce barriers to trade consistent with 

what we said prior to the election. 

 

We know that labour mobility is already coming to the entire 

country, a process undertaken by that member when he was the 

premier, together with the other premiers of Canada. But this 

new agreement with BC and Alberta will also include us 

coordinating, co-operating on trade offices in the Asia-Pacific, 

co-operating on an innovation agenda so that our three 

provinces will continue to be an economic powerhouse in the 

country, creating opportunities for our respective residents, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Premier has 

confirmed that he has agreed to entering into a partnership, I 

think he calls it the western Canadian economic partnership. 

Mr. Speaker, my question then is a very direct one to the 

Premier: before he signs, on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan, something called the western Canadian 

economic partnership, will the Premier commit today that the 

people of Saskatchewan will see a full draft of this agreement 

before it‟s signed? 

 

Because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we‟re learning. We can read the 

headlines, but it‟s in the fine print of this government that 

sometimes we have the concern. So will the Premier today 

commit that a full draft of any such agreement would be 

provided to the people of Saskatchewan before his government 

signs it? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the position of our 

party was very clear in opposition. It has remained consistent 

through the election process and post-election. Our position has 

not changed. And that very transparent position should be 

expected, on the part of our citizens, to be honoured by the 

government. And it will be, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We said very clearly we had concerns with respect to municipal 

autonomy, with respect to the impact of the agreement on the 

Crowns, especially their subsidiaries. Mr. Speaker, that‟s why 

we‟re not part of TILMA. TILMA‟s going to go ahead April 1, 

‟09. It‟s implemented April 1, ‟09. The partners will be Alberta 

and British Columbia, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We are going to pursue though a western economic partnership 

that contemplates much more than just trade, that contemplates 

much more than just labour mobility, Mr. Deputy Speaker. One 

that seeks to ensure that this part of the country continues to 

lead all of Canada, continues to provide economic opportunities 

as we see in unprecedented ways here in the province of 

Saskatchewan, and in a way that is very transparently consistent 

to what we said before the campaign, during the campaign, and 

after the campaign. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Official 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the record of this government on 

transparency has become very dismal in the last little while. Not 

so long ago, they signed the trade agreement across Canada, the 

labour mobility agreement across Canada. We couldn‟t even get 

a copy of the agreement after it was signed. 

 

My question to the Premier is a very direct one: will he commit 

today that the people of Saskatchewan will see a full draft of 

any economic partnership agreement before he signs it on 

behalf of the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, that government, that 

government chose not to even participate in discussions on 

TILMA — that‟s unfortunate — when they were the 

government. I think perhaps the concerns we all had about the 

agreement from a Saskatchewan perspective could have been 

accommodated, and we would be part of this agreement now. 

 

Western Canada represents a marketplace of a half-trillion 

dollars and 9 million people, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but our 

governments could be doing better. We could be doing better at 

reducing barriers between the two provinces. Right now if you 

own cattle on one side of the border and you want to move your 

own cattle to the other side, you need an inspector, Mr. Speaker. 

Right now if you‟re registered to do business in Saskatchewan, 

you‟d have to re-register in Alberta, re-register in BC. 

 

We will seek to reduce the barriers to the trade between these 

two regions, consistent with what we said prior to the election. 

We will seek every opportunity to further strengthen our 

economy, Mr. Speaker, in a province that today has the 

strongest economic record in the Dominion of Canada. 



March 16, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2279 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Discussions with Manitoba Hydro 

 

Mr. Quennell: — In February Saskatchewan‟s Crown 

Investments minister took a trip east to discuss a 

multi-million-dollar hydro deal with the Manitoba Energy 

minister. The trip was not listed on the public calendar of 

events, and Saskatchewan people learned of the trip through a 

Winnipeg Free Press story saying the deal was progressing 

well. 

 

Secrecy and spin are the order of the day for this government. 

To the minister: why the secrecy? Why did people of 

Saskatchewan have to find out about the trip and the proposed 

hydro deal after the fact? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 

Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Well, Mr. Speaker, at the request 

of Mr. Greg Selinger, Minister of Finance, province of 

Manitoba, I did go to Manitoba. And also Mr. Rondeau, 

Minister of Energy. They had wanted to meet members of the 

new government in Saskatchewan. They wanted to find out, 

what‟s this new administration all about? What are we hearing 

about SaskTel covering all of Saskatchewan with high-speed 

Internet services? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I was happy to 

accept their invitation. I was happy to go to the Manitoba 

legislature, talk about SaskPower, talk about the Crown 

corporations, and talk about the innovative things this 

government is doing to lead the country. I will accept any 

invitation like that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, on February 3 a spokesperson 

for the minister said the meeting was really preliminary. On 

February 28 the Winnipeg Free Press reported the Manitoba 

chief executive officer saying, “„We want to talk and get 

something going this spring‟ . . .” And on March 5 the minister 

said, when referring to his proposed deal with Manitoba, “It‟s 

time for us to act upon it.” 

 

To the minister: how did a multi-million-dollar deal go from 

being in the preliminary stages to the minister acting on it in 

one month? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What we 

did hear from the Manitoba government, and what we‟ve heard 

in this House before, is that for 17 years very little progress was 

made on SaskPower or any other type of issue, Mr. Speaker, for 

17 years. We talked about enhancing our interconnects between 

SaskPower and Manitoba Hydro — something that can be done 

to enhance both operations. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we talked about wind power: about what 

Manitoba‟s doing; what Saskatchewan‟s doing; and what 

maybe we can do together. Mr. Speaker, no agreements were 

signed. It was indeed a preliminary meeting. We got to know 

each other first. 

 

What we did agree on was that little was accomplished over the 

last number of years. More will be accomplished from this day 

forward. That‟s what‟ll happen, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The people of 

Saskatchewan have a right to know what the government plans 

on doing with provincial money. This government owes the 

people of Saskatchewan an explanation. This proposed deal 

raises more questions than answers. How much is it going to 

cost? What is the right price before the minister signs a 

long-term deal? Who has the minister consulted with? Where is 

the due diligence. 

 

To the minister: will the Saskatchewan Party stop all the 

secrecy and become open and transparent with the people of 

Saskatchewan? Will the minister provide the people of 

Saskatchewan with the facts of the deal before he signs 

anything? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 

Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — We did talk about hydroelectric 

generation, Mr. Speaker. We did talk about many things, and 

we talked about certain facts. 

 

One fact that I would like to talk about today, Mr. Speaker, is 

what the Manitoba government was doing in the ‟40s and ‟50s 

and ‟60s. They were building hydroelectric plants. What was 

the NDP [New Democratic Party] government under Allan 

Blakeney doing? They were buying up our own potash mines, 

Mr. Speaker. That‟s why today, that‟s why today when you 

mention potash around North America, people are concerned 

when it‟s in the same sentence as the NDP.  

 

Mr. Speaker, Manitoba governments of all stripes have done a 

good job in putting hydroelectric generation forward. We‟ve 

talked about them. We learned from them. We talked about 

what we can do together. And yes, SaskPower is looking at 

additional hydro-generation in the province and any other 



2280 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2009 

power that we can purchase to support the fastest growing 

economy in the country, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, the Winnipeg Free Press 

described the proposed deal as “. . . a power sale that would 

help Hydro keep electricity rates artificially low for Manitoba 

homeowners.” 

 

To the minister: is the reason for all the secrecy because he 

doesn‟t want Saskatchewan people to know he is hammering 

out a deal that will subsidize Manitoba rates while 

Saskatchewan people are having their utilities cut off because of 

soaring utilities rates at home? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Recognize the Minister for Crown 

Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I would like nothing 

more than to be able to say at that very first meeting, that 

one-day meeting in Winnipeg, that we hammered out a deal. 

But in order for that to happen, Mr. Speaker, there would have 

had to be many years of groundwork that is done beforehand. 

And that wasn‟t done by that administration, Mr. Speaker. 

That‟s a mistake that we will not make. 

 

We will be looking forward . . . We will ensure that there‟s 

enough safe, reliable power generated in the province of 

Saskatchewan. If there‟s a deal with our neighbours to the east 

or to the west or anywhere in the country, we will look at it 

because it‟s all part of being responsible and being able to 

provide that service to Saskatchewan residents. Having the 

fastest growing economy in the country is a great responsibility, 

and it‟s something that we‟re up to, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

SaskTel Services 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Thursday we 

learned the Sask Party was hiding their decision to snap off 

directory assistance, a key component of SaskTel. Then the 

minister said recommendations for outsourcing are given to the 

government and cabinet made a decision. Mr. Speaker, when 

the president of SaskTel was asked about outsourcing operator 

assistance — get this — he said, I don‟t believe in outsourcing 

directory assistance. 

 

To the minister: with the president of SaskTel so clearly 

opposed to outsourcing directory assistance, why then did the 

Sask Party demand the outsourcing of operator assistance? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 

Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. I‟d like to snap on to that question. I can tell all 

members opposite and all members of this House, that the NDP 

certainly did outsource each and every year, and each and every 

Crown corporation and within the executive side of government 

as well. 

 

I can tell the House today, Mr. Speaker, that SaskTel will not be 

outsourcing directory assistance operators, Mr. Speaker. The 

policy has not changed. It‟s the same policy that was in place 

under members opposite. It‟s the same policy that was in place 

under the NDP government for their terms in office. The 

SaskTel board and the SaskTel management will not be 

restricted. They will be able to make their recommendations 

towards the CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan] board and towards this government. That‟s what 

happened in this instance, Mr. Speaker. Their recommendation 

was not to outsource directory assistance operators. They 

decided not to do it and it‟s the right decision. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister has said 

previously that SaskTel‟s core services will not be outsourced 

and yet operator assistance is being outsourced. Most 

Saskatchewan people understand directory assistance to be a 

core service. 

 

But 5,200 people who work at SaskTel, along with the rest of 

Saskatchewan, would like to know what the minister considers 

core service. Last week, Mr. Speaker, the minister said he 

would work on a list of SaskTel‟s core service. He‟s had 17 

months to complete that list now. 

 

To the minister: will he provide the employees of SaskTel and 

the rest of Saskatchewan with the list that he considers core 

SaskTel services? Will he table that list today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 

Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I‟d be happy to speak 

to that list today. SaskTel‟s core services and networks include 

telecommunications, wireless broadband, Internet security, 

information systems, entertainment, and the Saskatchewan 

directories. Mr. Speaker, those are core services that are the 

responsibility of SaskTel. 

 

But even more important than all of those services listed, Mr. 

Speaker, the core, the core service, the core part of SaskTel is 

indeed the customer, the Saskatchewan resident that can rely on 

world-class service, that can rely on coverage that is more 

aggressive than ever before in the province of Saskatchewan. 

That‟s what the people of Saskatchewan asked for. That‟s what 

this government committed to on November 7. Mr. Speaker, 



March 16, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2281 

that‟s what Saskatchewan residents deserve and they will get 

from this government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, let‟s review. The minister has 

said that SaskTel core services will not be outsourced. And 

when asked to provide a list of core services to table it, he 

hasn‟t tabled it. Then he tells Saskatchewan people only 

services, then he says only services that have become routine 

. . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. The member has a right 

to put a question. I‟m having trouble hearing it. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Then the minister says that only services that 

have become routine will be outsourced. And once again, we 

don‟t have a list of what‟s routine in his estimation. What 

SaskTel services are routine? 

 

To the minister: is the reason he‟s ducking these questions 

because he doesn‟t want to be honest with the shareholders of 

SaskTel, the people of Saskatchewan, and tell them what the 

government‟s plan is? Why doesn‟t he just say that plan is to 

chip away and weaken SaskTel so they can go ahead and 

privatize it? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 

Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, routine services that 

were outsourced by the NDP government in 2004 were the 

spam filters. In 2005, the virus controls were outsourced by the 

NDP government at that time. Mr. Speaker, the biggest 

outsourcing ever. The biggest outsourcing ever contemplated by 

the Government of Saskatchewan happened on October 28, 

2002 and I quote: 

 

EDS came to me with a proposal that I thought was pretty 

interesting. It looked at ways for us to reform the 

government‟s IT system that would be more efficient, that 

would provide a return to taxpayers, and that would look 

at us creating more high-paying IT jobs in the province. 

 

Who said that? The hon. Andrew Thomson, minister 

responsible for Information Technology. NDP minister, Mr. 

Speaker. Enough said. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Regina Correctional Centre Escape Report 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Minister of Corrections 

cites privacy concerns as the reason for his blackout of large 

portions of the report into the escapes from the Regina 

Correctional Centre last August. But, Mr. Speaker, politicians 

and their officials simply aren‟t qualified to decide what 

constitutes a violation of privacy. There is however an 

independent officer of this Assembly who is qualified and paid 

to do just that — the Information and Privacy Commissioner. 

 

To the minister: will he agree to refer the original, unedited 

report to the Information and Privacy Commissioner for review 

with a view to deciding what additional portions can be made 

public? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. On 

Thursday last week, we released the report, the first ever 

independent external investigation report into an escape in this 

province‟s correction system. That report is very, very 

important to this government, Mr. Speaker. It does a number of 

things, but there‟s 23 recommendations that provide a 

framework for this government to move forward as a blueprint 

on the road ahead, Mr. Speaker, to fix long-standing concerns in 

corrections. 

 

One of the most important commitments this year, Mr. Speaker, 

I said on Thursday, was $87 million for a new remand centre in 

Saskatoon, never been looked at by the previous administration; 

over $9 million for safety, systems, and infrastructure upgrades 

to all our correctional facilities. Once again, Mr. Speaker, been 

asked to do it for 20 years by the SGEU [Saskatchewan 

Government and General Employees‟ Union]; never once did 

they ever get their concerns ever listened to, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have a short-term, medium- and 

long-term solution and we‟re committed to those goals, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the main questions 

Saskatchewan people want answers is why it took so long for 

the public to be informed of six dangerous inmates on the loose. 

Fifteen hours passed between the time police were first notified 

and the time the public was notified, but that section of the 

report that might answer those very questions is heavily 

censored, Mr. Speaker. To the minister: why did the Sask Party 

censor this part of the report, and what are they trying to hide? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Well thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 

thanks to the member opposite for that question. What I want to 

say, Mr. Speaker, is that report included information that was 



2282 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2009 

vetted to protect public safety and the safety and security of the 

Regina Provincial Correctional Centre and ensure the privacy of 

staff employed in the corrections system at all levels. And you 

know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker? It ensured the privacy of 

those inmates who did not escape August 24, 2008. 

 

All the people that contributed to the report in one way or the 

other — whether they were staff, inmates, working that night, 

or otherwise — for privacy, safety concerns of everyone 

involved, that information was vetted for due reason, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan people have 

been asking since last August how long it took for the minister 

to be informed of the escapes and what impact that delay had on 

notifying the public. But again this section of the report that 

could answer those questions has been blacked out. 

 

The minister does not have the right to expect privacy in this 

matter. He is accountable to the people of this province, Mr. 

Speaker. To the minister: will he give Saskatchewan people the 

answers they deserve? Will he refer that unedited report to the 

Information and Privacy Commissioner, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

or will he continue to hide the truth? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. On 

March 12, 2009 the Saskatchewan Party government lifted the 

NDP‟s total blackout policy, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The blackout 

policies discussed in Hansard of April 9, 2003, the minister at 

the time, the former member for Regina South, said while 

refusing the Saskatchewan Party opposition‟s request that he 

table an investigation report about an escape, and I quote, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker: 

 

Mr. Chair, obviously for security reasons I‟m not in a 

position to table the report in the Assembly. And if the 

member has questions, I‟m prepared to do my best to 

answer them. 

 

So it is true, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The NDP did not get any 

information from escape reports when they formed the 

government, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But that‟s because . . . Notice 

not once did the other previous government ever release a report 

into an escape, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I will say one thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the member 

opposite. There is a process in place under the freedom of 

information and privacy Act. He can follow that . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Time has expired. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Mid-Year Capital Projects 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I‟m 

pleased to have the opportunity to inform members of this 

Assembly regarding a number of mid-year capital projects — 

projects that the Ministry of Advanced Education, Employment 

and Labour will implement as part of our government‟s 

accelerated infrastructure, $500 million economic booster shot. 

 

Our government is investing $26.4 million in four 

post-secondary institutions. These investments help us to 

achieve two important goals — it helps to address our ongoing 

talent challenge by enhancing our capacity to educate 

Saskatchewan people, and, more immediately, it also creates 

new opportunities and economic activity for our province. 

 

As our government continues to work to build a seamless path 

for education, jobs, and careers, creating an ever-stronger 

post-secondary system, it‟s an important milestone along this 

path. Improving facilities for students will result in the 

implementation of new programs and expansion of number of 

seats in some existing programs. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I‟m pleased to announce that the 

Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology in 

both Regina and Prince Albert will receive funding for 

renovations to classrooms, laboratories, and enhancements to 

faculty, administration, and student space. The renovations at 

SIAST Wascana Campus in Regina will help meet the 

government‟s commitment to work toward the goal of creating 

300 new registered nursing education seats by 2011. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Funding for the SIAST renovations will 

also help to mean the delivery of plumbing apprenticeships 

right here in Regina, Mr. Speaker, and expanded opportunities 

for carpenter and electrician training in Prince Albert. 

 

I‟m also pleased to inform you that Great Plains College will 

renovate its main campus in Swift Current . . . [inaudible] . . . 

This regional college builds on a tradition which has served 

thousands of students across southwestern Saskatchewan. The 

Swift Current campus has not undergone a major renovation 

since it was built in 1948. This project involves upgrades to 

classrooms, offices, and common areas, an overhaul of the 

facility‟s mechanical and electrical system, and installation of 

new cooling and sprinkler systems. These renovations will 

enable the college to more effectively respond to local demands 

for training, particularly in areas of construction and energy. 

 

St. Peter‟s College in Muenster will also undertake 

much-needed building improvements. The college‟s Michael 

Hall was constructed in the 1920s and requires significant 

renovation to provide better accessibility and provision of 

services. This renovation will also create opportunities for 

partnerships with other post-secondary institutions, like the 

University of Saskatchewan, that will broaden and strengthen 



March 16, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2283 

program delivery in the east central region of our province. 

 

This government supports quality post-secondary education and 

skills training opportunities for our province‟s First Nation and 

Métis peoples, Mr. Deputy Speaker. A highly skilled, 

well-trained First Nation and Métis workforce is part of a 

homegrown solution for our talent challenge. It is also 

important that First Nation and Métis workers, families, and 

communities are able to benefit from Saskatchewan‟s continued 

economic growth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m very pleased to announce that the 

Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies will also be 

receiving funding. This marks the very first time that a 

provincial government has invested in SIIT‟s [Saskatchewan 

Indian Institute of Technologies] infrastructure, the very first 

time, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — The funding will support much-needed 

improvements at SIIT‟s Saskatoon campus to enable the 

institute to develop video conferencing capacity and distance 

education, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Funding will also go toward 

redevelopment of part of the existing facility to support the 

coaching and mentoring services that are an essential part of 

SIIT‟s student experience. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, these projects spread throughout the 

province from Swift Current to Prince Albert. These are an 

important step to ensure that the province‟s post-secondary 

system has the capacity to enrich communities, foster 

citizenship, as well as provide education, skills training, and 

personal and professional development, and deliver a workforce 

that meets the needs of Saskatchewan‟s growing economy now 

and well into the future, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to first 

start off by thanking the minister for sending his remarks across 

the floor in advance and giving me a chance to read them. 

 

And I have to confess, Mr. Speaker, when the House Leader 

first gave me the folder and told me that there was a ministerial 

statement today, I opened it up and I was sort of curious: well 

what has this minister been up to? But I was a little shocked and 

disappointed, Mr. Speaker, when the information that was 

presented in the folder actually has all been discussed in 

committee last week. So for regular watchers of the legislative 

channel, if they would like more information on this, I would 

encourage them to go to the Human Services Committee and 

check the Hansard there, and there is a more full discussion on 

this repeat statement, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The funding announced here in the statement is 26.4 million. I 

see, if the members would look back to the supplementary 

estimates, the amount for Advanced Education is 26.35 million, 

so the difference there must just be rounding up, but I assume 

there isn‟t any additional spending there. 

Mr. Speaker, a number of these items here, or all these items 

here, are good projects, of course. We look at expansion to the 

SIAST system. We look at a significant amount of funding 

being sent or going to Great Plains College in Swift Current, St. 

Peter‟s College, SIIT, where there‟s been a long-standing 

partnership with government there, Mr. Speaker. Indeed as the 

official opposition, funding for our post-secondary system is 

very important, so of course that is in a sense a positive thing. 

 

This funding does raise a couple of questions though and these 

are questions that are tied to Advanced Education but also tied 

to other ministries where we‟ve seen spending. And that is how 

the projects are being selected. And in Human Services 

Committee — again if individuals go back to Hansard — 

there‟s a larger discussion about the criteria used to select the 

projects. I think that‟s an interesting thing for people to watch 

to see why certain projects are chosen over others and the 

reasons behind that. 

 

The second point which is tied into why certain projects are 

chosen, Mr. Speaker, is the stimulus. How much of the 

additional funding is actual stimulus, Mr. Speaker, and how 

much of it is announcing planned projects earlier in order to 

free up capacity for the upcoming budget and live up to 

commitments that have been made there, Mr. Speaker? 

 

So again I would thank the minister for sending his remarks 

across even though it was a repeat announcement of funding 

that all members and the public have already learned about. But 

I do appreciate that, and I look forward to more information on 

this. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND 

SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Weyburn-Big Muddy. 

 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 

instructed by the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 

Agencies to report that it has considered the order of reference 

dated March 12, 2009, that the committee divide Bill No. 72, 

The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2008 into two Bills and to 

present its report. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 

Agencies has considered the matter, and recommends that Bill 

No. 72 be divided into Bill 82, The Traffic Safety (Volunteer 

Firefighters) Amendment Act, and Bill 83, The Traffic Safety 

(Licencing Provisions) Amendment Act. 

 

I move: 

 

That the sixth report of the Standing Committee on Crown 

and Central Agencies be now concurred in. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair: 



2284 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2009 

That the sixth report of the Standing Committee on Crown 

and Central Agencies be now concurred in. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. It is ordered the Bill No. 72, 

The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2008 be divided into Bill 

No. 82, The Traffic Safety (Volunteer Firefighters) Amendment 

Act, and Bill No. 83, The Traffic Safety (Licencing Provisions) 

Amendment Act. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I wish to 

table the answer to question no. 261 and 262. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved that the 

Government Whip table questions no. 261 and 262. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Not Debatable) 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I would like 

to table the requested document in return no. 34. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The government has ordered tabled 

return order for question no. 34. 

 

I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I would like 

to convert return no. 35 to a notice of motion for return 

(debatable). 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Government Whip has made a 

return . . . to table, to convert question no. 35. I recognize the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I would like 

to convert return no. 36 to a notice of motion for return 

(debatable). 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Government Whip has made a 

motion to convert to return (debatable) question no. 36. 

 

[14:30] 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 80 — The Construction Industry Labour Relations 

Amendment Act, 2009 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise 

today to move second reading of The Construction Industry 

Labour Relations Amendment Act, 2009. Last week, Mr. 

Speaker, I was pleased to announce the government is moving 

to ensure Saskatchewan‟s construction industry operates under 

fair, flexible, and effective labour laws. The government is 

amending The Construction Industry Labour Relations Act to 

expand the choices available for workers and employers, and to 

provide greater clarity for those involved in the industry. 

 

Currently the legislation requires that unionized employers in 

construction be a member of a representative employers‟ 

organization or REO [representative employer organization] for 

the purposes of bargaining. It also sets out which unions are 

allowed to represent construction workers. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

this legislation is unique; that is, it‟s an anomaly to 

Saskatchewan. No other jurisdiction in Canada gives 

government the legislative authority to directly shape collective 

bargaining arrangements in the construction industry. 

 

In our view, the government should not have the statutory right 

to pick a union for a worker, nor should it have the power to 

direct an employer to join an REO established by government 

decree which bargains with a particular union. Not only is this 

inappropriate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it‟s also likely 

unconstitutional. Mr. Speaker, the restrictive nature of this 

legislation as it has existed has discouraged some companies 

from participating in Saskatchewan‟s construction industry and 

prevented some unions from representing Saskatchewan 

construction workers. 

 

We need to renew this Act, Mr. Speaker. We need to create an 

environment that allows Saskatchewan construction workers the 

same opportunities all other workers in the province enjoy with 

respect to choosing a union to represent their interests. We also 

need to attract more companies and more skilled workers, many 

originally from Saskatchewan, into the province. Too many 

projects have been delayed because of a shortage of skilled 

labour. There have been cost overruns and a growth of backlog 

regarding projects. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, now more than ever our construction 

industry needs labour laws that make sense because right now 

we are literally laying the foundation for future prosperity. The 

government has embarked on an unprecedented effort to renew 

Saskatchewan‟s infrastructure. This fiscal year we‟ve 

committed a record $1.5 billion to fix roads, health care 

facilities, educational advanced institutions, as well as other 

parts of our vital infrastructure. Meanwhile the private sector is 

investing heavily within our province. 

 

This legislation will allow a trade union to organize a company 

on a multi-trade or all-employee basis as well as on a craft or 



March 16, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2285 

single trade basis; enable any trade union to certify an 

employer; allow an employer operating within the Act to chose 

the REO that will represent it; allow an employer operating 

outside an REO to negotiate a collective agreement for the 

duration of a specific project; give the Saskatchewan Labour 

Relations Board the authority to investigate complaints that a 

union has abandoned its bargaining rights; give the Labour 

Relations Board the right to revoke a union certification on the 

basis of an abandonment claim; and change the definition of 

construction industry to remove reference to maintaining a 

building or structure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the legislation will continue to prohibit a 

unionized construction company from creating a non-union 

spinoff company to evade its responsibilities. This legislation 

continues our effort to ensure Saskatchewan‟s labour laws are 

fair to workers and employers and competitive with other 

jurisdictions. 

 

I‟m encouraged by the reaction since we introduced these 

amendments last week, Mr. Speaker. Industry representatives 

say they expect more companies to become involved in 

Saskatchewan, which will lead to more competitive bidding, 

more opportunities for workers, more jobs, and will help us 

rebuild Saskatchewan‟s infrastructure after years of neglect. 

 

The Communications, Energy and Paperworkers Union of 

Canada, the largest union in the country, called the legislation a 

giant step forward for construction workers and predicts it will 

give workers more say in working conditions. I look forward to 

hearing more from organized labour, industry, and the people of 

our province during consultations on this legislation, which will 

take place over the summer. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Premier has made it clear. Our 

government is focused on ensuring our economy continues to 

grow with the benefits of growth being shared with the people 

of Saskatchewan. In summary, these amendments help us to 

move Saskatchewan forward. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move second reading, The Construction 

Industry Labour Relations Amendment Act, 2009. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Labour has moved second reading of Bill No. 

80, The Construction Industry Labour Relations Act, 2009. Is it 

the pleasure . . . I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a 

pleasure today to rise and speak at second reading to Bill No. 

80, An Act to amend the Construction Industry Labour 

Relations Act, 1992. Mr. Speaker, it‟s a pleasure to rise on this 

for a couple of reasons, not the least of which is the 

government‟s most recent concession with regards to open 

consultation and public hearings with regards to this Bill. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, before I do that, I simply would like to 

acknowledge the comments that the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Labour just made in regards to 

explaining the provisions of The Construction Industry Labour 

Relations Act. 

Mr. Speaker, to summarize briefly what he said, he‟s expecting 

that the Act provides for fair, flexible, and effective labour 

laws. He says the Bill will provide greater clarity. He says it 

will provide greater choice for workers. He says, Mr. Speaker, 

this is a unique Bill to Saskatchewan; in fact the word he used 

was it‟s an anomaly, Mr. Speaker. He said there is a need to 

renew the existing Act, and more importantly, Mr. Speaker, a 

need to attract more companies and workers to Saskatchewan. 

 

Well my goodness, Mr. Speaker, if indeed this legislation did 

all of these things, my comments today would be very short. 

Mr. Speaker, if the legislation in fact did all of these things, it 

would take no time whatsoever to proceed through all stages of 

this legislation, Mr. Speaker, to conclusion. And, Mr. Speaker, 

if this Bill did all that the minister says it would do, Mr. 

Speaker, there would be no need for public hearings and public 

consultation because, Mr. Speaker, these are all wonderful 

things. 

 

But I think, Mr. Speaker, I will take a few minutes today to 

discuss some of the provisions of the Act, to discuss the 

economy in Saskatchewan and the way in which the 

construction sector, Mr. Speaker, is impacted by and influenced 

by the economy that we‟re facing, Mr. Speaker. And I think, 

Mr. Speaker, I will establish that there‟s a great need, Mr. 

Speaker, to question the arguments that the government is 

putting forward with regards to this legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, is it fair, flexible, and effective? Mr. Speaker, I 

think we‟ll be able to argue that it is far from fair, Mr. Speaker, 

and therefore it will likely be ineffective. Mr. Speaker, does it 

provide greater clarity? I think, Mr. Speaker, arguments can be 

made and likely will be made to the committee that this Bill 

provides greater uncertainty, Mr. Speaker, and less clarity. 

 

Does it provide choice for workers, Mr. Speaker? It depends 

entirely on your perspective, Mr. Speaker, of choice. We all 

love that word, choice, Mr. Speaker. But at the end of the day 

some will argue — some will in fact bring forward evidence, 

Mr. Speaker — that it‟s not just more choice, Mr. Speaker. In 

fact this legislation means less for workers, not more choice, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Is it unique to Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? I don‟t know that 

yet, and in fact we‟ll take a look at labour legislation in other 

provinces, specifically in regards to the construction 

associations, the construction sector, Mr. Speaker. And in fact if 

this is unique to Saskatchewan, what is it that motivates 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? We like to be first in most things. 

And, Mr. Speaker, it‟s a good thing to take that leap and go 

forward. But, Mr. Speaker, what‟s the motivation? What‟s the 

need? And what do we gain by moving forward in doing 

something that nobody else has done, nobody else perhaps has 

contemplated, Mr. Speaker? This could indeed be an anomaly, 

Mr. Speaker. It could indeed be that, and that‟s not necessarily a 

good thing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, is there a need to renew the existing legislation? 

More than likely, Mr. Speaker. There is a need, Mr. Speaker, to 

renew the legislation. That‟s something that governments need 

to do. And therefore, Mr. Speaker, it‟s useful to consult widely 

with those who are involved in potential changes, and after 

consultation, Mr. Speaker, provide the legislature with an 



2286 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2009 

opportunity to review the legislation that‟s based on 

consultation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will make more comments in this regard in a few 

minutes. But, Mr. Speaker, if we are renewing existing 

legislation, there‟s another way to do it than what the way this 

government has chosen to do. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, finally, is there a need to attract more 

companies and workers to Saskatchewan? Absolutely, Mr. 

Speaker. What we want to do in this province, however — and I 

will elaborate on this later in my remarks, Mr. Speaker — but 

we want to attract more taxpayers to the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. To bring in a company from 

Alberta or from Manitoba to do work, and they bring in 

residents working for them from Alberta and Manitoba so they 

pay their income tax, Mr. Speaker, in Alberta and Manitoba, 

what we‟re doing effectively, Mr. Speaker, is that in fact we are 

sending our booster shot money outside our own borders, 

Mr. . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I recognize the member from 

The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

appreciate the interjection. So, Mr. Speaker, what we want to do 

is ensure that we have the ability, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that 

we‟ve got a fair, flexible, and effective labour regime in this 

province, Mr. Speaker, to cover Saskatchewan companies, to 

cover Saskatchewan workers — and, Mr. Speaker, if there‟s 

investments from outside the province, Mr. Speaker, to ensure 

that the Saskatchewan residents are the net beneficiary of 

additional provincial money, Mr. Speaker, and not the residents, 

the taxpayers of other provinces. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will also, before I conclude my remarks, indicate 

that I believe that there will be representation made at the 

committee stage this summer. There will be representation 

made, Mr. Speaker, that will establish that what this legislation 

does primarily is ensure that there are more Alberta licence 

plates on job sites in Saskatchewan than we‟ve ever seen 

before, Mr. Speaker. And I do not believe that‟s the intention of 

this government in bringing this legislation forward. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, after that introduction and laying out some of 

my comments . . . And I‟m surprised, Mr. Speaker, that given 

the unlimited time that the minister had to outline his 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, that he chose not to delve into a 

number of these subjects, Mr. Speaker, but decided to simply 

frame this legislation in terms of glowing, positive words, 

without an explanation or an understanding of need, or, Mr. 

Speaker, about the consequences of some of the actions that 

he‟s undertaken. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this legislation, as the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Labour said, he introduced last 

week. This legislation in the introduction last week, Mr. 

Speaker, was framed in a news conference, in a press 

conference, Mr. Speaker, for exactly what the minister said it 

was going to be. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, one member of the media, concerned about 

the lack of consultation that was going to occur around this Bill, 

pressed the minister, Mr. Speaker. And the reporter said, and I 

quote from that news conference, and he says this, Mr. Speaker, 

pointing his finger at the minister, “. . . why did you follow a 

process that was so loathed by labour the last time around?” 

 

What he was referring to, Mr. Speaker, is this process whereby 

the ministry sends out invitations to people that they want to 

consult with. They invite those people they want to consult with 

to a hotel, a closed room, Mr. Speaker. They have their 

consultation. No member of the public knows what was said, no 

member of the media is included in that process, and at the end 

of it, Mr. Speaker, these invited individuals who speak behind 

closed doors, Mr. Speaker, the government comes out and says, 

we‟ve listened to people and we‟ve responded. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that didn‟t cut it for the Ministry of Labour 

in the past. It shouldn‟t cut it for the Ministry of Labour in the 

future. But when the reporter asked the minister the question 

that I just put — why did he follow a process like that? — the 

minister said, and I quote from this news conference of March 

10, the minister said, and I quote: 

 

What we want to do is establish a sense of continuity. This 

is the way that we‟re going to be moving forward on 

labour relations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, continuity. They had a failed process of privacy 

and secrecy and lack of transparency. And the minister says, we 

want a sense of continuity, so we‟ll just continue with this 

process of consultation that‟s private and lacks a sense of 

transparency, Mr. Speaker. And then he puts his foot down and 

kind of stomps his foot, Mr. Speaker. He drops his shoulder 

forward and he says, this is the way we‟re going to do it from 

now on. 

 

[14:45] 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I heard that. I saw that, Mr. Speaker, and I 

thought, this can‟t happen. There‟s no way, Mr. Speaker, that 

this can happen. I immediately, on behalf of the opposition 

caucus, Mr. Speaker, drafted a letter to the Government House 

Leader, asking that this legislation be dealt with by the 

Legislative Assembly through the consultation process, Mr. 

Speaker. I immediately asked that the legislative committee, 

all-party committee, Mr. Speaker, deal with this piece of 

legislation so that the public knows what the stakeholders are 

saying about the legislation and has a full understanding, Mr. 

Speaker, of the potential consequences that this legislation is 

going to have on the province because, Mr. Speaker, we want, 

we want peace in the province. 

 

We want to have working people in this province and investors 

in this province and contractors in this province, Mr. Speaker, 

working together to ensure that the infrastructure that they‟re 

involved in is completed on time and in budget, Mr. Speaker, 

and for the benefit of Saskatchewan people. Mr. Speaker, 

consultation in public with a full range of the sectors involved, 

Mr. Speaker — that was important. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the Government House Leader called, 

indicated that they were prepared to change direction from the 

previous consultation process undertaken by this minister, Mr. 

Speaker, and that under the right set of circumstances this 



March 16, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2287 

legislation could proceed to the legislative committee and, Mr. 

Speaker, be subject to more public consultation and more 

importantly, Mr. Speaker, greater transparency. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you can understand, the public I think can 

understand, that closed doors, private meetings by invitation 

only are completely unacceptable for the development of 

legislation that ultimately is going to affect everybody. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there‟s no doubt that that status quo of 

secrecy, spin, and unaccountability had to change, Mr. Speaker. 

And as a result of efforts that were made from this side of the 

House, Mr. Speaker, we are now going to have a process that‟s 

going to ensure that members of the Legislative Assembly — 

opposition members and government members — are going to 

be able to identify individuals and groups that will want to 

speak publicly about this legislation, will bring them in front of 

the committee where members of the media are eligible to be 

present and to hear, Mr. Speaker, and will be able to put all of 

their comments on record. 

 

And we will find out, Mr. Speaker, whether this legislation 

meets the terms that have been outlined by the member 

opposite; that indeed it is fair, and it‟s flexible, and it‟s 

effective. Because, Mr. Speaker, I‟m not all negative. The 

members opposite would like to say from time to time that oh 

my goodness, he‟s all negative, Mr. Speaker. He never has a 

good and positive thing to say. But, Mr. Speaker, I want to say, 

I want to say that I support fair, flexible, and effective 

legislation in this province, Mr. Speaker. And the government 

just has to prove, just has to prove, Mr. Speaker, that in fact 

that‟s indeed what this legislation is. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, through public consultation, with 

representatives of the contractor and investor sectors, Mr. 

Speaker, with representation from working people in the 

province, I think we will establish, Mr. Speaker, that indeed this 

legislation is either fair, flexible, and effective, or it needs to be 

changed in order to become fair, flexible, and effective. 

 

Or, Mr. Speaker, if in fact this legislation is so poorly drafted 

that it can be neither fair nor flexible, then, Mr. Speaker, the 

only alternative would be to scrap this and do what would 

normally be done outside of the Department of Labour‟s current 

approach, Mr. Speaker: consult first and then draft, Mr. 

Speaker. Because when you draft, you are committing yourself 

to a specific agenda and direction, Mr. Speaker. There‟s no way 

of actually backing off and saving face, Mr. Speaker, when 

something is already drafted. But that‟s what we‟re faced with 

here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I expect that those who want to engage in the debate, 

discussion, representation, Mr. Speaker, at the committee level 

will indeed do so. So, Mr. Speaker, just to outline how this 

process should work because I think the arrangement that has 

been worked out by the government and the opposition is 

indeed fair to the process. And, Mr. Speaker, as Opposition 

House Leader, I believe that this is a fine institution, and 

whereby fair process will lead, Mr. Speaker, to effective 

representation of the public in the Assembly. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have agreed that we will have debate here 

in the Legislative Assembly at second reading. We‟re kicking 

that off here today, and over the course of the next about eight 

weeks of legislative session, we will engage in about five hours 

of debate and discussion at this stage, Mr. Speaker. I don‟t 

intend to speak that long myself here today. However, Mr. 

Speaker, I‟m sure that the members have these questions 

they‟re shouting at me, that who knows, maybe I might try to 

answer all of them. 

 

But that having been said, Mr. Speaker, after we‟ve had an 

opportunity to engage in debate of the Bill in principle, this 

legislation will indeed, as the minister said, be sent to 

committee. And we‟re in full support of that, Mr. Speaker; 

that‟s what we asked for. 

 

So this summer the committee of — if I‟m not mistaken — it is 

the health and Human Services Committee will meet to 

establish a timetable, will meet to discuss a invitation list of 

individuals and groups who will make representation. Mr. 

Speaker, the committee, after invitations have been sent out and 

meeting dates have been scheduled, will hear representation 

from those who support the legislation and from those who 

don‟t or who want it changed for — if I have it right, Mr. 

Speaker — about 10 hours of public participation. 

 

And then, Mr. Speaker, the minister has agreed to sit before the 

committee, explain what he and his ministerial officials have 

heard from the public consultations, express where they want to 

go with the legislation and what they might do with the 

legislation having heard where the public is. Mr. Speaker, I 

think the minister‟s comments will be heard over about a 

five-hour sitting of the committee. 

 

That legislation, Bill No. 80, Mr. Speaker, will then be next fall 

reported back to the House, back to the Assembly. And this 

Assembly will then dispose of all matters that are left and the 

legislation will either pass as stands or as amended or, Mr. 

Speaker, it will be scrapped, depending on what the 

recommendation of the committee will be. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have reached an agreement that will see 

this Bill proceed in a orderly fashion. One would say it‟s going 

to proceed quickly for the way in which legislation often 

proceeds in this place. And, Mr. Speaker, at the end of the day 

the public will have been heard. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, do we have any examples of this working? 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think the members opposite are in a good 

position, and especially after question period today, have to 

acknowledge, Mr. Speaker, that this process works, Mr. 

Speaker. Previously there was committee hearings, Mr. 

Speaker, on the Trade, Investment and Labour Mobility 

Agreement that Alberta and British Columbia signed. Mr. 

Speaker, there were hearings. The members opposite consulted 

widely in the province, and what they heard was the municipal 

sector had concerns with the so-called TILMA agreement. The 

Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I would just ask members . . . I know that you 

have, members have different things to confer about, but I 

would ask if we could just cut the tone a little bit to allow the 

member who‟s been recognized to be able to speak without a lot 

of interference. I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 



2288 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2009 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And so as 

I was saying, the members opposite heard from the public. The 

municipal sector had concerns. The Crown corporations sector 

had concerns, Mr. Speaker. And after the now-government 

members — then in opposition, Mr. Speaker — while they had 

said we support TILMA, we‟ll sign TILMA, before they‟d read 

TILMA, they were gung-ho about it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When they actually heard the public speak about TILMA, what 

did they do, Mr. Speaker? They said, whoa, wait a minute, we 

are not supportive of TILMA. We will not sign TILMA, and we 

want to see changes made to TILMA before we sign or go 

anywhere near the agreement. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what happened? The members opposite who 

now believe they‟ve got the right approach to this legislation 

with no consultation, when they approached TILMA without 

reading it they were all supportive, Mr. Speaker. But when the 

public told them what they thought about it, they backed off; 

they said no, Mr. Speaker. And even as late as today in question 

period, Mr. Speaker, the Premier says that those concerns are 

valid; those concerns stand, Mr. Speaker. And if this 

government is going to proceed on any matter that‟s even 

related to the TILMA agreement, Mr. Speaker, the concerns that 

were expressed by the public are going to be addressed. 

 

So does this process work, Mr. Speaker, when you engage the 

public? Absolutely it does, Mr. Speaker. The members opposite 

are fully aware of that, and as a result it still is surprising that 

the ministry and the minister, Mr. Speaker, would continue to 

put forward and argue that in fact it should be standard practice 

to put something out there and stand by it without full public 

consultation. That‟s going to happen, Mr. Speaker, and I 

encourage members of the public to read the legislation, to 

understand it in terms of what it‟s going to mean in their 

workplace, in their environment, in their community, and within 

this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I don‟t want to say too much specific to the legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, because there are going to be a number of my 

colleagues who are doing some preliminary consultations about 

this, so that we‟ll have a few things to bring forward during the 

course of this second reading or this in-principle debate that we 

are currently having. 

 

But there are some things that I do want to address, Mr. 

Speaker, just to set the tone for what members of the public 

have already communicated for us. Mr. Speaker, the point that I 

want to raise first, that the member opposite, the minister, 

talked about the legislation bringing greater clarity to the 

circumstance, to the legislation, Mr. Speaker. I think there‟s 

another word that the members opposite are going to hear 

frequently when the public talks about this legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, and it‟s not going to be clarity. It‟s going to be 

instability, Mr. Speaker. The expectation is that without some 

significant change, this legislation will create greater instability, 

greater uncertainty in the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There‟s no question at all that those points, Mr. Speaker, are — 

stability, that is, and certainty — are very important in a climate 

that requires investment and workers in an economic 

environment where we have a lack of workers. With 

uncertainty, with instability, you create turmoil. 

Now the last piece of legislation that this government brought 

forward that had to do with workers in the province, Mr. 

Speaker — with Bills 5 and 6, the essential services legislation, 

Mr. Speaker — the instability and the uncertainty and the 

turmoil that that created a year later is still permeating through 

the environs of the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

A year ago the legislation passed. We still have no collective 

agreement signed, Mr. Speaker. This legislation was supposed 

to create greater clarity, reduce uncertainty, and create a better 

and more effective labour-business climate in the province, Mr. 

Speaker. A year later, has it done that? Absolutely not, Mr. 

Speaker. There is more uncertainty in the province today than 

there was before Bills 5 and 6, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:00] 

 

It‟s because the government has a tendency to believe you just 

have to say nice things and everything works out. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, the nice things they said were not followed through, 

Mr. Speaker, in the detail. It‟s politics, Mr. Speaker. It‟s politics 

and it‟s not a detail that allows for effective relationships. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we want a balance in this province. New 

Democrats and CCF [Co-operative Commonwealth Federation] 

people before us, Mr. Speaker, were all about balance. Balance, 

Mr. Speaker. The public sector, the private sector, the 

co-operative sector working together, Mr. Speaker, to ensure 

that the people, the residents of the province are able to live in 

an economy, Mr. Speaker, that provides for all. 

 

Well the fact of the matter is if the environment of labour and 

business, Mr. Speaker, is unbalanced or instable, it drives 

investment away, Mr. Speaker. It doesn‟t bring investment in, 

Mr. Speaker. What we need to ensure, if we‟re going to have 

investment coming in, is that we need to have an effective 

relationship between labour and business. So one argues, is the 

relationship broke in this province, Mr. Speaker, and therefore 

we need to do something completely different? Or, Mr. 

Speaker, do we need to sit down and ensure that the parties are 

doing what they want to do, and that is talking together to 

ensure that we ultimately reach the goal that we set ourselves. 

 

Bottom line is we don‟t need instability. We don‟t need 

uncertainty. We certainly don‟t need additional turmoil to 

attract investment into this province. One could argue, Mr. 

Speaker, at this time of global economic crisis, the government 

seems to think that we are this island of stability in this world of 

economic instability, Mr. Speaker, when in fact we are affected 

by the instability that exists elsewhere. And there is no reason 

whatsoever to increase the instability inside our borders, Mr. 

Speaker, when there is so much going on around us. We cannot 

do things that will destabilize our construction sector, Mr. 

Speaker, when we are trying to stimulate the construction 

sector. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government speaks volumes with regards to 

infrastructure funding. We‟re seeing new money going out to 

stimulate the economy, Mr. Speaker, for roads, for hospitals, for 

schools, for municipalities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The members opposite yell, that‟s good for us. Yes, it is, Mr. 

Speaker. That stimulus is good for us, Mr. Speaker. And in a 



March 16, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2289 

recession, governments tend to put money out there to stimulate 

the economy. And, Mr. Speaker, we need to have the capacity 

throughout our province to respond to those things. But, Mr. 

Speaker, the benefits of this need to be those who live and raise 

their families and, for lack of a better word, play within our 

economies, Mr. Speaker. So what we need to ensure, Mr. 

Speaker, is that our provincial economy, our provincial 

contractors, our provincial labour force are able to take as much 

advantage of this stimulus as possible, and not just ship it out 

beyond our borders. 

 

Well one can argue, and I expect they will, Mr. Speaker, that 

Bill 80 is a wrong policy at the wrong time. I said earlier about 

the consequence of this legislation could simply be the influx of 

Alberta licence plates at construction sites in Saskatchewan. 

Mr. Speaker, we do want to encourage workers, we do want to 

encourage contractors, we do want to encourage investors from 

outside Saskatchewan to be a part of Saskatchewan‟s growth 

during this instable economic environment that we find 

ourselves in, Mr. Speaker. But what we don‟t want to do is to 

ensure that the biggest beneficiary are people who pay their 

taxes in Alberta, people who pay their taxes in Manitoba, 

people who pay their taxes in British Columbia, whether they 

are investors, contractors or workers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We need to ensure that when this government talks, as they do 

in the Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker — we need a Sask-first 

policy in the infrastructure field, in the job creation field, in the 

investment field, in the contracting field, Mr. Speaker — we 

also have to ensure that this Sask-first policy applies, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So what the members opposite are yelling at me about, Mr. 

Speaker — for the interest of the public — is essentially, who‟s 

going to do the work, says the Deputy Premier. Who‟s going to 

do the work? Well I have no objections, Mr. Speaker, for 

individuals coming in from out of province to do some work in 

our province. Absolutely not, Mr. Speaker. But when there‟s 

1,000 people at the Potash Corporation being laid off, when 

there‟s 1,500 people on the west side of the province in the oil 

and gas sector being laid off, when there‟s people out of the 

Oilsands Quest project in La Loche being laid off, when there 

are people in the agriculture sector who are giving up, Mr. 

Speaker, and moving into the communities, without jobs, Mr. 

Speaker, then certainly there are people — trained, skilled 

people — ready to go to work in this province on these projects. 

 

And if we‟re passing legislation or even contemplating 

legislation today to encourage Alberta licence plates to drive 

into this province and do work that thousands of unemployed 

Saskatchewan people can‟t do because the contractor who hires 

them in Lethbridge is also doing the work in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, well that is wrong. That‟s a consequence, Mr. Speaker, 

that we have to ensure we understand before we proceed on 

these projects. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the things we‟re going to find out is 

. . . The legislation is being reviewed this summer. A lot of the 

projects that the government is currently funding we assume, 

because that was the intention, are going to go ahead this 

summer. We are going to see — without this legislation, Mr. 

Speaker — the ability of Saskatchewan contractors and 

Saskatchewan labour to step up to the plate and work with 

municipalities, to work with health boards, to work with school 

boards, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that the funding that‟s going out 

for these new projects are able to get in the ground and that 

Saskatchewan people are the beneficiary today through 

employment and next year, Mr. Speaker, through the taxes 

collected by the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

People want a fair and effective work environment, Mr. 

Speaker. And government needs to move in that direction when 

indeed we are dealing with legislation. 

 

And more importantly, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people want 

to work in a fair and safe environment. Mr. Speaker, there‟s 

currently a standard set of rules for job sites. That‟s in the 

current legislation. That‟s not really a part of the future of 

Saskatchewan, based on what I read in this legislation, at a 

time, as I said earlier about boosting infrastructure spending, 

this is a time when we need the least reduction in rules. 

 

It‟s not that contractors, Mr. Speaker, can‟t find any work. 

There‟s lots of work to be found. We don‟t need to be reducing 

the rules on the work sites, Mr. Speaker, to encourage 

contractors to step up to the plate and work. And workers need 

to know that the safety in their environment, Mr. Speaker, their 

work environment, is of the highest quality. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one thing I think that the government has not 

taken into account that we are going to hear about during the 

committee hearings is the whole apprenticeship system. Mr. 

Speaker, I think Saskatchewan residents can claim, have been 

able to claim for some time that although there‟s a constant 

evolution and a need to continue to evolve the apprenticeship 

system, we in Saskatchewan enjoy one of the best 

apprenticeship systems in the country. As the minister said 

earlier about Saskatchewan being unique, well, Mr. Speaker, 

there are some unique features in our apprenticeship system that 

other provinces would do well to learn from us. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, how well thought out is this legislation as far 

as the apprenticeship system goes? Mr. Speaker, this legislation 

does not provide us any clear direction whatsoever. So there is a 

chance, Mr. Speaker — and we‟re going to have to listen 

carefully in committee — there is a chance that this legislation 

threatens the apprenticeship system in the province of 

Saskatchewan. And that, Mr. Speaker, and some other matters 

jeopardizes our ability to be first in some things as far as labour 

legislation goes in the country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do want to further add that we want nothing 

better for Saskatchewan people than to ensure that if there are 

unemployed people in Saskatchewan, that this government is 

supporting opportunities for them to go back to work, Mr. 

Speaker. Not just those in potash and steel and in the oil fields, 

Mr. Speaker, but also individuals who live within our First 

Nations communities, Mr. Speaker, who for the last several 

years have been involved in the new education programs that 

have been developed to help to move First Nations people, Mr. 

Speaker, from the poverty that exists within a lot of their 

communities into a wage-based labour force, Mr. Speaker — 

education that this government has supported over quite a few 

years, Mr. Speaker. And now we want to ensure that there are 

good quality jobs at labour sites, Mr. Speaker, that are fully 

understood and supported across the piece. 



2290 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2009 

Mr. Speaker, I had mentioned earlier that it is very important 

that Saskatchewan people understand the direction that the 

government is taking, which means, Mr. Speaker, we have to 

ensure that there isn‟t some other reason for Bill 80 to be 

brought forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We do know that across Canada, Mr. Speaker, parties that share 

the philosophy of the right wing Conservative parties — the 

Saskatchewan Party opposite, Mr. Speaker, sharing a lot of that 

philosophy, a lot of that philosophy, Mr. Speaker — really do 

believe that the less regulation there is, the better. The less 

government, the better. It‟s always interesting to me, Mr. 

Speaker, that those who say that there should be less 

government, when they become government, actually do more 

government work than others, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But there is always an agenda there that, Mr. Speaker, we have 

to watch closely. An agenda that talks about the race to the 

bottom. An agenda that results in salaries or wage rates being 

reduced. An agenda that results in fewer benefits being paid to 

working people. And, Mr. Speaker, more importantly, an 

agenda that leads to a reduction in safety requirements, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

These are all things that when one looks at the long-term 

consequences of any particular piece of legislation, that indeed 

we keep in mind, is there another goal behind this process? 

Freedom of choice, Mr. Speaker, sounds absolutely wonderful 

if you‟re out there. But freedom to reduce or freedom to lose, 

Mr. Speaker, is not a choice. And Saskatchewan should not be 

participating in a process that leads to less, especially when we 

live in such a wonderful province, Mr. Speaker — a province 

that for years has enjoyed a good, solid, strong balance between 

labour and business and that has and does attract investment 

into our province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we are about to engage in a process, a process 

that sees this legislature being able to do the work that the 

people sent us here to do. The government has given us a Bill, a 

Bill that, Mr. Speaker, has a lot of questions attached to it. A 

process, Mr. Speaker, that will allow the public an opportunity 

to ask some of those questions themselves and to answer some 

of those questions, Mr. Speaker, to review the legislation and 

put on record the concerns that they might have or, more 

importantly, a direction, Mr. Speaker, that could lead us in 

another direction. Another direction that in fact will ensure that 

the legislation that we come out of here with is fair and flexible 

and more importantly is effective. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we do need greater clarity. Mr. Speaker, we can be 

unique, but we‟ve got to be unique in a way in which all other 

provinces would want to follow us. Mr. Speaker, I don‟t want to 

be an anomaly. Mr. Speaker, I do not want to be an anomaly if 

that means you are set aside; you are looked at as being 

unusual, that you are not doing something that others want to 

emulate or to follow. Mr. Speaker, we can be unique and being 

unique means doing the right things. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, we do need to attract more investment into this 

province. We do need to attract more workers. Those workers 

can be from inside this province, Mr. Speaker, and if we don‟t 

have enough to do the work in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, we 

can attract workers from elsewhere. But, Mr. Speaker, they 

have to understand that the rules that apply here to protect 

Saskatchewan people also apply to them. 

 

The bottom line, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan taxpayers are 

putting money into a lot of projects around the province. The 

Saskatchewan taxpayers do have a stake in the work that‟s 

being done here, and ultimately Saskatchewan taxpayers should 

be the ones who benefit from this whole process. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the opportunity to have been able 

to say a few words in regards to this legislation. I hope the 

members opposite who I know have been listening carefully to 

what I‟ve had to say, I know that every single one of them has 

asked me a question while I‟ve been on my feet. The rules don‟t 

allow me to engage in that sort of debate or discussion with 

them but, Mr. Speaker, I‟m very pleased that they have been 

listening to the remarks that I‟ve made. I hope that those 

members who serve on the committee this summer and the 

early fall will listen carefully to those who are going to come 

before the committee and will put their thoughts on record. 

 

More importantly, Mr. Speaker, I hope that the government will 

learn from what has happened here over the last few days, will 

learn that you cannot, you cannot, Mr. Speaker, in government 

simply assume that you are right all of the time and that you 

don‟t need open, public dialogue in the legislative process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this process exists to allow the public input into 

the decisions made in this place. Mr. Speaker, we have to enjoy 

the full benefits of the rules that we have established to allow 

ourselves to do a job that the public wants us to do. We are a 

representative Assembly, Mr. Speaker, and when you represent 

individuals, you are expected to do so in a number of ways. One 

of those ways is to ensure that the public voice is heard. So, Mr. 

Speaker, I hope this process that the government has engaged in 

will be instructive for future activities of all ministries, of all 

Crowns, of all aspects of work under the influence of the 

ministers and the members opposite. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with that having been said, I think that I have 

indicated there are a number of members on this side of the 

Assembly who wish to comment on this legislation before it 

gets sent to committee, and therefore, Mr. Speaker, I now move 

that debate on Bill No. 80, An Act to amend The Construction 

Industry Labour Relations Act, 1992, be now adjourned. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from The Battlefords has moved 

adjournment of debate on Bill No. 80. Is it the pleasure of 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 63 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 



March 16, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2291 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 63 — The 

Saskatchewan Housing Corporation Amendment Act, 2008 be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s indeed a delight 

and a pleasure to rise to speak to Bill No. 63, an Act to amend 

the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation. It‟s essentially a 

one-page Bill. It‟s relatively straightforward, but it‟s one that 

means an awful lot to an awful lot of people in Saskatchewan, 

and so I have a few things to say and then we‟ll take it from 

there. It‟s relatively straightforward. It does talk about the 

affairs, and I‟ll just quote the Bill: 

 

The affairs and business of the corporation shall be 

conducted by a board of directors consisting of not less 

than five persons appointed by the Lieutenant Governor in 

Council. 

 

So it gives it more flexibility. We do support the idea of 

increasing the number. It was one before, since ‟95. I think at 

that point, it was the time when we were going through some 

tough times and we had to really focus our energies. And now 

it‟s important to take a look at this again, and we think that‟s a 

fair suggestion. 

 

Not less than five. So we anticipate that it may be more, 

obviously, than five. We know that we see another Bill before 

us, the Labour Market Commission, where they‟re reducing the 

number from 19 to 11. Is this a trend to reduce the number of 

people on boards? I‟m not sure. But this is a good thing here. 

 

It‟s relatively straightforward, Mr. Speaker, but what my 

concern is that largely are we missing some opportunities here 

to do the kind of things that need to be done for housing in 

Saskatchewan? Housing, as I said earlier, is such an important 

area. It‟s one of the basic, fundamental needs for strong 

communities, for strong families. And if we miss the 

opportunity now, what will be those consequences? And 

sometimes, Mr. Speaker, we talk about those unintended 

consequences. 

 

I want to say, though, before we get too far into the comments, 

that I do want to say that this is a very important Act. When it 

was struck, when it was passed in the ‟70s, it really was 

visionary in so many ways. I‟ll get into the objectives later, but 

I do want to say that it‟s allowed a lot of people in 

Saskatchewan — many people, many communities — to do 

some really good work and provide affordable housing in our 

communities. 

 

The housing authorities that we see right across the province are 

doing outstanding work. The boards volunteer their time to 

guide their employees in the resources within their communities 

and those are provided by the government to do an important 

job in our communities. 

 

And so the corporation as well provides a very important 

service to the people of Saskatchewan. I think that they deserve 

a lot of credit, and they‟ve worked many years to build the kind 

of province that we appreciate. And it‟s so important for the 

different communities and the people who live in those 

communities, whether they be seniors or people living with 

disabilities, those with low incomes. I think this is an important 

feature. 

 

Now we see that in the minister — and I will quote from her 

speech in just a minute — talks about the drive, the reason for 

these amendments. Clearly they wanted to act on the 

recommendations of the Merriman-Pringle report. Many of 

those recommendations have been acted on. Many were very, 

very good, very sound. 

 

I am concerned, though, that again we‟re missing an 

opportunity, and I will talk about some specific 

recommendations that could have been worked into this Bill. 

And I am concerned that we‟re missing an opportunity here to 

have those things in the Bill and strengthen the Act. This is one 

part, but there could have been a few others. And we‟re missing 

some real opportunities here. 

 

And still, you know, it‟s interesting because we talk about 

moving quickly, and we remember the summer of ‟07 and prior 

to the election, and the Sask Party at the time didn‟t really seem 

to think that there was an issue. They didn‟t really move that 

quickly. It was only till March a year ago that they actually set a 

task force. And here we are a year hence, and we‟re debating 

one amendment to the Act. So I am really concerned, and we 

know that this is an issue. 

 

Well the minister said on November 19, 2008, and I‟ll quote, 

and the quote goes: 

 

Concerns were raised that there was no representation 

from housing stakeholders or municipalities in the 

corporation‟s governance. The Saskatchewan Housing 

Corporation Act amendment that we‟re requesting, Mr. 

Speaker, will deal with that concern. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, and I will talk about this a bit because we 

feel that there‟s a real opportunity to include a much fuller 

representation on the governance of the Sask Housing 

Corporation. In fact, Mr. Speaker, we had called in our 

presentation to Merriman-Pringle that they consider using all 

the partners within the housing sector. Municipalities clearly are 

a major role, play a major role; so do business. 

 

But some of the other stakeholders include the First Nations, the 

FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations], tribal band 

councils — very important. Will they be represented at the 

board? 

 

As well, the Métis Nation of Saskatchewan. We pointed out, 

clearly they‟ve developed some real expertise. And I think of 

CUMFI [Central Urban Métis Federation Inc.] in Saskatoon, the 

kind of work they are doing. And the ministry is actually 

utilizing those folks. Will they be at the table? Very important. 

 

We also think about the North with their unique challenges. 

Very important that we don‟t neglect the North. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we saw a report just a few weeks ago from 

the student union at the University of Saskatchewan. Students 

bring a wealth of knowledge, first-hand experience of what it‟s 



2292 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2009 

like to be looking for housing. And the student unions, both at 

the University of Regina and at the University of Saskatchewan 

and throughout SIAST, I think have a lot of expertise. And as 

well, the regional colleges, post-secondary institutions. Clearly 

these folks are the ones who administer the post-secondary 

institutions, have a lot of expertise. Will they be at the table? 

We need to think about them. 

 

Housing and homelessness advocates. This is an area that we‟ve 

seen emerge since the ‟80s and the ‟90s. Prior to the ‟80s, 

homelessness was not the major issue that it is today. But we 

have people who can bring an awful lot to the table in terms of 

governance who should be included. Has the corporation, has 

the minister considered those? And those who are living in 

chronic poverty, advocates for those people — clearly these are 

people we need to have at the table. 

 

Another one, another group that we think is very important are 

advocates for those people living with disabilities — huge 

issue. We know that there‟s work with those . . . that are being 

done for those living with intellectual disabilities. But we know 

that the range of disabilities now is quite far-ranging as we 

really fully understand the meaning of living with disabilities 

and what it means to have access, a fully accessible housing 

unit or a home. We also know about safety. We know about 

inclusive communities. That‟s so important. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, of course this is one that we‟ve worked 

really hard in this province, attracting recent immigrants. How 

can we make sure that those people who‟ve come to our 

communities, our province, from around the world and across 

Canada have safe and affordable housing? Will they be 

included? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we‟ve talked about the business community. 

We‟ve talked about the builders, those folks, very clearly. They 

have a role; they have the expertise. But I also want to say the 

public has a role as well because in our communities we want to 

make sure the voice is heard and questions that can be asked are 

asked. And that ensures the transparency and the accountability. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about the Sask Housing 

Corporation Act. And as I said, this was really quite a visionary 

piece when it was developed, and I think that in many ways it 

was ahead of its time. But I do think that in some ways we 

should really take a look at the objects of the corporation. This 

is one that I think needs to be updated and we have seen this 

government take time to update. Sometimes I have some 

questions about how they‟ve updated some things, but here‟s 

one that I think, now that we‟ve got the Act opened and they‟re 

amending it, in one way I think that some of the things could 

have been done here as well. 

 

One of the objects of the corporation include “. . . to evaluate 

housing needs and conditions and the adequacy of housing 

accommodation in Saskatchewan.” 

 

This is an important role for the Sask Housing Corporation and 

clearly this Act says that and gives it the mandate to do that. 

 

But the problem we see — and this is one of the concerns and I 

raised it last week and I‟ll raise it again today — when we‟ve 

seen the minister respond to the Merriman-Pringle report . . . 

And clearly she‟s responded to some of the recommendations, 

but we‟ve not seen an overall plan, an overall statement of their 

world view of housing in Saskatchewan. We don‟t have an 

overall statement of benchmarks, where they see the province 

going in five or ten years. We‟ve seen that called for by the 

Federation of Canadian Municipalities, a 10-year plan. We need 

to see that and I‟m hoping that we see that in a few short weeks. 

 

We also see another recommendation goes on: 

 

to promote and encourage and undertake the development 

of measures that will provide adequate housing options for 

all Saskatchewan residents and will increase the 

affordability of housing to those in need. 

 

Again very important. But now, you know, the modern 

language is not so much we talk about options and you pick and 

choose your option, but we talk about a housing continuum. 

That as we move through our different stages as families or 

individuals, students, seniors, it‟s clearly we have different 

needs. And I think we need to have that work done so there are 

options for people along that continuum. 

 

[15:30] 

 

A third object: “to undertake, facilitate and promote the 

development of housing accommodation for [seniors] . . . the 

disabled and other groups or persons who require assistance.” 

Now, Mr. Speaker, just a clarification here. It does say the 

disabled, and I think this would be an opportunity for the 

minister to update the language. We probably should be talking 

about those living with disabilities. And we know that this was 

a sensitive area for the government last spring, and so this 

would be one word that we think should be modified. 

 

And we want to think that, as I said earlier, that the definition of 

those living with disabilities, we‟ve come to appreciate and 

understand that that spans quite a range of disabilities, whether 

it‟s physical disabilities or those living with intellectual 

disabilities, those who have mental health illnesses, challenges 

— very important that we include that whole range. And we‟re 

prepared to do that, particularly in the objects of the 

corporation, that we‟re not limited by the language that was 

used in the ‟70s. Now that we‟re in the 2009-2010 years, we 

should be thinking more about that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think this one is very important. It talks about “to 

promote, undertake and facilitate the repair . . . and 

improvement of housing accommodation.” That this is one that 

actually I think would be really innovative. And this is a 

recommendation made by Merriman and Pringle, when it talks 

about incorporating energy-efficient building practices into 

affordable housing whenever possible. 

 

It would be a real sign to the builders, the communities, that we 

are taking sustainability seriously here in Saskatchewan. There 

has been a lot of talk about this. And we know actually Sask 

Housing has been a real innovator in this area, but I think we 

need to include that in the objects. And a statement like that 

would go a long way to send a signal that Saskatchewan is a 

little greener, and we‟re doing that through updating our 

language in the objects. 

 



March 16, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2293 

And in fact, Mr. Speaker, we see that there‟s a debate at the 

federal level that talks about supporting a national housing 

strategy, that talks about sustainable and environmentally sound 

design standards for new housing. We think, what a wonderful 

opportunity here that we could include language like that when 

we‟re talking about repair or building, improving housing 

accommodation. So, so important. 

 

And that also leads into the next object: to encourage, promote 

public and private initiatives in housing matters. What a 

wonderful time, an opportunity, to say sustainability really is 

important — so important that we‟re putting it into the objects 

of the Sask Housing Corporation. 

 

Here it goes onto the next object, the innovation of new housing 

types, construction methods, forms of housing ownership, and 

evaluation of the application to housing needs in Saskatchewan. 

Wouldn‟t we be a leader if we made that a real sustainability 

statement? Just added a few words, but to the people who are 

looking to the Sask Housing for innovation this would be 

important. I know from our experience in Saskatoon that this is 

something that they‟re looking at whenever they talked about 

building, that we need to have that as part of our mandate, to be 

part of the objects. 

 

Now again here you go. And I think here‟s an opportunity at yet 

another object to stimulate and encourage research and 

education for constructive competition within the housing 

industry. To make it a little more green would be just a 

wonderful thing. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think that there‟s some real opportunities 

here. But as I read through that, there were a couple of words 

that I did not hear, and that was talking about addressing the 

issues of homelessness and shelter — that there‟s some 

responsibility that the Sask Housing Corporation has to ensure 

that no one is homeless in Saskatchewan. And here‟s an 

opportunity that we could include that. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when these objects were first developed in 

the ‟70s, again we had a federal housing strategy, and this 

played right into that. There was a partnership between the 

municipalities, the province, and the federal government. That 

fell apart. We knew that that happened in the ‟80s. And now‟s 

the opportunity to strengthen that and say, what are the new 

challenges that we have? And of course we know homelessness 

is a challenge we have in Saskatchewan, a challenge right 

across Canada, and we could have some real leadership with 

that. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to take a look at another part of the 

Bill here. And I think here, this speaks to the leadership in the 

‟70s when they saw the important role of housing in our 

communities and, in particular, with students and the type of 

housing we have. And I did appreciate that the Minister 

Responsible for Sask Housing did make an announcement 

regarding student housing just a few short weeks ago, because 

we‟ve been asking about that. But clearly section 19(1) talks 

about the role that the province has to provide and to allow for, 

and to play a role in providing student housing. So clearly there 

is a mandate and we need to see more of that. 

 

Now the administration at the U of S has talked about they 

would like to bring this up to the national average, which I think 

that‟s about 12 or 15 per cent. They have about, I think, a 

shortfall of about 800 units or beds that they need to get to. 

We‟ve come up with 400; we need another 800. Clearly more 

work needs to be done on that. Co-operative housing again 

speaks to how innovative this Act was — very, very important, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about some of the other things 

that this legislation is missing. And I‟ve talked a little bit about 

the energy efficient building practices. There‟s a real 

opportunity to include that in some shape or form. We know — 

and this was raised back in November and already there is 

discussions happening in Saskatoon within the CBO sector — 

about how can we help create an emergency tenant fund. Now 

this is the actual recommendation from Merriman-Pringle, and 

I‟ll quote: 

 

Create an “Emergency Tenant Fund” to provide repayable 

short-term assistance to renters who are having difficulties 

in making payments. 

 

I think this is a real innovation. We know that this is happening 

both in Toronto and Calgary. I‟ve had calls to my own office 

talking about tenants who are short one month‟s rent and 

they‟re going to be evicted. If there is a way to make this 

happen, I think this is really important. 

 

So one question I will have for the minister when we move this 

to committee is: are there legislative requirements to allow for 

Sask Housing to be a partner in this? I am not sure if that‟s the 

case. I don‟t know. But hopefully there will be expertise who 

can answer that question in committee, because I think this is an 

important thing. But we don‟t want to lose the opportunity, 

when the community obviously feels there is a need, that we 

can‟t do it because the legislation won‟t allow us to do it. 

 

Here we have an opportunity today to have the Act amended. It 

is open, and why not make sure that whatever amendments need 

to happen, happen — happens within the sitting right away. 

Clearly this is one that Merriman-Pringle felt was important — 

so important it included it within their recommendations. They 

saw it as a real innovation and I think it‟s very, very important. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, as well as the two or three recommendations 

I wanted to speak to, the other one was making sure that we 

value the partnerships, and I‟ve already addressed that. I went 

through the list of people, of groups that we felt were important 

to include. And clearly, Merriman-Pringle, and I‟ll quote their 

recommendation and . . . I‟ll quote it directly. I quote: 

 

Enhance partnerships with community based, First Nations 

and Métis organizations to create integrated place-based 

housing solutions as part of broader community 

revitalization efforts. 

 

Here is a real opportunity to invite these folks to be part of the 

solutions at the board table, at the governance table. And I 

really am hoping that that‟s the case. But I am concerned that, 

while it‟s not spelled out in the Act, it‟s very general. And who 

will be on the board? I have some concerns about that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 



2294 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2009 

So I think that there‟s some real opportunities here. I think this 

is very, very important that we take a look at some of these 

things and act on those things. We do see that many of the 

things have been acted on. I think that I would have wished for 

us to have taken a look at more of the Act so that it would have 

been . . . we would have seized the opportunity, that we‟re not 

going to let at least another year go by. Because some of those 

challenges, people just can‟t wait that long. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would say that, for example, I just want to make 

the case — and we made it last Thursday — and I just want to 

say that this report that I just thought was outstanding . . . from 

the University of Saskatchewan Students‟ Union, was 

outstanding. And this shows the kind of calibre, the quality of 

people who could be on that board. Here is an outstanding 

report called living well, learning well, and I just think that it 

just covers all the bases. 

 

Students these days are so articulate. They are so thoughtful. 

And when I look through the issues that they talk about, I think 

this is an important discussion at any board table. But 

particularly the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation board, 

these people would bring an awful lot of insight into it. When 

they talk about the student housing, talk about new and 

first-year students, the challenges they have, students living in 

residence, rural and northern students, I think that‟s an 

important discussion to have. International and out-of-province 

students, we‟ve heard concerns that people have come, students 

have come . . . well, haven‟t even come to the province. 

Because as soon as they hear that student housing here is 

virtually non-existent, they decide not to come. 

 

Now I know they have other challenges like the graduate tax 

exemption — the graduate students have. Here‟s yet another 

example of a challenge that graduate students have. Of course 

Aboriginal students face specific unique challenges too. 

Students are talking about their concerns. We know lesbian, 

gay, bisexual, transsexual students face unique issues, and we 

talked about that issue actually during members‟ statements. 

 

Students with disabilities, very important that we meet their 

needs because clearly they‟re going to play a large role as our 

economy grows and they take their rightful place in our 

economy. Student parents and graduate students clearly have 

unique needs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is not articulated well, and I have not heard 

the minister talk about housing as a right. We know that it‟s a 

right. We know that the United Nations . . . We have signed on 

as a country talking about our basic rights as a society, as 

individuals. And housing is a right, but we tend to gloss over 

that. And I think that needs to be discussed as well. 

 

We talk about specific housing problems. Shannon Dyck in this 

report really clearly outlines some of the challenges that we 

have — housing costs versus availability; rents, rent caps, rent 

increases; landlord accountability; and student loans. And we 

talk about the government component, whether it‟s provincial, 

or now we talk about the municipal role at the table with Sask 

Housing. But we also know the federal government has a huge 

role and that‟s so important, whether they‟re at the political 

level with the cabinet, the federal cabinet or with their offices. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I just want to say that I think this is an 

important document. I am looking forward to the next few 

months, and I have a few questions. We know that the housing 

policy framework for Saskatchewan that was launched in 2004 

was a five-year plan. It expired now, and we‟re looking forward 

to see what the next framework is. We have, as I said earlier, a 

series of recommendations that have been enacted, and we 

appreciate that. There has been some helpful things. But we 

have not seen an overall framework or world view from the 

minister about what housing is going to be like in 

Saskatchewan, and we need to see that happen. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, with that, we do have some specific 

questions that we would like answered in the committee. I‟ve 

identified some of those today. I will be asking about the 

emergency tenant fund, whether there was an opportunity that 

we missed because we didn‟t amend the legislation to include 

that. We‟ll be asking about the minister‟s intentions to ensure 

that all the partners will be at the table, that there‟s good 

representation, good diversity. Who will be at the table? What‟s 

the government‟s intention of that? So we need to hear that out 

because this legislation is kind of thin, and it‟s not very clear 

about the government‟s intentions. And clearly, Mr. Speaker, as 

I‟ve said before, what is the intention? Seeing that we may have 

missed the opportunity to include sustainability and green 

innovation as part of Sask Housing Corporation‟s mandate, will 

that take another form? I will be asking questions about that, 

and I‟ll be asking a few other questions as we get closer to that 

time in committee. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I look forward to the committee 

deliberations. And at this point we‟re prepared to have the Bill 

go to committee. Thank you. 

 

[15:45] 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 

by the Minister of Social Services that Bill No. 63, The 

Saskatchewan Housing Corporation Amendment Act, 2008 be 

now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Deputy Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It would be 

referred to the Human Services Committee. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Committee on 

Human Services. 

 

Bill No. 44 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 44 — The 

Agreements of Sale Cancellation Amendment Act, 2008 be 



March 16, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2295 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — I rise to speak briefly on the legislation to 

amend the agreement for sales cancellation Act. The intent, I 

think, on the part of the government was to clarify the 

legislative intent in the Act to ensure that the Act read what I 

think the legislature intended it to say, and which it didn‟t say 

with sufficient clarity. Unfortunately the government‟s first 

pass at making the Act clearer failed, Mr. Speaker. And in fact 

the amendments simply just raised more questions about how 

the Act was to operate and how the amendments to other 

legislation set out in this Bill were meant to operate, and what 

was being referred to by the time period set out in the 

legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The advantage of this type of Bill is that it deals with issues that 

lawyers deal with in their practice every day. Like some other 

legislation that comes out of Justice, it deals with issues and 

conduct and areas of business with which lawyers, in assisting 

the Saskatchewan public, are quite well versed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So this type of legislation, unlike other government legislation, 

has dozens more eyes looking at it after it‟s been introduced in 

the legislature. What can get past, what can get past the 

department or the ministry, Mr. Speaker — what can get past, 

clearly get past the minister in this case — doesn‟t necessarily 

get past all the real estate lawyers that deal with the legislation, 

Mr. Speaker. A number of members have raised issues about 

this Bill with me, with other members of the opposition, and it‟s 

quite clear that they‟ve raised them with the Ministry of Justice 

and with the minister. 

 

I guess the minister has written to me and said, well the 

legislation that is in front of the House for second reading has to 

be amended, and these are the proposed amendments that the 

government will be bringing to the committee so that the Bill 

clarifying the legislation in respect to agreements for sale in fact 

does clarify it, instead of making it even less clear, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I don‟t think it was the intention of the government to 

make the water muddier. They were doing that. It was caught 

by people who practice in the area. I understand that the 

minister practiced in the area, but I think it kind of got past him 

obviously, what would have been in the original legislation. But 

it has been caught by others. 

 

And it‟s an important principle I think of drafting legislation 

and passing legislation more importantly, Mr. Speaker, that 

what we do, we do deliberately; what we do, we do with intent 

and we do with a purpose. Not all the legislation that has been 

in front of this Chamber, and I think of The Witness Protection 

Act, necessarily has a purpose beyond politics, but this certainly 

did. And that purpose should be fulfilled. 

 

That said, Mr. Speaker, we‟re happy to see that lawyers in the 

province have brought matters to light. I think that‟s one of the 

values of having some delay in this Chamber before matters go 

to committee, before legislation gets rushed through, to have 

members of the public who are knowledgeable and interested 

take a look at the legislation. And happy to see that the 

government has conceded that point on construction labour 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, and that there‟ll be public hearings 

there. That‟s a much larger example of the value of receiving 

public input. But this is another case of receiving public input. 

 

I am reminded of a recent trip to New Zealand, Mr. Speaker, 

where I did visit the house of parliament in Wellington and was 

interested to hear that legislation after first reading goes to 

committee, that every piece of legislation is subject to public 

hearings. 

 

Now many times legislation of a housekeeping nature doesn‟t 

get any interest from the public, but the legislation is advertised 

as to when it‟s going to be before the committee. People attend. 

It is not necessary to be a New Zealand citizen to attend the 

committee hearings, and it‟s not necessary to be a voter. The 

youngest person to speak before a committee in New Zealand 

on legislation was 12 years old, so far, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So all that legislation receives a kind of public examination in 

committee as a matter of default, as a matter of course. Whereas 

in this legislature, we have to argue for that kind of attention to 

be given to legislation. We‟re successful in the case of Bill 80, 

the construction labour legislation. But that should be the 

default position in my view, that certainly a province, 

Saskatchewan, not divided into two islands as New Zealand is, 

could well afford to give this kind of public attention, probably 

after second reading, to every Bill. 

 

And this is another example of the value of doing that, Mr. 

Speaker, because these matters were caught by an attentive 

profession. But one could understand that the kind of mistakes 

that were made here in drafting and the wording that got 

through the Ministry of Justice could be in other pieces of 

legislation that are in front of us that aren‟t as well studied by 

the people who have to enact that legislation and put it into 

force. And some legislation that is used on a daily basis by 

lawyers was examined, and carefully examined, and has been 

the result of at least some amendments coming from the 

government side of the House when the matter gets to 

committee. 

 

The important principle in this Bill for us in opposition is that it 

not change what has been a bedrock principle in the province of 

Saskatchewan for many decades. And that is that in the case of 

one‟s home, that the only thing that can possibly be at risk — 

and it should be protected; there should be safeguards in place, 

and there are safeguards in place in Saskatchewan — but what 

should only be at risk is, under extreme circumstances and after 

all legal protections and all the opportunities have been 

provided, all that one can lose is one‟s home, that one cannot be 

pursued for the deficiency owed by the owner or the purchaser 

of the home to anybody else. 

 

And that‟s been safeguarded in legislation in the province of 

Saskatchewan for a long period of time, Mr. Speaker, and I 

don‟t think there‟s any controversy about that. But we want to 

make sure that that principle is protected here. And I raise that, 

Mr. Speaker, because I‟m not sure that the changes that the 

government is making put that at risk. 

 

But on the other hand, the drafting here, the government has to 

admit by its own actions in this matter that the drafting here was 



2296 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2009 

not perfectly done. And we don‟t want, through inadvertence, to 

put a question in any court case in respect to the unfortunate 

circumstance where somebody is losing their home, the 

principle that they cannot be pursued for the deficiency. And 

that is set out in legislation that is amended by this Bill, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So that is the bedrock principle for the opposition: to ensure that 

the government is not even inadvertently — because that‟s of 

cold comfort to anyone who‟s affected, Mr. Speaker — even 

inadvertently making a situation worse instead of making it 

better, Mr. Speaker. And I would have set out that principle and 

the value of that principle to this NDP opposition in any case, 

Mr. Speaker, but I think it‟s highlighted by the fact that this 

legislation which, if it had any value, the value was to clarify 

legislative intent in respect to cancellation of agreements for 

sale. 

 

And it doesn‟t give you a lot of confidence about . . . legislation 

coming from the government side was so hastily drawn up that 

it did not clarify that. As a matter of fact, it raised questions and 

now has to be amended in committee. It doesn‟t inspire a lot of 

confidence in government legislation, Mr. Speaker, when the 

legislation that is brought to us for the sole purpose of clarifying 

people‟s rights in fact raises so many questions that . . . I think 

it‟s three amendments the government is making in response to 

objections and concerns raised by the profession. And that‟s 

before we get to committee, Mr. Speaker, that we know about 

those. 

 

So not a lot of confidence inspired in the government‟s due 

diligence and care in bringing legislation before this Assembly. 

Obviously some attention has to be given to make sure there 

aren‟t other issues with this legislation that have not been 

caught but, Mr. Speaker, that work is going to have to be done 

in committee. And we are prepared to do that work now. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion presented by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 44, 

The Agreements of Sale Cancellation Amendment Act, 2008 be 

now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? 

 

I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I designate that Bill No. 44, The 

Agreements of Sale Cancellation Act, 2008 be referred to the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 46 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 46 — The Labour 

Market Commission Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for the opportunity to 

enter in the debate on Bill No. 46, An Act to amend The Labour 

Market Commission Act. 

 

I think this is a pretty significant piece of legislation that we‟re 

talking about here. I know this government has talked a lot 

about how it strives to ensure that it will increase its 

transparency and accountability through all its actions. And 

here we have a piece that I would say is actually moving 

backwards. 

 

It is somewhat ironic that just a minute ago I was on my feet 

talking about Sask Housing and how they were increasing their 

board from one to at least five, and here we‟re going from 19 

down to 11 — cutting people out. And so I have many of those 

same concerns. I did have a concern that that Bill was kind of 

thin. And this Bill in front of us is a two-pager. 

 

And it does talk about specifically who will be on the board, 

and of course that‟s been missing from some other pieces of 

legislation where they just say not less than — in that case — 

not less than five. And here you have not more than 11. So we 

know that it could be eight, nine, something like that, but it 

won‟t be more than 11. And here are the . . . who will be on the 

board, if you take a look at the new section no. 4 where it 

outlines who these folks are. 

 

And of course many of my colleagues have raised the issue 

really around a couple of key points. I think there are three key 

points here. One is the consultation that‟s gone into this 

legislation, which is becoming a real hallmark of the 

government and their style of what they call consultation, or 

lack thereof. A lot of people have a lot of questions. 

 

So we‟ll talk about the consultation. We‟ll talk also in terms of 

the role of the new Labour Market Commission within 

Enterprise Saskatchewan — one branch of the government that 

we don‟t know an awful lot about. We‟re not sure how effective 

it is. And while we had high hopes for the Labour Market 

Commission as a stand-alone commission, now that it‟s within 

Enterprise Saskatchewan, I have some deep concerns. 

 

[16:00] 

 

And the one that‟s particularly concerning for me, and I want to 

talk about this right now, is that it eliminates the representation 

from the social economy completely. And I would be curious to 

know how they determined that. Why did they do that? And 

that will be a question we have in committee. 

 

I know, representing the core communities of Saskatoon, we 

think the social economy plays a large role in the strength of 

our communities, and we think that this is alarming. This is a 



March 16, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2297 

dangerous signal that the government is sending to the CBO, 

the community-based organizations who are particularly 

interested in economic development, whether that be housing, 

agricultural production, that type of thing. What does it mean 

when they‟re saying we don‟t value that any more. We don‟t 

value that at all; in fact you‟re out of the picture. 

 

I don‟t know if there were consultations beforehand, if there 

will be a new role for those folks. We wait and see in the next 

few days, in terms of the budget, what this really means. But to 

be cut out like that and we see . . . We know this sector has been 

very successful throughout the country. We think particularly 

Quebec has been a real leader in this, and Saskatoon actually 

has been as well. This was some real leadership that we saw in 

how we strengthen our communities and community economic 

development. 

 

So now to take out this social economy is really, really a 

backward step. And so I just want to read into the record from 

the explanatory notes for Bill No. 46 of 2008, what does social 

economy mean? And under 3(e) and I‟ll quote: „“social 

economy‟ means the not-for-profit sector that seeks to enhance 

the social, economic and environmental conditions of 

communities and includes the voluntary sector.” 

 

And I know that this government is loathe to talk about the 

voluntary sector. It seems to have crossed out that language 

wherever it can. It talks now about the CBO, or the 

community-based sector, which is fair enough. I think that‟s a 

very worthwhile name, but it doesn‟t mean you cut it out, 

period. And this is a real concern. And I‟m not sure what kind 

of initiatives the minister for Enterprise Saskatchewan, now that 

he has the responsibility, or I guess, non-responsibility or just 

. . . He said, I‟m not touching it. I don‟t know what he said. 

 

But this is a real backwards step for a province that was 

showing some real leadership. We know that in many ways 

community-based organizations pay a huge role when it comes 

to housing. And so what does that mean? That we can expect no 

further interest from community-based organizations in terms of 

this? 

 

We know the government made a big deal last year about a 

summit. I don‟t know if they had at that point in the summit 

actually talked to many of the folks who were there talking 

about that they were actually going to be cut out. We know, for 

example, there are . . . Actually as I think about this, I can tell 

you many examples. One I can think about that deals with a 

recycling, rejuvenating computers that gets kids back into the 

workforce. Are they now going to be cut out? Clearly they‟re 

not wanted at the governance table though, and I think this is 

hugely, hugely unfortunate. 

 

This description . . . Section 4 is very thorough in terms of, for 

example, (c) when it talks about the: 

 

. . . three individuals from post-secondary educational 

institutions that are recognized by the minister responsible 

for the administration of The Post-Secondary Education 

and Skills Training Act, at least one of whom must be 

appointed to represent post-secondary educational 

institutions operated or administered by First Nations or 

Métis persons or organizations. 

Very thorough. That‟s a very good definition. 

 

We don‟t see that in some of the other Acts. Why is it, how is it 

that this government can bring forward on one day a piece of 

legislation that has a section like that, and then in other pieces 

of legislation, nothing? Here‟s the one, section (b): “three 

individuals, at least one of whom must be of First Nations or 

Métis ancestry, representing business in Saskatchewan.” And 

(a), “. . . representing labour in Saskatchewan.” That‟s all you 

get? 

 

We know the workforce is very diverse. There are many unique 

challenges faced by the workers in Saskatchewan. Women have 

specific issues that they would like to raise. Families have 

specific issues that they would like to raise. Recent immigrants 

have specific issues. Those living with disabilities have specific 

issues. Students who are about to go into the workforce have 

specific issues. Are they not going to be at all at this table here? 

I‟m really, I‟m really disappointed with this. 

 

Likewise with business. We know the business community in 

Saskatchewan is very diverse. We know there are independent 

businesses. There is the small-business sector. We know there 

are multinationals in this province — large, large corporations. 

We have some very different unique circumstances. We know 

there are businesses and labour who have their labour standards 

governed or their bargaining regulations governed by the 

federal regulations. Some are governed by the provincial 

regulations. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think while on one hand this seems to be . . . 

Well not one hand — I think there‟s some big holes. I won‟t 

even go that far. I think there‟s some big holes and some big 

gaps and so I am concerned about this. 

 

And I‟m concerned about, you know, when I look at, when I 

went on the website, when we saw what was the intention of the 

Labour Market Commission and we saw the partnership. 

Clearly when you have a rich and full dialogue at the table, you 

can have a real building of partnerships, and I don‟t see this 

happening. Clearly this government has picked some winners 

and some losers. When they go out and consult, some people 

seem to have the ear of government and some just don‟t seem to 

be able to get their voice heard at all. 

 

And I look at what the objectives of the commission were as 

defined by the Act: 

 

to provide advice to the minister on provincial, regional 

and sectoral labour market issues, trends and strategies. 

 

So here you have three unique needs: at the provincial level; at 

the regional level; and also at the sectoral level. Whether it be 

public labour issues and business issues, private, there‟s 

different sectors that need to be addressed. 

 

One, and I think this is huge: 

 

to foster co-operation among labour, business, First 

Nations and Métis organizations, training institutions and 

government to develop labour market strategies [and] 

policies . . . 

 



2298 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2009 

So how do you foster that co-operation? By taking five people 

away from the board? I think that‟s a huge mistake. We know 

the five: two are from labour; two are from business; and the 

one voice from the social economy sector is now completely 

gone, and I think that‟s a huge mistake. That‟s one that needs to 

be there for sure. I think all five need to be there. 

 

One that we heard, and we heard this an awful lot when we 

were in government, it needs to be more nimble on the research 

and provide answers to government and to business and to 

labour about the needs, about how we can meet our labour 

market challenges. And clearly that was met through one of the 

objectives — to research and provide analysis of provincial, 

regional, sectoral labour market issues, trends, and strategies. 

So hugely important. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think this is clearly a step backwards. This 

could have been an opportunity. Again we‟ve spoken about this 

— missed opportunities. If the government clearly wanted to do 

something to rejuvenate the Labour Market Commission, that‟s 

okay with us. I think that‟s a positive thing. You can always go 

back and say, are we doing the best job we can? But to do this 

kind of legislation without the consultation is clearly a step 

backwards. And it‟s clearly some missed opportunities because 

we probably could have strengthened it. And here we have an 

opportunity that‟s missed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As I look at the website — we printed it out — one of the 

quotes that I say that I really appreciate is to: 

 

. . . is best achieved through a partnership between labour, 

business, education and training institutes, government, 

and other stakeholders to essentially connect the dots . . . 

 

Connect the dots. And I love that phrase because I clearly think 

there is a problem here about connecting the dots. or some dots 

are more important than other dots. And we see one dot, the 

social economy, being completely left out. And we know that 

there seems to be a reduction from one other individual to 

represent the public — the old one, there was to be two. We 

think that‟s a missed opportunity. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, some of these dots seem to be more important 

than the others. And clearly that alarms us. And we look for a 

better, better work from this government. When it talks about 

. . . And it gets up many times and talks about transparency and 

accountability. How can that be when you‟re reducing the 

number of people at the table? 

 

Well when you have so many important issues, so many issues 

that have substance . . . And clearly the message is — you know 

what? — we‟re rolling you over into Enterprise Saskatchewan. 

There‟s not going to be so many of you at the table so we don‟t 

really want to hear about the issues. Those thoughts that we 

thought were important, aren‟t so important any more. So, Mr. 

Speaker, I just think that this government is missing the boat. 

 

When it talks about consultations, clearly it doesn‟t really mean 

it. They don‟t really mean it. And I am very interested in 

hearing what the minister has to say about the social economy 

when we get to the committee. Because I want to know what 

does he envision for that role, the community-based 

organizations that do get involved with economic activity 

within the communities, particularly sustainable economic 

activities and those that matter an awful lot to the people in our 

communities, such as housing. What is the plan here? I think 

this is clearly out of step. 

 

Another issue that I see happening here is a bit of a disconnect, 

even within government here. We see now the Labour Market 

Commission going over to Enterprise Saskatchewan. It was 

with the part-time Minister of Labour and Advanced Education. 

He has lost this job to the Minister of Enterprise Saskatchewan. 

That‟s an interesting thing. 

 

I don‟t know what happened there, whether there was some arm 

wrestling or what happened. What‟s the logic behind that? I 

don‟t know. You know, the members over there think that may 

have happened. I‟m not sure. But I know that this doesn‟t seem 

to have a lot of rhyme or reason to it, Mr. Speaker. I think 

there‟s some big question marks out there. 

 

And again, if we‟re not connecting all the dots, if some of the 

dots are going to be left, if we‟re not going to be interested in 

some of the dots, I don‟t know what the rush is here. Why don‟t 

we get out and talk to the people. 

 

Here we saw a summit last fall throughout the province, talking 

to those CBO groups about some of the challenges they have. 

And we know that this government when it was running in the 

campaign, particularly talked about they wanted to talk to the 

CBO organizations that had issues or worked with young 

people and those who were vulnerable who were not making 

the connection to the labour market. And now we see the 

outcome of that. They‟re just going to be cut loose. They‟re 

done. They‟re history. That‟s the end of it. 

 

And I think that‟s alarming, Mr. Speaker, because we think we 

could do better. We know this government has the resources. 

We know that they could be providing support to 

community-based organizations. Some of the things they‟ve 

done in the past have been quite alarming, and we‟ve seen some 

of these actions after last year‟s budget. Are we going to see 

those same things happen this year after this year‟s budget? 

 

We were concerned, Mr. Speaker, about how we heard about 

Station 20 after the fact. What a cut that was. No announcement 

about that but about a week after the budget we heard that 

Station 20 was history. A very important innovative group in 

Saskatoon that were really meeting the needs, and that could 

have been called one of the social-economic drivers in 

Saskatoon. But it‟s now history. We think this is a real problem, 

Mr. Speaker. And it clearly . . . You know, Mr. Speaker, they‟re 

very sensitive still about this issue because they really, really 

did the wrong thing at that point, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[16:15] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with that, as I said there, we‟ll have some 

questions about this. I will be asking the Minister of Enterprise 

Saskatchewan what is his world, what is his view about the 

social economy? What are we going to do about that? Is it just 

done? Is it over with? And if that‟s the case, I think that‟s really 

a disappointment. We‟ll be asking about that. 

 

We‟ll be asking about the consultations that took place. What 



March 16, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2299 

were the nature of that, and what can we expect in the future? I 

am interested in hearing that, because if there is information to 

be shared, I am very interested in that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am so disappointed that the number has been 

decreased. We saw in one hand, one Bill that‟s going on not 

less than five. And now, we have not more than 11. So I guess 

the magic number is somewhere between 5 and 11. And so I 

don‟t know what that is here for, for this government. But I 

think they need to be more consistent in how they talk about 

how they set up the representation from the public. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate on 

Bill No. 46, The Labour Market Commission Act. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 64. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 9 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Gantefoer that Bill No. 9 — The 

Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 

2008 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you. It truly is a pleasure and an honour 

for me to have the privilege to enter into this debate this 

afternoon on behalf of the fine people of Regina Northeast. 

 

And this is, I think, a very important piece of legislation, Mr. 

Speaker. This is a piece of legislation that fundamentally 

changes the position of a very sound public policy. This Bill has 

taken on a bit of a life of its own. It‟s already developed a 

nickname in the community of the double-dipping Bill. And 

basically this is what it allows, it allows people the ability to 

double dip within our system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, section 27 of The Superannuation Amendment 

Act, 2008 and all the previous Acts was there for a reason. 

Section 27 was there to prevent employees who would have the 

ability to collect superannuation from the Government of 

Saskatchewan while being re-employed by the Government of 

Saskatchewan or continue to work for their employer without 

actually retiring, — which would be allowed under this 

provision, Mr. Speaker — preventing someone from 

double-dipping and preventing the taxpayer from really 

basically paying twice for the same service. 

 

And that‟s what is, I think, at stake here, Mr. Speaker, is there‟s 

been a long-time held opinion that civil servants of this great 

province of ours . . . Which, by the way, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t 

think anybody has anything ill to say about the civil servants of 

our province. They do a yeoman‟s job. They do wonderful work 

on behalf of the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. But there is a belief 

that when they retire that that should be the end of their ability 

to continue to double dip or the ability for them to continue to 

draw on the taxpayers of this province. 

 

The changes to this legislation would set that stage, would 

allow them to — a civil servant, for example — to retire and 

then to be hired back on and basically do the same job for the 

same wage. Only the reality is, drawing his pension plus being 

paid, it would be getting twice what they‟re entitled to, to do 

that job. And they would be doing that at the expense of the 

taxpayers of this great province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the way the Act now reads, an employee can — 

and let‟s just use an accurate example of an employee working 

for the civil service here in Saskatchewan who would be maybe 

paid $200,000 a year in salary — would be able to work for the 

province and do some very valuable and appreciated work. 

Don‟t get me wrong there. And their services to the people of 

Saskatchewan is well documented, and we have a very good 

civil service, a very strong civil service. But this legislation 

would allow them to move to a situation where upon retirement 

they‟d be entitled to draw 70 per cent of their wage as a 

pension. Then they‟d be able to go back and do that same work 

on a salaried level. 

 

So drawing 70 per cent of their salary to do that work — as on 

pension they would receive about $140,000 a year — then they 

could go back and do the same job they were doing for the same 

200,000. So reality is they would be drawing from the taxpayer 

of this great province twice. They‟d be drawing once through 

their pension and once through their salary . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Totalling three forty. 

 

Mr. Harper: — And my learned colleague over here was quick 

with his math — soon that would add up to be 340,000. So I 

appreciate that, because that‟s a significant amount of money. 

 

But the real problem here, the real issue here at hand is the 

ability to double dip, the ability to draw twice on the taxpayers 

to do the same job they‟re doing now. That‟s what the flaw in 

this particular legislation is, is that it opens the door, it opens 

the door to allow that double-dipping to take place. That is a 

long-time, fundamental understanding in this province that that 

would not be the case, where an employee of the Government 

of Saskatchewan could take their retirement, they would take 

that retirement and they would be severed then from the ability 

to go back and do that same job for the same amount of 

compensation. 

 

And that is, I suppose, the big issue that we have here with this 

particular piece of legislation, is that it really opens the door 

and perhaps even, Mr. Speaker, one could say it even misses the 

opportunity. It misses the opportunity to set a standard — a 

high standard — for the civil servants of this great province and 

that could be measured against that of other provinces. 

 

And it‟s unfortunate that this government hasn‟t seen the light, I 

suppose, to take that opportunity to ensure that we do have 

those standards. But in fact they‟re bringing in legislation that 

really weakens the Act and opens up the real potential for 

double-dipping, and really opens up the potential for civil 

servants who would be able to retire, they would be able to 



2300 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2009 

retire at 70 per cent of their salary; draw that 70 per cent of their 

salary as pension; and then go back and do their job as they‟ve 

been doing for many years at the salary level of reasonable and 

fair compensation. 

 

And I believe that, Mr. Speaker, we have to have fair and 

reasonable compensation for our civil servants. They do a great 

job. They do a wonderful job in this province, and if we want to 

continue on that high standard, the quality work that we‟re used 

to in this great province from our civil servants, then we need to 

pay reasonable compensation for those efforts in order to attract 

the brightest, the young, the very capable people to continue to 

bolster our ranks of our civil servants so that we as 

Saskatchewan citizens, but also Saskatchewan here, would 

enjoy their talents and their abilities. 

 

And basically the talents that they bring to the workplace — the 

education, the experience — they bring to the workplace, it 

demands, it simply demands reasonable compensation. And I 

don‟t think anybody would argue with that. 

 

I think the issue here is this particular piece of legislation opens 

the door, opens the door to abuse. It opens the door to 

double-dipping. It opens the door to allowing individuals to 

retire, to draw 70 per cent of their salary, and then go back to 

the workplace and do the same job they‟ve been doing and 

continue to receive the same compensation. 

 

So that is really a double hit on the taxpayers of this province, 

and I don‟t think that‟s right. I think most people in this 

province would not see that as being right. They would see that 

as not being fair and reasonable. And I think what we‟re 

looking forward here is to have the legislation that would reflect 

fairness, would be reasonable to the taxpayers of this province. 

After all, they‟re the ones that are footing the bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you may or may not be aware that in many pieces 

of legislation, if you received a severance payment, you cannot 

continue to collect that severance payment if you go back to 

work for the Government of Saskatchewan. And that seems 

reasonable. I don‟t think anybody would object to that. 

 

And I know some folks myself who were former employees of 

the government, who through negotiations came up with a 

settlement of their severance package, and a part of that 

severance package was an understanding that during the period 

of severance, if they were to find themselves re-employed with 

the Government of Saskatchewan, then they would lose that 

portion of the severance package that would commence with 

their employment date. And I think that‟s fair and those people 

who‟ve received those packages, when negotiating this, they 

believe that to be fair too. I mean, if you‟re going to go back 

and work for your employer, then you shouldn‟t be getting a 

severance as well as receiving a payment for your work being 

done. 

 

And I think that probably that‟s the biggest flaw in this 

particular piece of legislation is that it opens that door to allow 

for that — lack of a better term — double-dipping that allows 

people who would be able to continue to receive their salary 

because they‟re still doing the job, but because they have retired 

or moved down the road towards retirement, they‟d be able to 

draw their pension. So then the taxpayers of Saskatchewan 

would be basically on the hook for both, making payments for 

their pension as well as making payments for their services 

being rendered. 

 

It‟s exactly that same principle, it‟s exactly that same premise, 

that you cannot double dip. You cannot collect twice for 

performing the services for this province. You shouldn‟t be able 

to collect twice for doing the same job. I mean this is basically 

what it is. If you‟re doing the job for the good people of this 

province and have been doing so, seek retirement — and fair 

enough; after a good, lengthy record of service to the province, 

retirement is an option that should be available. 

 

But it shouldn‟t be a retirement where you retire one day, say 

on a Friday you retire, and Monday you come back to do the 

same job now at a salaried level. You‟re collecting your pension 

which is about 70 per cent of your salary and then you end up 

taking the whole salary again. So what you end up doing is 

having somebody who‟s receiving really 240 per cent, which is 

even more than the suggestion of double-dipping. It would be 

even higher than that. 

 

And we‟re not talking about a huge number of people. I think 

we‟re talking about some 1,900 people that find themselves in 

that situation. But it‟s the principle, Mr. Speaker, that you open 

the door and you allow this principle to be established. And 

then who‟s next? 

 

You may find those people who for whatever reasons find 

themselves in the need of to leave the employment of the 

Government of Saskatchewan, and they do so through a 

severance package method of exiting. And as most severance 

packages that I‟ve been aware of will include the clause simply 

that if you regain employment with the province of 

Saskatchewan, the Government of Saskatchewan, that your 

severance package will end the date, the commencement of 

your re-employment with the Government of Saskatchewan. 

And that‟s only fair. 

 

And if you talk to, which I‟ve had the opportunity to talk to a 

number of people who‟ve found themselves in that situation 

over the last number of years here, they will be the first to agree 

that that‟s a fair and reasonable solution. I mean I suppose, yes, 

we would all, I suppose, in our moment of human greed . . . 

They would ask them if they would like to have both. Well sure 

they‟d like to have both. They‟d like to have their severance 

package and continue to work for their salary. I mean that 

would, I suppose, there‟s a little bit of human greed in all of us 

that would say, that‟d be great. 

 

But there‟s also a sense of fairness in all of us that would see 

that this is not fair. It‟s not fair for the Government of 

Saskatchewan to be on the hook for both, making compensation 

for either the severance package exodus or the retirement 

exodus and finding themselves also with the need to maintain 

the salary. 

 

So that, Mr. Speaker, is probably, I guess you could say, the 

bottom line of what this particular piece of legislation is all 

about. And it‟s different, I suppose, if an employee retires from 

their particular job and goes on to work for a different 

government or a different company. And that‟s acceptable. 

That‟s quite fine. That‟s quite all right. 



March 16, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2301 

I think what we‟re concerned about here is the real potential, the 

real opportunity for a person or persons within our civil service 

to have reached the magic age of retirement or perhaps being 

offered even an opportunity of early retirement, take that 

opportunity, and then return the very next day to the very same 

desk doing the very same job they have been for a number of 

years and being paid salary for it while they‟re drawing their 

pension. So that would be, that seems to be the number one 

issue here. 

 

And it‟s a long-held premise in the public sector in Canada — 

over the last number of years it‟s been watered down somewhat 

— but that the onus is on the employee to tell the government 

or the employer whether or not they‟re returning to work. And 

that‟s basically what the severance package agreements have 

been that I have been aware of, having in fact just most recently 

talked to a good friend of mine who is a former employee of the 

Government of Saskatchewan here, who found himself let go a 

few months ago with the change of government. He was one of 

those victims of this government‟s decision to rid, I suppose, 

the civil service of that particular individual. 

 

[16:30] 

 

And it took a little while. I think it took something like four 

months or five months of negotiations. Unfortunately he did 

have to get a lawyer involved, and they did have to have serious 

negotiations with the government lawyers. But at the end of the 

day they did come up with a severance package, a fair and 

reasonable — at least he believes it was a fair and reasonable — 

severance package. 

 

And part of that severance package, part of the agreement is that 

if he finds himself re-employed with the Government of 

Saskatchewan — you know, one of the departments or an 

agency of the Government of Saskatchewan — that he will then 

notify the government officials here that he is now re-employed 

with the Government of Saskatchewan and that his severance 

package compensation will end the very day of his 

commencement of his re-employment. And that‟s fair and 

reasonable. I think that‟s pretty well an accepted clause 

whenever you look at severance packages, whether it be in this 

province or elsewhere. 

 

And we can always talk about the employment environment, 

Mr. Speaker. And yes, we have a tight market employment 

atmosphere, and I think that‟s fair to say that the environment is 

tight. There‟s opportunity throughout the province but we have 

in some cases more jobs than we have workers to fill them. And 

to do this and then assure that we have the ability to attract and 

retain some of the brightest and the youngest in our province 

here, we need to ensure that they have fair and reasonable 

compensation for their efforts and for the job that they provide 

for us. 

 

And we often overlook the value of many of the employees that 

we have and civil servants we have in this great province 

because they . . . I know from knowing many of them 

personally, but also just looking at my experience as an MLA 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly] and watching some of 

the good work that‟s being done by many of the civil servants 

whom I haven‟t even had the pleasure of meeting, you can see 

that they have a loyalty. They feel a certain loyalty to this 

province. They feel a certain loyalty to their government and 

they certainly want to produce the best possible product that 

they can, and they do. 

 

I think we are very, very fortunate the top-quality personnel we 

have throughout our civil service here. They certainly do great 

work. They have been outstanding. I believe if there was 

awards handed out throughout Canada here, our civil service 

would win a lot of those awards for the quality work that they 

do. 

 

But we have to ensure, Mr. Speaker, that we have the ability to 

continue to maintain and strengthen our civil service. You do 

this by replacing those who are retiring and those who move on 

to other things. You replace them with the best possible people 

out there. In order to do this, in order to have the ability to 

attract these people, you have to provide fair and reasonable 

compensation. I don‟t think anybody would object to that. 

 

I think you‟ll find that fair, reasonable compensation is 

something that the taxpayers of this province look forward to 

because they know that it‟s an investment. Their money, their 

taxpayers‟ money that goes towards financing the civil service, 

the money that goes towards attracting and retaining these 

people, is really an investment because we get it back 

manyfold. We get that money back manyfold from the quality 

of work that‟s done by our civil servants. 

 

So there‟s no doubt that we need to continue to do that, but we 

must also look at the fact that we don‟t want to create a 

situation where you can have personnel who are at a point in 

time in their life where perhaps they can take retirement or they 

could take early retirement, or perhaps a early retirement 

package is something that‟s being offered to them. And they 

could take that early retirement package on a, oh say on a 

Friday and then return to the same job on a Monday and be paid 

a compensation, a fair and reasonable compensation. 

 

I think the rule of thumb here . . . I don‟t think we‟re wrong too 

much on our figures when we say that a retirement package 

would look something like about 70 per cent of the salary level 

that the individual was receiving. And then to take retirement 

on a Friday and simply come back to doing the same job at the 

same desk on a Monday at full salary would certainly create a 

situation where the taxpayer of this province is supporting, on 

both levels, that level of income, and it simply wouldn‟t be fair. 

It wouldn‟t be right for the people of this province and certainly 

not fair or right for the taxpayers. 

 

And after all, Mr. Speaker, I mean that money really all comes 

out of the same pot and it comes out of the general revenue, and 

that is the taxpayers of this province. One way or the other it‟s 

going to be supported by the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. And 

what we need to do is ensure that we have, yes, the best quality 

people that we attract — the youngest and the brightest. 

 

And we have no problem, the taxpayers of this province have 

no problem in funding that and supporting that approach 

because they know that is simply an investment in the future. 

By hiring the best people possible and paying them a fair and 

reasonable compensation package, we know that that‟s an 

investment in the future because our history has shown that 

civil servants in this province here, who are unique, I think, 



2302 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2009 

who are unique because they demonstrate a real loyalty over 

and above just being a job, they demonstrate a real loyalty to 

this province. And they work hard at their job — do excellent 

work. We‟ve seen that day in and day out. 

 

And we know that the taxpayers of Saskatchewan look upon 

paying fair and reasonable compensation to those people who 

we hire to do our work on behalf of us as an investment. 

Because it‟s an investment in the future; it‟s an investment that 

is returned to this province many times over. And we benefit 

from it. There‟s no question about that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I think when we take a little closer look at this particular 

Act, the Act to amend the superannuation Act, we see that there 

are some things that I think we all agree with. I think we all 

likely agree that, is that the reports do not disclose — the annual 

reports that is — should not disclose personal information such 

as names of individuals who are retiring, who may have passed 

on during a certain period of time, the amount of 

superannuation or other allowances or benefits being granted on 

individual cases. 

 

I don‟t think that the people of Saskatchewan are interested in 

knowing that. I think there‟s a great deal of support for keeping 

private, private information. And I don‟t think anybody across 

this great province would want to see that in any annual report. 

 

What they do want to see though, they want to see fairness, and 

they want to see a fair and reasonable compensation being paid 

to employees who are doing the good work on behalf of the 

people of Saskatchewan here. But I don‟t think you‟d find too 

many people out here would agree with the concept of 

double-dipping and people being able to draw their pension 

while still working and earning their full salary. I don‟t think 

you‟d find a great deal of support for that anywhere. 

 

I think we can likely all agree on the proposed minor 

amendments regarding the calculation of pension benefits for 

the spouse. I think that‟s something we have to look forward to. 

I think in the past we looked at pension plans where the spouse, 

you know, in the event the pensioner passed on, the spouse 

probably ended up without getting the full benefits that she may 

have been entitled to. And I think that‟s unfortunate. 

 

And I think those are the kind of things that should be fixed 

because a lot of cases the spouse is just as much responsible for 

the quality of work being done by the civil servant in this 

province as the civil servant him or herself, mainly because they 

were there to support the individual. 

 

Like the rest of us, we all have our good days and our bad days 

and when we come after a bad day, it‟s nice to have somebody 

to sit down and talk to and be able to share your problems with 

and share your concerns, and it sort of lightens the load. And 

there‟s no question in my mind that that‟s certainly the case 

with our civil servants too. Because they have good days and 

bad days. There are days when things go well, and days when 

things don‟t go quite as well as we had planned. 

 

So they, I‟m sure, go home and they take that home and they 

have the opportunity to sit down and share that with their 

spouses. And it‟s nice to have that sounding board; it‟s nice to 

have somebody there to support you when those days happen. 

And I‟m sure that that‟s exactly the case here. If you talk to any 

of our civil servants, I think they would agree with me at least 

that the home is very important, and the opportunity to ensure 

that the spouse receives a fair and reasonable compensation is 

something that . . . [inaudible] . . . followed up on. 

 

And this piece of legislation though, Mr. Speaker, does raise a 

concern. It raises the concern that this is a fundamental shift in 

public policy. And my question would be, who was consulted 

before these amendments were proposed? Who did the 

government talk to? Did the government talk to anybody? Was 

there anybody that brought these concerns to the government? 

 

If they did do the consultation, how broad was that 

consultation? Who were the stakeholders? What were the 

different groups that they may have consulted with? Or did they 

not consult with anybody? Did they just do this on their own? 

 

And they seem to have that tendency, Mr. Speaker, of bringing 

forward legislation, and then we‟ll do the consultations. It‟s a 

little like, you know, slapping the top of the desk with a 

two-by-four and saying, okay now we‟ll talk about it. The noise 

has already happened and the event has already taken place. 

 

So I would like to know, and that‟s one of the questions I would 

like to have. And hopefully at some point in time when we get 

to a committee, when this Bill finally gets to committee, we‟ll 

have the opportunity to ask that question. And I would hope 

we‟d get a straightforward response as to, you know, who was 

consulted before these amendments were proposed. Was there a 

broad range of consulting over a large period of time? Or was 

there very limited consulting, or perhaps none at all? 

 

One also has to wonder what other alternatives were explored 

before this amendment was allowed for the double-dipping to 

be introduced. I mean what else did the government look at? 

What other provisions? What other alternatives? What other 

issues? Who else did they talk to? What were the other things 

that perhaps were available that the government made a choice 

to go in this double-dipping direction? Whether they‟re 

following something else. 

 

Double-dipping, actually, Mr. Speaker, has some negative stuff. 

It provides an incentive for individuals to end their careers, to 

remain in that position which will slow down the rise of young 

individuals into the organization. This is something that we 

want to encourage — and that is the young people coming into 

the positions that are being vacated or the vacancies that 

occurred throughout government and throughout bureaucracy 

on an ongoing basis. 

 

There‟s I think a real need, Mr. Speaker, to continue to 

modernize, to continue to update, continue to add youth to our 

system because there‟s a first of all the energy level, if nothing 

else. Certainly they bring energy to it. But they also bring a 

new, fresh perspective. And that is I think welcomed in any 

organization, the government bureaucracy not being any 

different than any other organization. Certainly brings that 

forward. And we look forward to having that on an ongoing 

basis. 

 

And we actually encourage, we encourage the government to 

look at that as an opportunity to bring young people in, to bring 



March 16, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2303 

that youth, that enthusiasm that comes with youth, but also the 

desire. And a lot of the educational levels today of the people 

coming out of our universities certainly bring with it a lot of 

experience that they‟ve learned from, you know, from their 

university professors and their own experience at university. 

But many of them throughout their university career have also 

been out in the real workforce during the summer months 

earning revenue, earning money to help compensate the costs of 

their education. And those experiences are very valuable. And 

we would like to see that. 

 

We‟d like to encourage the government to continue to attract 

youth to fill the vacancies that do occur, to limit the ability for 

individuals to leave, perhaps prematurely leave their positions 

so that they can take an early retirement so they can simply 

come back, do the same job at full salary level. I think what we 

want to see is career civil servants doing their job. When the 

time comes to retire, they retire and open the door and the 

opportunity for young people coming on. Because young people 

bring with them the enthusiasm of youth but they also bring 

with them a bright, new outlook, a fresh outlook. 

 

We‟ve seen that in every organization, whether it be private 

sector companies or whether it be other governments in other 

jurisdictions. We see that a bright, young future is held for the 

youth who join the government, who bring forward their 

thoughts, their ideas. 

 

And it‟s very encouraging and a lot of times are very rewarding 

to those, you know, those taxpayers who are footing the bill. 

They certainly get their money back because this is . . . sure it‟s 

an investment. It‟s an investment in the youth. But that youth 

usually very quickly repays that investment. And then of course 

we stand to gain because of that. Certainly this piece of 

legislation could have some significant financial ramifications 

for the taxpayers and deserves a very close scrutiny. 

 

[16:45] 

 

And I‟ve tried in my humble way here to outline some of the 

issues that had come to mind, but I‟m sure that when we get the 

opportunity to have this Bill before committee and have the 

opportunity to discuss it thoroughly with the minister, I‟m 

hoping, I‟m hoping that the minister will be able to answer 

some of these questions very forthright and give us some very 

straight answers from what I‟m sure will be some very, very 

straight questions. I think we‟ll have some good questions for 

the minister, and I‟m hoping that the minister will respond in 

kind with some good answers. 

 

This legislation could have ramifications not even immediately 

apparent. And I‟m sure there‟s lots of areas that I, in my brief 

time up here, will have skipped right over and didn‟t recognize. 

And I‟m hoping that, you know, as we get into the discussions 

around this Bill that we will be able to flush some of this stuff 

out. 

 

I‟d also like to have the opportunity to talk to people across this 

great province about this, particularly those people who may be 

affected, perhaps some of those people who may have already 

retired — and they would have their opinions on this — 

because we have a real host of retired civil servants across this 

great province who obviously served Saskatchewan well, 

served Saskatchewan for many, many years through some very 

tough times, might I add. They made some very tough decisions 

and led this province in some very, very crucial times and very 

tough times. 

 

And those people who have now retired and are out of 

government, they‟ve now retired, and they sometimes join my 

colleague over here on the golf course — they‟d probably win 

in the golf game, knowing how my colleague golfs over here — 

but they carry with them a wealth of knowledge, a wealth of 

knowledge based on their experience. They have served in the 

civil service. They have served the people of Saskatchewan. 

They‟ve done a very fine job of that. 

 

But they‟ve also gained a great deal of knowledge that we can 

benefit from by having the opportunity of sitting down and 

having a conversation with them. They, I‟m sure, will have their 

opinions on this particular piece of legislation. And I would like 

to hear from them. I would like to hear what their opinions are 

because there‟s no greater teacher than experience. 

 

And when you get the opportunity to sit down with somebody 

who has experienced a lifetime of service, whether that lifetime 

be 30 or 35 years . . . And I‟m thinking back to one of my 

constituents, who I had the opportunity of door knocking on 

more than one occasion but most recently I think was probably 

during the last election. And he was a freshly retired civil 

servant from the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

And it was one of the conversations that I had that I really, 

really enjoyed because now that he was retired he was able to 

discuss with me a lot of his thoughts and his opinions that he 

would have not shared with me in the past. Being an employee 

of the government, he didn‟t think it would be the right thing to 

do. So he would, you know, be very polite at the doorstep and 

so on and so forth, but certainly not indicate to me any of his 

political preferences — which by the way I don‟t know what 

they were today because I just don‟t know that. That wasn‟t 

what I was interested in. 

 

What I soon became interested in was having the conversation 

with him and hearing from him first-hand some of the 

experiences that he had during his 35 years as a civil servant 

here in the province of Saskatchewan, and to sharing some of 

his thoughts based on those experiences, some of his opinions 

of how changes could be made to make Saskatchewan even a 

more effective civil service, to make it more efficient. 

 

And he had some great ideas and I‟m looking forward to having 

the opportunity of sitting down with him one of these days over 

a cup of coffee or maybe even a pot of coffee and have him 

share with me some of his thoughts and his ideas because 

there‟s no doubt in my mind that the greatest teacher of all is a 

teacher of experience. 

 

And when you have somebody who‟s had that experience, 

somebody that‟s gone through 35 years of history of this 

province as a civil servant here has offered that leadership, has 

offered that experience, has offered his time, and he‟s just one 

of those examples of loyal civil servants that we have in this 

province. I mean he was one of those who didn‟t look at the 

clock when the time came to the close of the day. He looked at 

the work that was still left to do, and I know that there was 



2304 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2009 

many times that he didn‟t leave the office at 5 because that was 

quitting time. He was one of those that left the office when the 

job was done. 

 

And I admire that because that‟s the loyalty I was talking about 

earlier, that I find that many of our civil servants have in this 

province. They‟re not just loyal to the job. They‟re just not 

loyal to the paycheque. They‟re loyal to the province. There‟s a 

job to do; they want to get on with it. They want to get results. 

They want things to happen and when they‟re given that 

opportunity, we can see as the result of it the quality of civil 

servant, the quality of work that‟s done in this province day in 

and day out. 

 

And we have not just one of those. We have many, many of 

them and in fact, Mr. Speaker, I would say the vast majority of 

the fine people working for this province and delivering the 

services are those type of people. They‟re committed to the 

province, not committed just to the job, not committed just to 

the paycheque, but committed to doing quality work on behalf 

of the people of Saskatchewan. And we see that every day. 

 

And I‟m just thinking back to a conversation I had with my 

good friend who‟s now retired. And after 35 years you can 

imagine, Mr. Speaker — 35 years — the amount of change that 

he would have seen during his time with the Government of 

Saskatchewan, the amount of change that would have taken 

place during that period of time, the amount of progress that he 

would have seen. 

 

And all of this was done without him having to double dip. He 

didn‟t double dip. He didn‟t take an early retirement and go 

back and fill his pockets because he had the opportunity to. No, 

he didn‟t. He did it because he felt a loyalty to this province. He 

did it because there was a job to do. That was his job, his 

responsibility, and he did it. And he led the way, along with 

many of our civil servants, he led the way on making those 

tough decisions when those decisions were thrust upon him and 

he was asked to make those decisions. 

 

He made those tough decisions because it was the love maybe 

— it might be the right word to use — the love for this province 

that they held. Not just the love for the paycheque, not just the 

love for the job, but the love for this province that they held 

because they wanted to make sure that Saskatchewan benefited, 

benefited to the best of its potential, benefited to the best of its 

possibility. Without having to double dip, without having to get 

extra pay, without having to do any of this, they did it because 

Saskatchewan in their belief is the province to be in — as I do 

and I‟m sure you do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think all the members of the House here would agree that 

Saskatchewan is a wonderful, wonderful province, and we‟re all 

very, very fortunate to live here. But what makes it a wonderful 

province is the fact that we have great civil servants working for 

the people of Saskatchewan. We have civil servants who 

provide top quality services. 

 

We‟ve enjoyed that for many years, and we will enjoy that into 

the future if we can recruit young, bright young university 

students and graduates who come forward to provide us with 

their enthusiasm. Yes, youthful enthusiasm, but also the 

knowledge that they gained through their studies, the 

knowledge that they‟ve gained through their experiences in life. 

 

And they bring that in combination with some veterans that 

have been around awhile and served this province well. and 

have a tremendous amount of knowledge built up. And I don‟t 

think we don‟t want to get past that because I don‟t think we 

want to lose that. 

 

We have the opportunity here, and I know, I think every 

member here probably could identify several people in their 

constituency who are retired civil servants who are carrying 

with them vasts amount of knowledge, vast amounts of 

knowledge based on their experiences, based on their time in 

the civil service, not only in their time in the work place, but 

their time in life‟s experience. Throughout life‟s experience 

they‟ve gained a lot of that. 

 

So we don‟t want to lose sight of that. We don‟t want to lose 

sight of the fact that we have tremendous potential within the 

civil servants here to continue, continue to have a strong civil 

service that provides effective and efficient leadership on 

issues. 

 

We need to be able to ensure that we have openings for those 

youthful graduates of our universities who bring forward a lot 

of their education and a lot of their life experiences. And they 

do so quite willingly. But we need to be able to attract them and 

to retain them. And in order to do that, you have to have a fair 

and reasonable compensation package — fair and reasonable 

when you compare it to other provinces, fair and reasonable 

when you compare it to other opportunities that might exist 

within the private sector. 

 

And I think if you look around you, we‟ll find the opportunity 

does exist to do so without having to provide a double-dipping 

process. The double-dipping process is something, Mr. Speaker, 

that I think most Saskatchewan people would find not 

acceptable. I think that when they look at the fact that perhaps 

an opportunity does exist for someone to take early retirement, 

and to be able to draw or to qualify for 70 per cent of their 

income as a pension or their retirement income, and then be 

able to go back to the same desk they were holding and taking 

on the same job, the same responsibilities, and being paid a full 

compensation package there, really, really is double-dipping. 

 

What it does do, it puts the taxpayers of Saskatchewan 

responsible for funding both levels of income — the pension 

level of income and the salary level of income. And that, Mr. 

Speaker, I think most people would find that fairly distasteful 

and not acceptable. And that‟s certainly not an acceptable 

practice that we would find most people in Saskatchewan 

enjoying. 

 

I think one of the problems here, Mr. Speaker, just at first blush 

of this particular legislation, is that it legalizes a form of 

double-dipping, simply as easy through a very costly way of 

addressing a difficult problem. I see this as perhaps the 

opportunity here — and really I would hope the government 

would look at this as an opportunity — an opportunity to 

enhance our civil service by providing those vacancies as they 

come up, as their retirement comes along, if somebody retires 

or takes an early retirement package, that the government would 

look at this as an opportunity to recruit youthful, young, bright 



March 16, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2305 

individuals to be a part of our civil service in Saskatchewan. 

 

I think there is no finer calling than the calling of serving the 

great people of Saskatchewan. I think it‟s a great opportunity 

for people who really want to make their mark and who really 

have a lot to contribute, a lot to add to our system and our 

society. I think that it‟s an opportunity for the ability to bring in 

young people to enjoy a good mixture of youthful enthusiasm, 

most recently trained and educated young people, mixing them 

with veterans who have been around awhile, who have had 

some very good experiences throughout their experiences 

within the government and within the administration of the 

government. 

 

And if you have the opportunity to speak to many of the 

veterans that have been around for awhile, I think you‟ll agree 

with me, Mr. Speaker, when you say it‟s a very enjoyable time 

when they sit down and take the time, start to share with you 

some of the experiences, some of their experiences in the past 

when they‟ve had to make some decisions in tough and 

troubling times in this province. 

 

And we‟ve gone through that in the past. I can relate to some of 

that, having been around in 1991 to 1995 and sat in the 

government benches. And I can recollect the tough, tough 

debates that went on within our caucus and the decision-making 

process of dealing with the economy of the province and the 

financial situation of the province at that time. And as much as I 

found it tough, and as much as the caucus members I‟m sure 

found it quite stressful, I think it was equally as stressful on the 

civil servants who were wrestling with the solutions to the 

problems, wrestling with the requests from government 

members saying what can we do in this particular situation, or 

how can we save money here, or how can we trim something 

here or trim something there. 

 

And those requests were put forward to . . . and they‟re the ones 

who had to make that decision. They‟re the ones who had to 

come up with the options to present to government as to how 

they can be cut here, where it can be cut there . . . 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — It now being 5 

o‟clock, the Assembly will adjourn until at 7 . . . will recess 

until 7 o‟clock. 

 

[The Assembly recessed until 19:00.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2273 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2273 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 2273 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2273 

  LeClerc .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2273 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2274 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2274 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2274 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2274 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2274 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Glass Slipper Benefit 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2275 

 World Junior Hockey Championships 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2275 

 Breaking the Silence Conference 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2275 

 Contributions to Agriculture 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2276 

 Young Entrepreneur Builds Business in Moose Jaw 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2276 

 Social Work Week 

  LeClerc .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2276 

 Affordable Housing in The Battlefords 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2277 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Western Economic Partnership 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2277 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2277 

 Discussions with Manitoba Hydro 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2279 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2279 

 SaskTel Services 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2280 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2280 

 Regina Correctional Centre Escape Report 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2281 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2281 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Mid-Year Capital Projects 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2282 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2283 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2283 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2284 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Not Debatable) 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2284 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 80 — The Construction Industry Labour Relations Amendment Act, 2009 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2284 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2285 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 63 — The Saskatchewan Housing Corporation Amendment Act, 2008 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2291 

  Harpauer (referral to committee) .......................................................................................................................................... 2294 



 

 Bill No. 44 — The Agreements of Sale Cancellation Amendment Act, 2008 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2295 

  Morgan (referral to committee) ............................................................................................................................................. 2296 

 Bill No. 46 — The Labour Market Commission Amendment Act, 2008 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2296 

 Bill No. 9 — The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 2008 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2299 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 


