




















































Hansard: April 30, 2009


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 56A  THURSDAY, APRIL 30, 2009, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2909 

 April 30, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — Members, before I recognize other members, 

I would like to introduce to you the Acting Chief Electoral 

Officer, David Wilkie. And joining him today is Beverlee Graf, 

the acting administrative coordinator from the Electoral office. I 

invite members to welcome them to their Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Humboldt, the 

Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

to you and through you to this Assembly, it’s my great pleasure 

to introduce Mr. Victor Prettyshield. If Victor could give us a 

little wave. He is seated in your gallery. 

 

Victor is the Regina coordinator of Child Find Saskatchewan. 

He has been in his role with Child Find for two years now and 

works tirelessly for the cause of missing children within our 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, dedicated individuals such as Victor and his 

colleagues at Child Find Saskatchewan and the many volunteers 

throughout our province remind us that a missing child is 

everyone’s responsibility. Victor has joined us today to help 

promote the Green Ribbon campaign and to recognize the 

month of May as Missing Children’s Month in Saskatchewan. 

 

I know my colleagues in this House will want to join me today 

in commending Victor for his work on behalf of Saskatchewan 

children, and I ask all members to join me in welcoming Victor 

to his Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, you may have noticed over the 

years that all school groups that come to the legislature are 

bright and good-looking, from great schools located in fine 

constituencies, and today is no exception. I wish to introduce to 

you and through you to all members of the legislature, 25 

students from — 25 bright and good-looking students — from 

the great school of St. Anne School in Saskatoon Meewasin — 

the fine constituency of Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

With the 25 students are their teacher, Rob Herrick, and 

chaperones Dolores Maurice, Treena Zdunic, Lori Froehlich, 

LeAnn Wright — probably not such an unbright or 

ungood-looking group themselves. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you, I would 

like to introduce in your gallery Friends on the Outside. They 

are an ecumenical and intercultural charity providing support 

for inmates in the Regina Correctional Centre with programs 

such as journaling, guitar lessons, self-esteem building, and 

one-onto-one counselling. They offer liturgies as requested and 

support for community integration and family reconciliations. 

Their goal is to create a culture that accepts, receives, and 

fosters reconciliation and healing. 

 

And I had an opportunity to speak at their annual fundraiser this 

past March 5. And I would like to introduce the founder, Father 

John Matheson — if you’d just give us a wave — and the 

current executive director, Ruth Robillard, and the members 

along with them today is Sister ReAnne, Father Matthew, Chris, 

and Ben. Welcome to your Assembly. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Wascana Plains, the Minister Responsible for Sports, Culture 

and Youth. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise today to 

introduce to you and through you and to all members of this 

Assembly, a very talented young lady who resides in my 

constituency. Seated in the Speaker’s gallery is Janean 

Lowenberger, accompanied by her parents Jean and Fred, and 

by her grandmother Janet Perkin. Janean is 17 years old and 

attends Greenall High School in Balgonie. She’s looking 

forward to a fantastic summer, not only because she graduates 

from high school this year, but also because she will be 

realizing one of her dreams. 

 

In July, Janean will be playing in a softball tournament in 

Central Park, New York City as a member of the 2009 Triple 

Crown USA [United States of America] team. She was selected 

by an American college coaches to be on the Triple Crown team 

and is the only Canadian to have been chosen. I’m told that 

Janean comes by her athletic ability quite naturally. Her 

grandmother Janet, sitting beside her, was a pitcher for the 

all-American girls’ baseball team, the Kenosha Comets in 1946. 

So Janean is proudly carrying on the family tradition. 

 

In addition to her skills at fast pitch, Janean is also an 

outstanding student. She maintains a 90-plus average, is a 

trainer for the football team, plays the flute and piccolo, has 

performed lead roles in the school musicals, and excelled at 

track and hockey. This young lady is clearly very talented and 

very accomplished. Our hope is that even if sports or schooling 

takes her out of the province for a while, that she comes back to 

her home province to live and work. 

 

Please join me in wishing Janean great success. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 



2910 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2009 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 

to introduce to you, through you and to all members of the 

Assembly, someone who is a very, very close and a good 

personal friend in my life, and her name is Roxanne Senft. 

Perhaps she could stand so we could properly recognize her. 

She provides me a great deal of support. She is a great support 

for my family. And without individuals like her in the lives of 

us politicians and our crazy schedules, it makes things much 

more difficult. So I want to express my sincere thanks to her 

and her family and welcome her to the Legislative Assembly 

today. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 

Head-Milestone, the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to the rest of the Assembly, I’d 

like to introduce 14 grade 8 students from Milestone, 

Saskatchewan, about 30 miles south of Regina. And their 

teacher is David Hawkins. Certainly I welcome them to the 

Assembly. 

 

I think it’s very significant, especially this week as the SSTI 

[Saskatchewan Social Sciences Teachers’ Institute on 

Parliamentary Democracy], the teacher’s institute was taking 

part in the building over the last couple of days, and David 

attended that. And I know from that, certainly I think the 

students from Milestone have benefited absolutely from it. And 

I think it’s always really beneficial when the teachers 

understand what happens in this room. 

 

We get to meet with the students shortly after and try and 

explain it in about a 20-minute exchange. But when you have 

teachers like David who has done his homework over the last 

number of years and brings a class in every year, I think it 

really is beneficial to our youth of the province. So I’d like to 

thank him for all the work that he does in promoting our 

parliamentary system. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour today to 

present 938 signatures on the petition. These will be the last 

opportunity I have to present the petition before we enact some 

legislation. This petition, Mr. Speaker, is in support of changes 

to The Highway Traffic Act, to be referred to as the Gallenger 

amendment. And the petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to enact changes to The Highway Traffic Act, 

to be referred to as the Gallenger amendment, which 

would require all vehicle traffic to slow to 60 kilometres 

per hour when passing a snowplow with their warning 

lights activated on Saskatchewan roadways. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve reviewed these 938 signatures that make the 

total more than 2,000 on this petition. They are from literally all 

across Saskatchewan. I noted as far away as Leader, Quill Lake, 

P.A. [Prince Albert], and many, many other communities, some 

from Swift Current. I don’t want to omit communities, but in 

the interest of time I’m not going to read all of the communities, 

but it’s a broad section from the province of Saskatchewan. I’m 

proud to submit these. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 

petition that speaks to the need for the Government of 

Saskatchewan to recognize the essential role of all health care 

providers as valued members of the health care team, and that 

there needs to be a realization that the utilization and value of 

the full range of professional skills is promoted through 

retention and recruitment and by ensuring adequate staffing 

levels, and that there also needs to be a commitment to adequate 

funding and the installation of good faith in the provincial 

collective bargaining process. 

 

And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to maintaining health care services 

and job security for all health care providers. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present on behalf of Saskatchewan working 

people and families. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition in 

support of indexing minimum wage. Mr. Speaker, the minimum 

wage increases are often sporadic and do not always reflect the 

rising cost of living faced by minimum wage earners. And the 

petitions reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to indexing Saskatchewan 

minimum wage to ensure that the standard of living of 

minimum wage earners is maintained in the face of the 

cost of living increases. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petitions are signed by residents of Prince Albert and 

Shellbrook. I so submit. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



April 30, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2911 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition on 

behalf of rural residents of Saskatchewan who question why the 

Sask Party government is leaving them behind with respect to 

providing safe and affordable water. And the prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to financially assist the town of Duck Lake 

residents for the good of their health and safety due to the 

exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency, and that this government fulfills its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good residents of 

Prince Albert, Duck Lake, Rosthern, Laird, Beardy’s. I so 

present. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition in support of 

preventing criminals from profiting from their crimes. And the 

prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to enact legislation prohibiting any and all 

convicted criminals from receiving payment or 

remuneration for the recounting of their crime or for any 

memorabilia connected with the crime, and that the 

government enact this legislation in time to prevent Colin 

Thatcher from profiting from his murder of JoAnn Wilson. 

 

As in duty bound your petitioners will ever prayer. 

 

Signed by citizens of Regina, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions in support of needed expansion of the graduate 

retention program. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately expand the graduate retention 

program to include master’s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by concerned citizens of Yorkton, 

Canora, and Regina. Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Missing Children’s Month in Saskatchewan 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our government has 

proclaimed May as Missing Children’s Month in Saskatchewan. 

Child Find Canada is recognizing this month with their 18th 

annual Green Ribbon of Hope campaign. This campaign starts 

on May 1 and aims to increase public awareness of National 

Missing Children’s Day held on May 25. My colleagues in this 

Assembly and I are wearing a green ribbon today to show our 

support and compassion for missing children. We wear the 

green ribbon to raise awareness of the problem of missing 

children. We wear it as a symbol of hope for families and 

friends who are missing loved ones. 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan has adopted the Children’s 

Advocate’s office children and youth first principles as part of 

this plan to strengthen the province’s child welfare system. 

Child Find Saskatchewan is guided by the very same principles. 

Recognizing the rights and protection of children and youth is 

paramount, and the safety and well-being of Saskatchewan’s 

youngest citizens is everyone’s responsibility. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to thank 

Child Find Saskatchewan for making a difference in our 

communities by helping to protect our children. Child Find not 

only locates missing children, but delivers educational 

programs and raises awareness about missing children. I 

sincerely thank all the staff and volunteers of Child Find for the 

hard work and express our government’s support for the Green 

Ribbon of Hope campaign. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I stand here today to express my 

support and the support of the NDP [New Democratic Party] 

opposition caucus for the 18th annual Green Ribbon of Hope 

campaign. The green ribbon of hope represents a symbol to 

remember missing children and seek their safe return. 

 

This month-long campaign is championed by Child Find 

Saskatchewan in partnership with Child Find Canada. This 

campaign, along with National Missing Children’s Day on May 

25, serves as an important reminder of those families whose 

lives were changed due to a missing child. 

 

The green ribbon of hope was originally created by the students 

and faculty of Holy Cross Secondary School in St. Catharine’s, 

following the abduction and subsequent murder of one of their 

students, Kristen French. In memory of this heartbreak, the 

students and faculty directed that their idea for the green ribbon 

be used exclusively by Child Find Canada as an avenue to 

increase national public awareness and to raise funds to support 

our education and search programs for missing children. 

 

It is with this story and the Green Ribbon of Hope campaign 



2912 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2009 

that we take time to remember the tragedy families endure in 

Canada and Saskatchewan still today. By wearing this ribbon 

we recognize and show our support for these families, children, 

and friends of all those affected by a missing child. 

 

It is our role as Members of the Legislative Assembly to raise 

awareness on important issues, and I do not think one could be 

more worthy than this. Children are the most vulnerable 

members of our society and whose futures will guide our great 

province forward. Therefore I would encourage the Assembly 

to recognize the vital work of Child Find Saskatchewan and 

Child Find Canada and to wholeheartedly support this 

campaign by wearing a green ribbon of hope. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister from Indian 

Head-Milestone. 

 

Notre Dame Hounds Win Championship 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, fellow members of the Assembly, I’d like you to join 

me in congratulating the Notre Dame Hounds on capturing the 

National Midget AAA Hockey Championship. The Hounds are 

located in the village of Wilcox, just south of Regina as well, 

and produce some of the best hockey players in North America. 

 

Athol Murray College of Notre Dame is a Catholic, co-ed, 

independent, residential high school for students in grades 9 to 

12. Father Père Athol Murray was appointed to St. Augustine’s 

parish in Wilcox in 1927. The institute’s name was eventually 

changed to honour his contribution. Though Père died in 1975, 

his legacy lives on. His beloved Notre Dame Hounds continue 

to produce many of North America’s finest students through a 

balanced program that emphasizes the values of good character, 

leadership, and community living. 

 

This past weekend, the Hounds had a 4 to 0 win over the 

Calgary Buffaloes in Selkirk, Manitoba, giving the Notre Dame 

Hounds their first national title since 1986. The Telus Cup was 

only one victory in this year’s season. The Hounds won the 

Saskatchewan Midget AAA Hockey League with a resounding 

34 wins, 7 losses, and 3 tie record. And on that, then went on to 

sweep three straight playoff series. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like everyone to join me in congratulating the 

fine young men on their phenomenal season. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Northern Hockey Champion 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Ty 

Gardiner is the Sergei Fedorov of the North. This is the case 

because Ty, a resident of Ile-a-la-Crosse, plays both forward 

and defence for the Beardy’s Blackhawks AAA hockey team. 

 

Like Fedorov, Ty is a champion. Last year he helped 

Saskatchewan win gold at the National Aboriginal Hockey 

Championship, and tomorrow Ty will join Team Saskatchewan 

to defend this national championship in Winnipeg. 

 

In June, Ty will graduate from grade 12. In the future, Ty would 

like to go as far as his hockey will take him and then eventually 

attend university. However, Ty understands that his goals can 

only be achieved with hard work. His father has said that Ty 

spends his summers training for hockey and that Ty will be 

trying out for the La Ronge Ice Wolves. 

 

Ty’s father is Big Lou, or Louis Gardiner, the first person from 

Ile-a-la-Crosse to play in the WHL [Western Hockey League] 

junior hockey league. He played with the Flin Flon Bombers. 

As Louis has been involved in his community as the community 

recreation promoter, school board trustee, and municipal 

councillor, he’s now the regional representative for the Métis 

Nation of Saskatchewan. 

 

Ty has large shoes to fill, but if he skates with the La Ronge Ice 

Wolves, he will have accomplished one of his father’s 

milestones. Ty has the Gardiner spirit and a Fedorov-like 

uniqueness within him. These have made him a leader amongst 

his peers, and in the future he will be a leader within the Métis 

nation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish Ty very well and tell him I’m very proud of 

him. Ty and his father, Louis, and his mother, Mary, are great 

Métis people from Ile-a-la-Crosse. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Business Excellence Awards in Moose Jaw 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, the 

8th Annual Business Excellence Awards were held last night in 

Moose Jaw with several businesses being recognized for quality 

and distinction in eight categories. Although our province and 

my community of Moose Jaw is not immune to the economic 

turndown, it was inspiring to see businesses come together to 

recognize their excellence and achievements. 

 

Community leaders, staff, and friends came out to celebrate the 

fortunes of their accomplishments in Moose Jaw with the 

business of the year going to the Moose Jaw Co-op. Over the 

last 10 years, the Moose Jaw Co-op has returned over $10 

million of its earnings to its members besides being involved in 

other aspects of community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all nominees are recognized for their success. 

Other winners included: Hopkins Dining Parlour for the Pioneer 

Award; Mid West Efficiency Ltd. for job creation; Guys and 

Dawls of Hollywood for a new business venture; SIAST 

[Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology] 

Palliser Campus for healthy workplace; Velvet Hair Salon for 

marketing; Boh’s Cycle & Sporting Goods for business 

innovation; Hoopla Clothing for young entrepreneur; Moose 

Jaw Tourism for customer service; and the Royal Bank for 

community involvement. 

 



April 30, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2913 

It was a gala event of achievement, Mr. Speaker, success and 

celebration and a reflection of entrepreneurial attitude in 

Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Prince of Wales Scholarship Recipient 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Stephanie 

Sasakamoose is a student at Wesmor Community High School 

in Prince Albert Northcote. Stephanie is a recipient of this 

year’s Prince of Wales Scholarship. The scholarship was 

established during the Prince of Wales’s visit to Saskatchewan 

in 2001 as a way to help students with the cost of education. 

The scholarships are awarded to grade 11 students to encourage 

them to graduate high school. Ten students across the province 

receive this scholarship each year in recognition of their hard 

work both in and outside their respective schools. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Stephanie is most deserving of this award. She 

worked 20 hours a week at a part-time job and volunteered with 

the firefighting mentorship program in addition to being active 

in several school sports. Stephanie has since left her part-time 

job and cut back on some of her volunteer work so that she 

could focus more on school. This decision is one that school 

principal Shelley Storey lauds as a testament to Stephanie’s 

strength of character and her maturity. Dr. Storey commends 

Stephanie for taking the time to prioritize in order to succeed. 

 

Stephanie believes that she has succeeded because she is 

determined not to let difficulties in life keep her down. She has 

set for herself goals and is working to achieve them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in offering 

congratulations to Stephanie Sasakamoose on being Prince 

Albert’s recipient of the Prince of Wales Scholarship. Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

2008 Income Tax Savings 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today 

is the deadline to file your 2008 personal income tax returns. As 

tax filing season comes to an end, Saskatchewan families are 

seeing the effects of the historic tax cuts introduced by our 

government last fall. 

 

Many people will or will have already received larger refunds 

than expected. And all residents of this province are benefiting 

substantially from our government’s legislation. Eighty 

thousand low-income families and individuals will pay no 

provincial income tax at all. These savings are primarily the 

result of our government’s decision to increase the basic and 

spousal personal exemption by $4,000 each. We also 

substantially increased the child tax credit to $2,000. We also 

introduced a new low-income tax credit, Mr. Speaker, to ensure 

that even people with little or no income, such as seniors or 

students, also benefited from these historic measures. When you 

factor in low-income tax credit, indexation, and the retroactive 

aspect of our legislation, Saskatchewan families are saving 

more than $700 million this calendar year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while the Saskatchewan economy remains 

relatively strong, we are not immune to the effects of the global 

recession such as affordability; however, through these 

measures, our government is taking action. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Minimum Wage and the Government’s Record 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, in December 2007 the 

Minister of Advanced Education and Labour said the 

government would make a decision on linking minimum wage 

to the low-income cut-off, LICO, and indexing minimum wage 

by the first quarter of 2008. 

 

In April 2008, the minister was asked if this government would 

be indexing the minimum wage and he said he was reviewing it. 

Mr. Speaker, that was a year ago. Tomorrow the last of the 

NDP’s scheduled increases to the minimum wage takes effect, 

and this government hasn’t given any indication that they are 

going to index the minimum wage. 

 

Now to the minister: is the Sask Party government going to link 

the minimum wage to LICO and index it, or is the minister still 

reviewing this? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I certainly appreciate the 

opportunity to provide an update. I think as I’ve said previously 

in this Assembly, my first analysis on the timing was probably a 

little bit optimistic. That review still continues, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the news, Mr. Speaker, the news that just came out 

yesterday, Mr. Speaker, the average weekly earnings are up 3.5 

per cent over February 2008, Mr. Speaker — the average 

weekly earnings, $804. It’s a record in Saskatchewan’s history, 

second largest growth in wages in Canada. The national 

average, just over 1.8 per cent, Mr. Speaker. The third highest 

average weekly earning right across the country, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’re pleased to be moving forward with the increase in 

minimum wage to 9.25. It’s one of the largest minimum wages 

in Canada and, Mr. Speaker, we’ll ensure that this work 

continues. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



2914 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2009 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I would make a suggestion. 

There’s an easier way for this minister to avoid these questions. 

And rather than spinning what he’s been doing over there on 

reviewing forever, he should just agree to index the minimum 

wage. That’s my suggestion to him. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — When the NDP announced a plan that 

would link minimum wage to LICO and pass legislation that 

would index the minimum wage, the then Finance critic and 

now Minister of CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan] said he supported this idea. He was going 

around everywhere saying he supported this idea. In fact he 

said, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party was the first to recommend 

indexing of minimum wage. Imagine that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now considering the minister has the support of not only the 

Minister of CIC, but all the Sask Party, will he commit today to 

indexing the minimum wage? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Before I recognize the minister, it just seems 

that we have too many participants in the questions being asked 

and the response being given. I’d ask members to allow the 

minister to respond. Minister Responsible for Advanced 

Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 

member opposite just made reference to forever. Well 16 years 

wasn’t forever, but it was sure long enough for the people of 

this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve just said, we are 

moving forward with this commitment that we made. It was a 

campaign promise, one of over 100 that we’ve kept, Mr. 

Speaker. Not only have wages just gone up, Mr. Speaker, but 

what we can see from the employment stats is that we’ve gone 

up more than 10,900 people since March 2008. We’ve seen 

First Nation and Métis employment go up by 7.9 per cent. 

We’ve seen women’s employment go up by over 8,900 

positions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We know we’re not immune from what’s going on around us, 

Mr. Speaker, but on a relative scale we remain very confident in 

Saskatchewan’s economy and the communities right across this 

fine province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, review, review, review. But, 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP believe that a person working full-time 

should have a high enough income to meet the low-income 

cut-off. Our plan was to match future increases in a minimum 

wage to the poverty line. 

 

We know that under the Sask Party many Saskatchewan 

families are under financial stress. Take for example the 40 per 

cent increase in the number of families going to the Saskatoon 

food bank. Now to the minister: does the Sask Party believe that 

a person working full-time in Saskatchewan should be able to 

meet their basic living expenses, and if so, what are they 

prepared to do about it other than review? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for 

the opportunity to talk about the work that we’ve done — the 

largest income tax reduction in Saskatchewan’s history; the 

increase in the low-income tax credit, Mr. Speaker; new active 

families benefit for children’s . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. More than 

doubled the seniors’ income plan for the first time in 16 years. 

We’ve just increased student loans for the first time since the 

mid-1990s. And just yesterday our Minister of Finance 

announced that there is 700 millions in tax savings for the 

people of this province. Delighted to stand on this record and 

compare it to the members opposite any time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Utility Rates and Emissions Reduction 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the Sask 

Party’s excuse for their broken promises on climate change is 

their new-found desire to keep SaskPower rates affordable. 

Affordable utility rates didn’t seem much of a concern when 

they were asking for a 13 per cent rate increase, mind you. And 

they didn’t seem to be an issue when they trashed the $320 

million Green Future Fund the former NDP government 

established to meet our climate change targets. 

 

To the minister: where was the Sask Party’s commitment to 

keeping utility rates affordable when they squandered the 

money the NDP set aside to address climate change? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I find it interesting what 

the NDP consider squandering. And to begin, I would like to 

state yet again that the $320 million was nothing more than a 

press release. It wasn’t anywhere except in the GRF [General 

Revenue Fund]. It was never allocated. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the $320 million we used, $140 million went 



April 30, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2915 

to highways and road construction — something that was 

completely neglected under the NDP; $40 million in additional 

go green funding for environmental initiatives; and, Mr. 

Speaker, $215 million for debt reduction. Only the NDP would 

consider that squandering. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Well, Mr. Speaker, they used our money that we 

left them in the $320 million Green Future Fund to balance their 

budget. So the money that we left . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Member from Regina Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Throw a stone and hear what yelps. Mr. 

Speaker, the Sask Party says the Sask NDP has to choose 

between affordable utility rates and reduced greenhouse gas 

emissions. But the fact is, the Sask Party is providing neither. In 

fact the report from the rate review panel made it clear that the 

real problem is the Sask Party’s inability to manage costs at 

SaskPower. 

 

To the minister: how can the Sask Party ask for a 13 per cent 

rate increase, promise years of further rate increases, and then 

claim that they can’t keep their climate change targets because 

they want to keep utility rates affordable? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I think what we just heard 

was the NDP true colours coming out — their absolute sense of 

entitlement that they think that the profits realized are their 

money. Not the money of the people of this province to be used 

for the benefit of the people of this province, but the NDP’s 

personal little cash cow. I think it’s absolutely a ridiculous 

position. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a StarPhoenix article said, and I quote: 

 

For years under the former regime, Saskatchewan was 

accused by environmental groups of being the country’s 

worst laggard in acting to cut emissions. That goal was 

sacrificed year after year at the altar of offering the 

lowest-cost utilities bundle. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it goes on to say, and I quote: “But it’s a fool’s 

game to believe [that] this province can reduce emissions 

without cost.” 

 

That’s exactly our position. We will continue to do whatever we 

can to make life affordable for the citizens of our province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — And I guess that plan included cutting out the 

lowest cost utility bundle for the poor citizens of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP acted to begin reducing greenhouse gas 

emissions. We built enough wind energy capacity in just six 

years to provide electricity to 73,000 homes. Over 16,000 

homeowners benefited from rebates and grants for 

programmable thermostats, Energy Star appliances, and home 

upgrading programs. 

 

The Sask Party has continued these programs but has done 

nothing to build on them since coming to office. Instead they 

promised emission reductions in 2020 from the nuclear power 

plant they seem so intent on building. 

 

To the minister: what is the Sask Party doing to reduce 

greenhouse gas emissions this year, not years from now? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, the $320 million that the 

NDP is so fond of bringing up over and over again, it was 

one-time money, one-time money, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And if the member opposite wants to know what we’re doing, 

starting in 2008: SaskPower low-carbon energy sources, $1.7 

billion; renewable energy, $139 million; energy efficiency and 

conservation, $105 million; solid waste and water resource 

management, $51 million; natural resource conservation, $37 

million; research and development, $52 million; education and 

awareness, $7 million — Mr. Speaker, over $2 billion. I think 

their $320 million pales in comparison to what we’re doing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Well unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, money to 

address greenhouse gas emissions in this province — zero 

dollars. 

 

The Sask Party’s excuse for everything is to blame the NDP. 

But as a prominent columnist pointed out yesterday in 

yesterday’s StarPhoenix, “But it was your party’s promise to 

meet these standards, Ms. Heppner.” 

 

In other words, if the Sask Party really thought it was 

impossible to keep affordable rates and address climate change, 

they should have said so during the election. But they didn’t, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

To the minister: did the Sask Party ever have any intention of 

meeting the NDP’s climate change targets or was it just a 

cynical ploy to convince voters that they had changed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



2916 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2009 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, apparently the member 

opposite wasn’t listening when I just read off this list. But I 

would point out that SaskPower low-carbon energy sources 

would reduce greenhouse gas emissions. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as to the targets, the member opposite said in 

April 2008, and I quote, “I would say the federal targets are 

something they should clearly be adopting.” And, Mr. Speaker, 

the NDP leader last September, and I quote from an article, 

“Calvert said the Conservatives’ own federal plan will mean 

significant costs for Saskatchewan.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, they were concerned about the federal plan 

costing the residents of this province money. Imagine what their 

higher targets are going to cost the people of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Profits From Crime and Victims’ Rights 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Minister of 

Justice passed off on to the opposition a responsibility to 

introduce legislation preventing criminals from profiting from 

the recollection of their crimes. The government has all the 

resources of the Ministry of Justice at its disposal, but according 

to the Minister of Justice, it’s the opposition’s responsibility. 

 

My question then to the minister is this: if we take him up on 

his invitation, will he make the resources of the Ministry of 

Justice available to us to help prepare the best possible 

legislation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member 

opposite for the question. Yesterday I did in fact invite the 

members opposite to introduce a private member’s Bill. Upon 

reflection and upon discussion with my colleagues, I and my 

colleagues feel that such legislation would in fact be better done 

if it was prepared using the resources of the Ministry of Justice, 

and accordingly I’m prepared to announce today that I directed 

my staff to prepare a piece of legislation that will be introduced 

next week. We will be looking for the members’ opposite 

support in passing that so that it goes to a third reading within a 

day or two of having been introduced. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m also announcing today that we will be 

undertaking a broad public consultation to deal with victims’ 

rights generally to ensure that we’ve got broad future legislation 

that can enhance victims’ rights not just with regard to specific 

items but with regard to all sources of revenue. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Severance of Public Servants 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, a few 

days ago, we asked for an update on the cost of severance 

packages for the fired professional public servants. Now the 

Minister of Justice tried to claim he couldn’t talk about issues 

before the courts — never mind that there are no issues before 

the courts, never mind that the government had made this type 

of information available to the public in the past. 

 

To the Minister of Justice: can he confirm that the total cost to 

date of severance packages is in excess of $10 million? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we anticipate the cost of 

transition, it will be in the range of $10 million, yes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when governments change, some employees 

change in order to carry out the new direction in government. 

Our government dismissed about 70 people as a result of the 

transition process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many of the members opposite were there in 1991 

when in fact the NDP fired 200 Crown corporation and 

government employees in its first two months. Mr. Speaker, at 

that time a senior NDP cabinet minister said senior government 

officials had to be dismissed “without cause” in order to replace 

them with people “who better reflect the needs of the 

government.” Mr. Speaker, that was Dwain Lingenfelter that 

said that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, as I recall, the former Devine 

government did not terminate employees in this building. It was 

left to the incoming Romanow government. As I recall, Mr. 

Speaker, the Devine government had taken a number of 

employees out of the classified service, and they were orders in 

council. Now, Mr. Speaker, the people that this government 

fired were members of the professional, classified public 

service. 

 

Now the minister has advised the media and now today he’s 

advised the House that the number is in excess of $10 million. 

Yet the Sask Party was asked a written question: what was the 

total cost of the severance packages? Yesterday the government 

claimed it would take them six more months to make that 

number available. This is the day after the minister told the 

media the number of 10 million. 

 

So to the minister: why is he telling us the number today is 10 

million when he’s not prepared to put that in writing? Is that 

Sask Party stonewalling? 

 



April 30, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2917 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I can advise the member 

opposite there are still some matters that are not settled. I do not 

wish to prejudice or cause any damage to the negotiations that 

are ongoing. I would like very much — and I think the 

members opposite would share that view — that we would like 

to treat these people with care, compassion, and give them a 

reasonable settlement as quickly as possible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a new government needs new people in place in 

order to carry out the direction of the new government. That’s 

the approach our government followed upon taking office, and 

it’s the approach the NDP government followed upon taking 

office. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in December 1991, the NDP fired Liquor Board 

chairman, Ted Urness. Darrel Cunningham, the minister at the 

time, said: 

 

I’m not going to be critical of Mr. Urness’s work. He’s 

done a credible job. I’m not knocking the guy. I’m just 

saying we’re moving in a different direction. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are treating these people appropriately, fairly, 

and moving as quickly as we can to get settlements. We will 

collect all of the information and we will provide detailed 

spreadsheets with all of the information on it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — You know, Mr. Speaker, we have people in 

Duck Lake that are having their water cut off because of 

outrageous water rates, Mr. Speaker. Yet this government has 

over $3 million . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the . . . Order. I recognize 

the member from Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Yet this government has over $3 million for 

a temporary pavilion during the Olympics, Mr. Speaker. This 

government has over $10 million to fire and pay severance 

payments to public servants that got their jobs through the 

classified service, Mr. Speaker — $10 million. I say they seem 

to have access to more money than brains, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker — Order. Order. Order. I just want to remind 

members to be mindful of the words they choose and how it 

reflects on the character of individuals. I think we all as 

members want to respect that. I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — So, Mr. Speaker, why would anyone believe 

that it’s $10 million, according to the minister, when the Sask 

Party government isn’t prepared to put this in writing? 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, this is a government that 

intends to be and will be and will continue to be open, 

transparent, and accountable. If matters are before the courts, 

we’re not talking about them. If there are things that involve 

specific personnel matters, we’re not talking about them. 

 

We have prepared a spreadsheet in accordance with the written 

question that was asked. They have been supplied information 

as it comes available and, Mr. Speaker, they will get all of the 

information. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they are a government that when they came into 

office they actually went out and fired single women on 

Christmas eve. They were the most cold, callous, and unfeeling 

people imaginable. Mr. Speaker, they had no compassion, no 

sense of reasonableness. I quote former Premier Romanow. He 

said if they are politically incompatible with an NDP 

administration, he said, “it makes the person not competent to 

carry out the job.” 

 

I can’t imagine something more offensive to a long-term career 

civil servant to find out that if they’re not NDP supporters, they 

are not competent. What a thing for a former premier to say. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice claimed 

in the press scrum apparently that his government wanted 

people who “wanted the province to grow.” Now, Mr. Speaker, 

we believe that’s an insult to the people who were fired who got 

their jobs through the Public Service Commission. 

 

To the minister: is he really prepared to stand in this House and 

say that the 70 people that came out of the classified public 

service that were fired by the Sask Party government did not 

want the province to grow? Or will the minister do the right 

thing and apologize to the professional public servants whose 

commitment and loyalty to our province has been attacked in 

the media? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we want to hire people that 

are philosophically compatible with the new direction for this 

province, that they will have this province grow and take its 

rightful place in Confederation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite, they’re the ones that are 

saying that they want growth now. What about when they were 

in government? They said, we will always be in and out of 

equalization; we will always want not to grow; we will be a wee 

province; there will be more there for the rest of us. 

 

That is a group of people over there, Mr. Speaker, that have no 



2918 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2009 

desire for the province to grow, no ability to make it grow. And 

for them to stand announcing, we’re pro-growth, what a 

ludicrous thing for them to say. The member from Riversdale is 

the one that’s on record as saying, we’re not going to be a 

growing province. I don’t know where they think they’re 

coming from for now to say they’ve got a public service that 

was supportive of growth. It just wasn’t on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[10:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Gender Equity Issues 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday I asked the 

government about the gender gap in the pay of the Sask Party 

employees and also if there was any commitment to pay equity 

legislation. The minister not only didn’t answer the question; he 

wasn’t even in the right time zone. 

 

In the Premier’s office and in ministers’ offices under this 

government, women get paid much less than men, much less. In 

this government, in the Premier’s office, women get paid much 

less than men. Since the minister clearly has no idea how to 

answer the question, I’ll ask the Premier. 

 

To the Premier: does he feel this is acceptable? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, delighted to talk about the 

significant growth in opportunities for women in this province. 

Is there more to do? Yes, there is, Mr. Speaker, but based on the 

March 2009 data, women’s employment was up 8,900 jobs. 

 

What we just saw yesterday, Mr. Speaker, wages on the rise, 

Mr. Speaker, setting records. Mr. Speaker, $804, it is now the 

third highest across the country, Mr. Speaker. Is there more to 

do? Of course there’s more to do. That’s part of a shared legacy 

that those individuals are responsible for. They made changes to 

the Status of Women office in 2002, Mr. Speaker. Is there more 

work to do? Yes, there is, but the data out today says we’re 

making progress, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, women in this province on 

average earn 84 cents on every dollar that the average male 

makes. But in their offices, women make 53 cents for every 

dollar a male makes. That is a poor example for the government 

to be setting for women across this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, this is a calculation done using 

the government’s own numbers. And I know the minister likes 

to read, so I will recommend a couple of pieces: Balancing the 

Scales of Pay Equity, a document put out by CCPA [Canadian 

Centre for Policy Alternatives], and also one that he may find 

informative, the former pay equity policy framework that was 

put in place by this government to provide equity for 

Saskatchewan women. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, when will the minister start 

valuing the contribution of Saskatchewan women and put in 

place pay equity? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I certainly appreciate the 

opportunity to reiterate the latest employment numbers, the 

latest numbers regarding wages, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Regarding our government, Mr. Speaker, this government 

employs people based on merit, Mr. Speaker. The cost of 

government is less during this administration than it was during 

the previous administration. The cost of political staff salaries 

in the Saskatchewan Party government will continue to be 

lower than the NDP government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we can see, what we can see, Mr. Speaker, is 

a blatant attempt to try to resuscitate a very, very stagnant 

leadership campaign, Mr. Speaker. That’s what we’re seeing, 

Mr. Speaker. We’re seeing poor NDP politics while we practise 

solid public policy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Speaker: — Before orders of the day . . . Order. Before 

orders of the day, earlier I introduced our Acting Chief 

Electoral Officer and the manager in the office. They’re here 

today to observe the presenting, pursuant to section 286, The 

Election Act, 1996, the report of the Chief Electoral Officer. I so 

lay it on the Table. 

 

I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would 

request leave to introduce a motion requesting leave for a 

member. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 

leave to present a motion. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. 

 

I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 



April 30, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2919 

MOTIONS 

 

Granting of Leave of Absence 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move by 

leave of the Assembly: 

 

That the privilege of exemption of a member from 

attending as a witness before any court while the 

Assembly is in session shall be waived, with respect to the 

voluntary attendance for the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland at the Court of Queen’s Bench with respect to 

her previous capacity as a peace officer. 

 

And further, that the member for Saskatoon Sutherland 

shall be granted a leave of absence from the Assembly for 

this purpose from Monday, May 4 through Thursday, May 

7, 2009 inclusive. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved a 

motion regarding the attendance of a member in the Assembly. 

And we’ll ask, will the members take the motion as read? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the member for 

The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I request 

leave to make a short statement. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from The Battlefords has 

requested leave to make a statement. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to offer my apologies to the members of this House, 

members of the public including the media, on comments that I 

made the other night, Mr. Speaker. While I realize the 

comments that I made were made in committee, I believe that 

those comments have implication beyond the scope of the 

committee. And I wish to make my apology more broadly than 

just to the members who were in that committee that evening. 

 

Specifically, Mr. Speaker, my comments came near the end of a 

series of questions to the Minister of Energy and Resources 

during a public meeting of the Economy Committee Tuesday 

afternoon. More specifically, Mr. Speaker, on reviewing the 

committee Hansard, I see that I have said that a question I was 

about to put to the minister was requested to be put by a 

member of the media. 

Mr. Speaker, let me be clear to all members of this House, all 

members of the public, that although the question I was about to 

put was based on a transcript of media questions asked 

previously of the minister, no member of the media — not from 

Regina, not from my constituency, not from any other 

Saskatchewan constituency — asked me to put this question to 

the minister. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I respect the role of the independent media. I was 

wrong to bring them into the debate of the committee. In my 

enthusiasm to hold the minister accountable for his earlier 

comments, I inadvertently misled the minister, the members of 

the committee, and by extension the members of this Assembly. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I apologize to the minister, to the 

members of the committee, to the members of this Assembly, 

and to the members of Saskatchewan’s hard-working media. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I thank the member from The Battlefords for 

that apology. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Support for Rural Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an 

honour to have the opportunity to enter into and lead this debate 

this morning. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m going to start out with my motion. My motion 

is: 

 

That this Assembly recognizes the actions of this 

government in providing more support to rural 

Saskatchewan in 16 months than the previous NDP 

government did in 16 years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government recognizes the important role 

rural Saskatchewan plays in growing and sustaining our current 

economic growth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the former administration spent 16 years 

systematically dismantling rural Saskatchewan. They allowed 

the highways to fall into disarray. They ignored the imbalance 

of education funding and didn’t have a plan to reduce the 

education portion of property taxes. They closed rural hospitals. 

I could go on and on. 

 

This is why this government has focused on the challenge of 

rebuilding, rebuilding rural Saskatchewan. We went ahead and 

fulfilled our promise to reduce the education portion on 

property tax to the farmers — to everybody, but especially 

farmers — to achieve a fairer balance for education funding. 

 

And our government is spending $152 million for 13 new 



2920 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2009 

long-term care facilities right across Saskatchewan, most in 

rural Saskatchewan where they have been ignored for years. 

Mr. Speaker, we’re planning and committed to rebuilding rural 

Saskatchewan — that, Mr. Speaker, is our vision. 

 

It is evident, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP, and in particular their 

leadership hopefuls, have no clear vision for rural 

Saskatchewan. When you look through each individual 

hopeful’s policy statements, they’re scarce when it comes to 

rural population. What I’m going to do is I’m going to give you 

some of the quotes, some of the quotes of their various 

leadership candidates. 

 

The leadership candidate Mr. Meili has said that: 

 

. . . the party’s disengagement with rural voters has grown 

so much, the NDP should hire rural employees to help 

rebuild those relationships. 

 

“At this point . . . [to me] the distance is so great, we need 

to invest some money.’ 

 

“They really do feel that the NDP left them behind.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP had 16 years to build those relationships, 

and instead they burned the bridges. Not only burned them, they 

didn’t fix them up. You should see our rural municipality. 

 

Leadership candidate Mr. Pedersen said that the previous NDP 

government “. . . had an attitude that rural Saskatchewan was on 

the decline and didn’t warrant the kind of investment required 

by urban areas.” What a statement. Even a leadership candidate 

and former party president has acknowledged that their party 

has abandoned rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Pedersen also noted that it troubled him that many in his 

party seemed to have the attitude that rural Saskatchewan was 

in an inevitable decline, and there was nothing that could stop 

it. Mr. Pedersen is not the only one who is troubled by this 

attitude. The people of rural Saskatchewan who were ignored 

for 16 years are troubled by this as well. 

 

Leadership candidate and former cabinet minister, the member 

from Moose Jaw Wakamow, has said that meeting with rural 

municipal councils in her constituency gave her a chilly 

reception. Go figure. Maybe because that administration has left 

them out in the cold for so many years. She recently said that 

the NDP missed a huge opportunity by not putting forward a 

more comprehensive platform in the last two elections. They 

had 16 years — 16 years — to work on rural issues. Why were 

they ignored? 

 

The member from Moose Jaw Wakamow says that they need to 

be meeting with rural people face to face at all times and not 

just during a campaign. Isn’t it common sense that you should 

listen to your constituents? Apparently not with the NDP. 

 

Leading candidate Dwain Lingenfelter has said that his party 

made tactical mistakes in targeting cities while ignoring rural 

seats. He goes on to stereotype rural Saskatchewan by saying he 

can win rural votes simply by being a farmer. Rural 

Saskatchewan knows which party understands rural issues, Mr. 

Speaker, and that includes more than just agriculture. The 

record is clear on who closed the hospitals and the schools and 

who is building new ones. 

 

We have another quote that was from the Prince Albert Daily 

Herald of Mr. Lingenfelter. It says, “I think . . .” and this is a 

quote: 

 

I think that we’ve made some tactical mistakes in the way 

we prioritized seats. For example, cities like Prince Albert, 

Regina and Saskatoon are big priorities and then we have 

a few rural ridings that are a stage down and then we have 

a whole bunch where we [have] more or less [and] don’t 

do a lot of work in. 

 

Anyway. And it continues on; here’s another one. In a recent 

forum, Mr. Lingenfelter said, “There are many issues a New 

Democratic Party government can reconnect with in rural 

Saskatchewan. We simply need to go and listen and find out 

what it is that they want and need.” They, rural residents, have 

been telling them for 16 years, Mr. Speaker, what they wanted, 

and they just got ignored. 

 

[11:00] 

 

In the NDP publication, The Commonwealth had a stark 

assessment of the situation. “The NDP was blown out in almost 

every rural seat in the 2007 election so it is clear [that] a rural 

disconnect is now more prevalent than ever and the party has 

much work to do in this area.” 

 

Why did it take an election loss for the NDP to recognize that 

they cannot write off rural Saskatchewan? Rural issues are 

important, and they matter regardless of whom the residents 

vote for. Mr. Speaker, it is clear — it is crystal clear — that the 

NDP and their hopefuls are only concerned with rebuilding 

their own party support in rural Saskatchewan. They lack the 

vision to do any actual rebuilding themselves. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many things that we can be sitting here 

talking about, what the NDP has done, or basically has not done 

in rural Saskatchewan. And I can’t do it all in 15 minutes, 

believe me. 

 

Now let’s go back to their record. Let’s go back to their record. 

Since the NDP came in, since the NDP came in, they closed . . . 

This is on the health, and they closed 52 rural hospitals — 52. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have a story about this one because I was born in 

Arborfield. I was born in Arborfield and our first-born 

unfortunately had cerebral palsy. And we kept her at home for a 

long time, and finally it just got to be too difficult. She had to 

be tube fed. She had to be looked after on the 24-hour basis, 

Mr. Speaker. We were fortunate the hospital in Arborfield took 

and put her into long-term care. And Arborfield was only 15 

miles away from Carrot River so this was good. This really 

helped our family out. 

 

Unfortunately she passed away just before she was 10 . . . 

Excuse me, Mr. Speaker. But what I am saying, Mr. Speaker, is 

we were very fortunate to have that hospital there. 

 

Shortly after that, shortly after that, they closed the Arborfield 

hospital. And they told the people that okay we’re closing this 



April 30, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2921 

hospital, but Carrot River is only 15 miles down the road. While 

shortly thereafter, another couple years later, they closed down 

the hospital in Carrot River and they said, don’t worry about 

that; Nipawin’s only another half an hour down the road. Boy 

am I ever glad that we got in, Mr. Speaker, because I’m afraid 

that they would have ended up closing down the Nipawin 

Hospital and saying, don’t worry, don’t worry; Prince Albert 

and Melfort are just down the road a little further. They 

neglected, they neglected our health care in rural Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. There is no denying that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — This government, this government is seeing 

people moving back into Saskatchewan. We want, we want to 

move this province forward. We’re going to end up having to 

build hospitals. Actually we’re building one right away in 

Humboldt, something that was talked about by that 

administration for a long time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know as Health minister, as Health minister, the member 

from Battleford said in 2006 that the suspension of hospital 

services in rural Saskatchewan is a fact of life. No, Mr. Speaker, 

it is not. And now that same member from Battleford stands up 

and insists on building a brand new hospital in North Battleford. 

He was Health minister. He had years to do it but he didn’t do 

it. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Didn’t get it done. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Didn’t get it done. Didn’t get around to it. 

Didn’t get around to it, Mr. Speaker. This government will get 

around to it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also have to bring up . . . and boy, I’m rapidly 

running out of time. Mr. Speaker, I also have to bring up about 

the tax cuts, the tax cuts that, in this province, that my friend, 

the member from Rosetown, went and diligently went to work 

on figuring out how we could go about cutting the property tax. 

Farmers were paying an inordinate amount of money on taxes. 

 

Now when you went back and looked at the NDP platform, they 

didn’t have anything. They had some property tax rebates, but 

in their platform, when they ran in the 2007 election, they had 

absolutely no tax cuts for the farmers. They didn’t care about 

rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. They didn’t care about rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

You know, the member from Kelvington-Wadena said, you 

don’t put oil wells in the middle of Regina. You don’t have 

potash mines in the middle of Saskatoon. We have to have rural 

Saskatchewan, and we have to keep them vibrant. We can’t 

keep them as second-class citizens. This government, this 

government is going to put those people back on the standard 

that all the people of Saskatchewan should enjoy. 

 

Let’s just take a look at what was done to agriculture back 

throughout the years. They closed, that administration closed 31 

rural offices over 16 years. They didn’t care. They didn’t care 

about the people in rural Saskatchewan. They especially didn’t 

care about the farmers, the farmers. 

 

One thing they really were quick on was ripping up the GRIP 

[gross revenue insurance program] program — their own 

program, their own contract that they signed. Mr. Speaker, this 

hurt the farmers. This hurt the farmers big time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They had a terrible time trying to figure out how to fund CAIS 

[Canadian agricultural income stabilization]. Fact is, there were 

times that they just didn’t do it. They didn’t get around to it, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

This government is committed, is committed to fully funding 

agriculture. From 2001 to 2006, the crop insurance premiums 

went up and the coverage went down. Mr. Speaker, we are 

putting money, we are putting money into crop insurance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m really running out of time here. I wanted to 

get in a few quick quotes from Dave Marit. This is a quote from 

Dave Marit who’s the SARM [Saskatchewan Association of 

Rural Municipalities] president: “This is the best budget for 

rural Saskatchewan in history. With this budget, Saskatchewan 

truly is open for business.” 

 

Another quote. Another quote. This is also from Dave Marit. 

 

When you see Agriculture as number 3 winner at today’s 

budget, that’s probably the first time in years that I can 

remember where agriculture was right behind education 

and health, as far as increased funding that they received. 

So that’s great news. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again I want to — because I’m running out of 

time — I want to re-say my motion: 

 

That this Assembly recognizes the actions of this 

government in providing more support to rural 

Saskatchewan in 16 months than the previous NDP 

government did in 16 years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — The member for 

Carrot River has made the motion: 

 

That this Assembly recognizes the action of this 

government in providing more support to rural 

Saskatchewan in 16 months than the previous NDP 

government did in 16 years. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the . . . I recognize the member for 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair. 

Mr. Chair, I’m pleased to enter into this debate this morning 

because I think it’s a particularly timely debate. The Minister of 

Agriculture and I have just gone through the spending estimates 

for the Sask Party Ministry of Agriculture. And what has 

become extremely clear to me, that if you look at the money 

that was put into the agriculture budget, it’s clear that it deals 

only with risk management, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party tries to spin that we have seen a 

dramatic increase in the agriculture budget. And might I say 

this: that under the federal agreement for AgriStability, the 

federal government advises the province what we should expect 



2922 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2009 

in terms of provincial input into this program based on last 

year’s numbers, Mr. Speaker. And the Government of 

Saskatchewan had no alternative than to put this money into 

these risk management programs because that is their obligation 

under AgriStability. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when we are talking about a dramatic increase 

in the Ministry of Agriculture’s budget, it is because the 

expectation is that farmers will be accessing AgriStability as a 

result of negative margins, Mr. Speaker. And this is not 

particularly good news for those people in the farming sector. 

 

The other thing I might note, Mr. Speaker, is that since this 

government has come to office, we have seen a dramatic 

decline in the number of hogs in our province, and we’ve seen a 

dramatic decline in the size of our cattle herd — so dramatic, so 

dramatic that XL Beef in Moose Jaw has laid off 200 workers 

because they don’t have access to cows, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it took this government over a year, over a 

year to recognize the crises in the livestock and hog industry. It 

took them over a year. And we can see the numbers dwindling, 

Mr. Speaker. The numbers of cattle in this province have 

dwindled dramatically, and the number of hogs in this province 

and producers in this province has been reduced dramatically. 

 

But this government sat for over a year and did nothing, saying 

that any kind of direct payment to these producers would have 

trade implications. That was their excuse for a year. And yet 

shortly before this legislature reconvened in March, the minister 

finally found some money, about $72 million, as a stopgap 

measure for the livestock and hog industry. And we saw $40 

per cow and, you know, $20 for weaners, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I would say this: that if you had looked at where the cattle 

and the hog industry was before this government came to office, 

we had a very large cattle herd. We had a number of hogs in 

this province. And we’ve seen a dramatic decline, Mr. Speaker. 

So that’s what this government has done for rural 

Saskatchewan. We built up the herds over years. A lot of work 

went into increasing the size of our cattle herd and our hog 

industry, and what we see is the complete collapse of these two 

industries in the province. And what has the Sask Party done? 

Very little, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, they like to say that nothing occurred in the 

province for 16 years. Well, Mr. Speaker, obviously something 

was occurring because the NDP government was elected for 

four terms, so something must have been taking place. 

 

Now they would have you believe that there was no investment 

in rural infrastructure, no investment in facilities, no investment 

in educational facilities, no investment in highways. And yet, 

Mr. Speaker, year after year after year, at a time when oil was 

between 20 and $30 a barrel, at a time when — when the NDP 

government took over — there was a $15 billion debt in the 

province, we were able to invest in infrastructure and in 

services.  

 

And in fact, Mr. Speaker, when we took over, if you were a 

diabetic living outside of Saskatoon and Regina, you didn’t 

have access to satellite dialysis. And in fact the member from 

Carrot River, he talks about his constituency. The very first 

satellite clinic that the NDP funded was the Tisdale Hospital in 

order that people that were living in the Northeast could have 

access to those services. 

 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, when the NDP government took over, 

there were CAT [computerized axial tomography] scans only in 

Saskatoon and Regina, and we made sure that there were CAT 

scans in the various regions of the province so that rural 

residents would have access to those medical services. 

 

Now the Sask Party would have you believe that the NDP did 

very little when it came to ensuring that rural Saskatchewan had 

access to education and training. And in fact it was an NDP 

government, when we had access to very little money because 

of the debt left by their predecessors, we began to very 

systematically move community colleges to comprehensive 

high schools in the Estevan, Weyburn, North Battleford, 

Tisdale, Nipawin, in order that rural residents — Humboldt — 

so that rural residents could have access to education and 

training to support industry out in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[11:15] 

 

Now they would have you believe that there wasn’t a school 

built in the province during the 16 years that the NDP was in 

office. Well you know, the member from Carrot River, all he 

has to do is look at Tisdale which is in his neck of the woods — 

a brand new, joint-use facility, where we have health services, 

high school services, our education and community college all 

under one roof, Mr. Speaker. And it was something that the 

citizens in that area thought was appropriate. And the NDP 

government made sure that that facility came to fruition. 

 

Now you know, we have other rural members. The member 

from Biggar regularly talks about nothing done in rural 

Saskatchewan. Well I can tell you that there was a lot of road 

work done in the Biggar constituency; a brand new high school, 

a joint-use facility with the Prairie West community college 

done where there was the new Biggar comprehensive high 

school and the regional college so that people in Biggar could 

have access to post-secondary education and training. 

 

Then we have — I think it was Wynyard — brand new nursing 

home in Wynyard, as well as Moosomin, the Speaker’s riding, 

an integrated facility. And these are just facilities that I can 

think of very quickly. 

 

When the NDP came to government there were no 

pre-kindergartens in the province, and we made a decision — I 

believe it was 1995 — to start funding pre-kindergartens in the 

province. And pre-kindergartens are now available to people 

living in rural Saskatchewan. In addition there was very little 

work that had been done when it came to child care facilities, 

and under the previous NDP government, a lot of work and a lot 

of spaces went into rural Saskatchewan to support rural 

residents and their employment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in addition rural business was having difficulty 

attracting and recruiting skilled workers, and the NDP brought 

in the Saskatchewan immigrant nominee program, and we now 

have increasing sizes of communities as a result of that 

program. I think of Tisdale, the member from Carrot River. All 



April 30, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2923 

he has to do is go to a large manufacturer in Tisdale, and he will 

see a number of immigrants that have come to the province as a 

result of the immigrant nominee program. Gravelbourg is 

another place, Trailtech, where we have a number of people 

who have come from the Philippines and are working at 

Trailtech, a very successful rural business. And all of this was 

done as a result of a significant investment through the NDP 

government into the immigrant nominee program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in addition if you drive along the No. 1 Highway 

in the southwest part of the province, you will see the 

centennial wind farm which is a tremendous investment in rural 

Saskatchewan, a 150-megawatt wind farm. All of that was done 

by an NDP government. 

 

Now these people, I know that they have their spin and their 

revisionist history, and they would have you believe that the 

NDP has never invested in rural Saskatchewan. And I just want 

to put it on the record that the NDP was elected for four straight 

terms, and a tremendous amount of money was invested in rural 

infrastructure as well as people in rural Saskatchewan, and so I 

would find this motion not acceptable, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Saskatoon Sutherland. 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am honoured to 

enter this debate concerning rural Saskatchewan. I grew up in 

rural Saskatchewan, actually pretty close to Regina, and moved 

away from my home town to attend university and eventually 

got married and living in Saskatoon. But when you grow up in 

rural Saskatchewan, you always go back. You go back to your 

roots, visit your parents, see your friends. It’s very common, 

you know, that people who grow up in rural Saskatchewan go 

back. And I have family that farms. I have family still in that 

small town. 

 

And there was a lot of relief when the Sask Party won the 2007 

election. The rural communities were very, very relieved that 

they were going to be able to get out from under a very 

non-supporting government. Since we’ve taken office we have 

done some very good things in agriculture. Our minister is an 

excellent minister. He definitely knows what he’s doing and has 

led our party and this government into giving lots of help to 

rural Saskatchewan. Actually we have done more for rural 

Saskatchewan in our 16 months than the previous government 

had for 16 years. 

 

We can talk about what we’ve done or what they haven’t done, 

but I want to tell you a story about my hometown and health 

care. One of the big issues with the former government was the 

closures of hospitals. In Montmartre we had a hospital since the 

’50s. My father, Dr. Lionel Prefontaine, was actually the 

physician that practised medicine in that small town. 

 

The first hospital was a three-storey house, and he would carry 

the patients up the stairs. That’s how he got to access the third 

floor. He would carry — literally carry — the patients up the 

stairs. Now eventually in the ’60s, a new hospital was built in 

Montmartre, and it had an area for a doctor’s office. It had lab 

X-ray. It had about 20 beds. Babies were born there. Appendix 

were taken out there. This hospital serviced the community very 

well. 

 

A lot of other communities had similar situations back then, and 

Wolseley, Indian Head, Fillmore, those are places that had 

hospitals. And the physicians would have operating room days 

and go together and do an O.R. [operating room] slate in 

Fillmore, for instance. And then one would be the anesthetist 

and they’d do the surgery. And if they needed blood, the plane 

from the Red Cross would drop blood in the field behind the 

hospital. People were taken care of and the community was 

very strong. 

 

If you had a parent who was very ill, the patient wouldn’t have 

to leave the community. And there were some, you know, 

long-term patients in the hospital in those days because they 

had the room and long-term care was dealt with in that way. So 

a new hospital was built in the ’60s. 

 

Then in the ’80s, the hospital — late, no, early ’90s, ’91 — the 

old hospital in Montmartre, the one that was built in the ’60s, 

was torn down and a new hospital was built, brand new 

hospital. That hospital has never functioned as a hospital. They 

don’t have a doctor any more. The health region won’t make 

beds available so a physician can admit the patient to hospital. 

There’s a lot of bureaucracy and rules that just sometimes defy 

common sense as far as what are we doing to take care of sick 

people in our province. 

 

The new hospital is now a long-term care facility. So a couple 

. . . I believe it was Mr. and Mrs. Shiplack. They were very 

elderly, and the husband had to go into the home. He needed 

more help than his wife could give him in their own home, so 

Mr. Shiplack was admitted to long-term care. Mrs. Shiplack 

eventually needed to go into care as well, but they wouldn’t 

allow them to be in the same care home. And that happens very 

often in rural Saskatchewan where you have parents that one is 

admitted to a facility and the other one can’t be admitted to the 

facility, or they’re admitted to a facility that’s 15 miles apart. 

And that’s a shame; it’s a real shame. And I believe that our 

patient-first review is going to look at those issues for rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

My father, who pounded nails into hospitals and in the 

community, suffered a heart attack while he was curling. There 

was no access to ambulance services, paramedic services in the 

town now, and there was no physician. Some people from the 

community put him in the back of a half-ton truck in the middle 

of winter, drove him to the hospital which is the care home, and 

I mean they didn’t even attempt resuscitation. But here’s a man 

that worked in the community to provide health care to the 

population, a community that thought, you know, that their 

community was strong and supported the hospital. He spent his 

life there, and he died there without a doctor coming near him, 

without an ambulance, without a hospital. And I think that’s a 

shame. And I believe that our government is going to . . . well 

we are looking at those issues, and that’s very very important. 

 

The NDP, when they were in power, closed hospitals. They 

closed schools in rural Saskatchewan. They didn’t respond to 

agriculture demands that were made during those years. They 

cut agricultural funding. They ignored droughts in the livestock 

industry. Crop insurance premiums went up as coverage 



2924 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2009 

decreased, and producers were left out in the cold. 

 

That doesn’t bode very well in rural Saskatchewan for the 

opposition. And the people will remember. They will remember 

how they were treated, how rural Saskatchewan was neglected. 

They will remember that. And I believe they will remember that 

for a very, very long time. 

 

Under the NDP, $315 million was cut to agriculture — $315 

million, Mr. Speaker. You just can’t do that to a population and 

then expect that you can go and visit rural Saskatchewan and 

get their trust back. You just can’t. So I’ll close with that, Mr. 

Speaker, and I’ll be supporting the motion. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Regina Northwest. 

 

[11:30] 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me pleasure 

to have the opportunity to rise and represent the fine folks of 

Regina Northeast in this debate. First of all, I want to say to 

you, Mr. Speaker, and to the members here, I’m fighting a bit of 

a cold, so if my voice cracks or makes strange noises, I 

apologize for that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we look at the motion brought in by the 

member from Carrot River, we can’t help but think it’s a pretty 

bold statement, a pretty strong and pretty bold statement. And 

it’s one that I think needs to be held up to the light of facts and 

reality to see if the light shines through or perhaps as . . . 

[inaudible] . . . we need to pour some water on it to see if it 

holds water. But what we need to do is let’s examine what has 

happened in rural Saskatchewan in the last 16 months under this 

government. 

 

One of the first things that we notice, one of the first things we 

notice is that we’re seeing the livestock population, the 

livestock industry of this province being decimated. We’re 

seeing the livestock industry, the numbers of livestock, the 

numbers of cattle in this province dropping dramatically. We’re 

at a point in time where we’re probably teetering on losing the 

entire industry as producers simply exit the business at a rapid 

pace. 

 

Mr. Speaker, about two or three weeks ago, I had the 

opportunity to talk to a farmer from the Canora-Yorkton area, 

and he was telling me of a situation. I believe it was a 

neighbour of his who ran a small herd — probably the total cow 

herd of about 100, 125, somewhere in that area — decided that 

he was getting out of the business simply because he could no 

longer afford to stay in it, could no longer just hang on. So he 

culled the cow herd. He took out the old cows. Any cow that 

wasn’t a good, solid quality breeding animal, he culled those 

cows. Then he held a dispersal sale — he had about 90 or 92 

head, I believe it was — had a dispersal sale of red cows. These 

were quality cows. These were good solid animals that would 

produce well into the future. Mr. Speaker, every one of those 

cows went to slaughter. Not one of them re-entered the breeding 

system. Not one of them re-entered the industry. They all went 

to slaughter. 

Mr. Speaker, that tells us that we have an industry out there that 

is teetering on bankruptcy, an industry that we’re about to lose. 

And what has this government done to address that problem? A 

small, small — after nearly a year — a small, small cash, 

one-time cash ad hoc payment which is really nothing more 

than a bad Band-Aid solution for a broken leg. Mr. Speaker, too 

little too late for most of the people in the beef industry in this 

province. We’re seeing the same callous disregard for the 

beleaguered hog producers who are finding themselves with 

their backs to the wall, who are in an industry that has 

experienced a tremendous downturn for a long time, Mr. 

Speaker. And has this government come to their rescue? No. 

Has this government even approached the federal government 

to come up with a meaningful support program for our livestock 

industry, whether it be cattle or whether it be pork in this 

province? No, they haven’t. They have failed our producers in 

this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some day, some day the pork industry will return 

to profitability. Unfortunately I don’t think we’ll have an 

industry left in this province to enjoy that time, simply because 

this government has not reacted. It’s fallen short, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government carried out, a while back, a 

review of Saskatchewan Crop Insurance which . . . I think crop 

insurance is a very good program, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s a 

program that well serves the farmers out there. Is there room for 

improvement? Yes, there’s room for improvement. I think if 

you look at the agricultural industry today, the extreme high 

finances it requires to operate that industry, there needs to be a 

meaningful insurance program in place to protect those 

producers out there. 

 

And if we check back in Hansard, the members who are today 

in government when they were in opposition, I think if we 

check back in Hansard I think we’ll find reams and reams and 

reams of calling — by those members — calling on the 

government of the day, calling on crop insurance to include 

spot-loss hail. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this government took the opportunity to 

review crop insurance to make some changes around the edges. 

I think it was really no surprise to anybody that there was no 

rosy, rosy solutions to the problems of crop insurance and 

trying to make it more lucrative. But one of the things that I 

really, truly suspected that they would do when they reviewed 

crop insurance, Mr. Speaker, was to bring in the inclusion of 

spot-loss hail. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I’m not alone there. I know 

from talking to farmers across this great province they had 

expected that too. 

 

But what do we see? The review of crop insurance, the review 

of crop insurance and the finalization of crop insurance review, 

and what happened? No spot-loss hail. Something that 

producers were led to believe by the members opposite that 

would be included in their review of crop insurance was left 

out. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I can say that farmers were disappointed. 

They were disappointed in that, but they were also 

disappointed, Mr. Speaker, in the fact that this government is 

sitting on mounds of money — mounds of money — and yet 

they would not take a close look at taking crop insurance and 



April 30, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2925 

making it more sensitive to the reality of farming today, to the 

cash flow reality of farming today by increasing the cost of 

production coverage. It’s still at 80 per cent; maximum 

coverage is at 80 per cent. Mr. Speaker, with the mountains of 

money that this government’s sitting on, I would have thought 

that they would have been able to review that aspect of crop 

insurance and increase the coverage — maybe not to 100 per 

cent, but maybe up to at least 90 per cent. 

 

That would have been well received by farmers. But what 

they’re seeing now, Mr. Speaker, is the same level of coverage 

as they’ve had in the past, nothing that really reflects the 

increase, the dramatic increase in costs of operating their farm 

today, the dramatic increase in cash input costs — nothing to 

insure them against that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we noted lately that this government who pretends 

to have the concerns of farmers at heart have announced power 

rate increases of 13 to 15 per cent. That means farmers in 

Saskatchewan today will be looking at the increase of their 

power bill by 13 to 15 per cent — not just on their homes, Mr. 

Speaker, not just on their homes but on their shops and their 

entire farming operation, which if you’ve ever been involved in 

a farm, you know that the electricity is a major part of that. 

Well we’re seeing this government increase the burden of cost 

of operating that farm by announcing a 13 to 15 per cent 

increase in power rate costs, but not just for this year but for the 

foreseeable future, each year in the foreseeable future, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Last fall we’ve seen SaskEnergy . . . this government directs 

SaskEnergy to increase its rates just in time for not only the 

winter months and the heating of the homes, and in farmers’ 

cases many of their shops, but also there’s many farmers out 

there who use natural gas as the source of heat to dry their damp 

crops, Mr. Speaker. So what did they find that they were facing 

last fall? They were facing increased costs to operating their 

farms, thanks to this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister for Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance has just announced rate increases, rate increases as 

high as 12 per cent. Many of these rate increases, Mr. Speaker, 

will be affecting those farmers directly. If you know, Mr. 

Speaker, farmers have a number of vehicles, licensed vehicles 

that they need for their farming operation. They need that to 

support their operations, and they’re now looking at increased 

cost of insurance on those vehicles. Mr. Speaker, all of these are 

increased costs, Mr. Speaker, increased cost to the farming 

operations out there without any meaningful increased support 

for farmers. 

 

We’re seeing, Mr. Speaker, we’re seeing all kinds of increased 

costs and all kinds of interesting situations. We’re looking at 

input costs, at perhaps all-time high input costs. Fertilizer costs, 

perhaps they’re down a little from the high point of last year, 

but still very dramatically high. This in spite of the fact that last 

year at this time, natural gas — which is a very important and 

major component for the production of nitrogen fertilizer — 

natural gas was trading on the market somewhere around $8.50 

a gigajoule. This year it’s a little over three, a little over $3 a 

gigajoule. 

 

But have fertilizer prices come down at that same rate? No they 

haven’t, Mr. Speaker. They have softened a little bit, but they’re 

still a long way, still a long way from being reasonable as 

compared to the cost of production, compared to cost of natural 

gas, a major component in the production of nitrogen fertilizer. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there is no doubt in my mind that when you 

test, when you test this motion, there is no doubt that farmers 

will say that with friends like this government, they certainly 

don’t need any enemies. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Arm River-Watrous. 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Deputy Speaker. When I get up to 

this motion, I wanted to speak to it because it speaks to the 

reason why I ran and why many of our members are here — 

why we were voted in. 

 

When we, prior to 1999, we were approached, myself, to run, I 

was with the municipal government. And there was a 

disconnect from the present government to rural Saskatchewan, 

I won’t go as far to say that they purposely ignored rural 

Saskatchewan, but there was a total disconnect with that. 

 

And it was the attitude of that government at that time, and 

persisted right through till they were defeated, that basically 

rural Saskatchewan was not going to grow. And yet the people 

out there had a very different opinion of that. And when we ran 

and we were chosen to run, and I ran in my riding, in my new 

riding of Arm River-Watrous — at one time was considered, 

some of the communities, to be NDP strongholds. In fact there 

was certain cabinet ministers that lived in some of them towns 

and were very prominent in the party. 

 

And when I went door knocking, the people, the residents even 

in them towns were switching their votes and they just said, you 

know, that the party has left them. The NDP party had left rural 

Saskatchewan, had left them a long time ago, and that they were 

never going to vote with them again. And that shows. The last 

election I think I won by 50 plus . . . [inaudible] . . . in seats, 

and in polls that in the history I looked back that the NDP 

always controlled. And I will give a few reasons of that. 

 

One of them is the town of Watrous. In about ’92 or ’93, Mr. 

Speaker, they started a fund to replace a long-term care facility, 

and by ’93 they pretty well had all their money in place. So 

every year they would approach the government for the 

government’s share of their funding to go ahead. They had their 

60 per cent coming in, and every year they were turned down. 

They didn’t expect the first year to be passed. But they would 

have liked, after a number of years, to at least know where they 

actually sitting. 

 

And I know when I first was elected there, they had almost 

given hope that their long-term care facility would ever be 

replaced. And I know in opposition I read petitions. I brought 

that issue forward many times. And I know the staff, when we 

went there, had said that they could never remember a minister 

of Health coming to visit them. And I won’t argue that. I can’t 

remember far back if it ever did. But all I know is when we 

became government, I asked our Health minister if he would 

tour the facility. And he did last fall. And our government made 

that a priority, the simple reason because it needed to be 



2926 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2009 

replaced. 

 

I can remember them taking me there with the roof leaking 

when it rained. You can’t have a long-term care facility with 

roofs that leak. I mean, it just was a shame, the way it had been 

run down. And with our government, we wanted to make that a 

priority of many things with rural Saskatchewan. We didn’t 

want to be any better than the cities. We just wanted to be 

treated equal. And that is what the residents of rural 

Saskatchewan were asking for. And under our government, Mr. 

Speaker, I think, I know we’ve accomplished that. We view 

rural Saskatchewan as just as important as every part of the 

province. 

 

I mean, you can talk about other things — the school closures. 

Under the NDP watch, there was over 190 school closures at 

that time. That speaks to the people that were leaving. And why 

were they leaving? Because it was the attitude of that 

government that Saskatchewan was not going to grow. They 

were not putting the resources into rural Saskatchewan. They 

were not trying to work with the communities and to work with 

business to say what can we do to help some of these businesses 

come? What do you need for these businesses to come in, for 

these communities to start to grow? 

 

In 1999, after I was first elected, I used to meet with the town 

councils. The first thing that they would talk about was how 

many empty houses they have in their communities and that the 

young people were leaving for jobs. That we need jobs. We 

need the people back. 

 

What’s the problem now when I deal with these towns, is these 

towns are looking for funding for infrastructure for subdivisions 

which we provided, which we are helping them with. That $100 

million that says to these towns that we know that you’re 

growing, that you’re going to keep growing, that we want to 

help you any way we can. And that is something that this 

government has been famous for and very good at is saying, we 

will work with you. And that is something the other government 

did not do. Their agenda was, well you’re on your own. If 

you’re dying, you’re dying; I don’t know what we can do to 

help you. Where this government is looking at how we can help 

you grow. 

 

[11:45] 

 

Cellphone coverage was another one. We can go into the 

investments that the Crowns made out of the province. That was 

a priority for that government. We made it a priority that we 

strengthen the Crowns and to work with the people in 

Saskatchewan, that you work with businesses. One of them was 

cellphone coverage. That’s what they said — businesses — we 

need full cellphone coverage. We need Internet access across, 

so we can open up these businesses in towns. That is something 

that we provided, that we’re doing over the number of years 

with plans. 

 

Another one is highways, Mr. Speaker, is highways. That was 

another thing that businesses and towns and villages say, we 

have to have a plan for infrastructure. We know that every 

highway can’t be fixed the very first year, but give us a plan. 

Give us an idea when our highway will be fixed or what 

highway’s a priority, where business can build along. And our 

government has come up with that. 

 

I can talk about my constituency. Highway 20 and Highway 2 

were both done last year, and they needed to be done. I can 

remember getting calls and that in on Highway 20. I think by 

the town of Drake they were driving in the ditch in the spring 

because the vehicles had to go on the shoulder and partly in the 

ditch because the middle of the road was basically gone. It was 

just one big, huge pothole and a mudhole. Well we repaved that 

and built that up and worked on that, trying to make that stretch 

of highway a primary weight. 

 

Those are the things that this government has done. And that is 

why I want to speak to this motion because it speaks to what we 

have done. And we recognize that the province has to grow 

equally; it has to grow together. You cannot separate one 

segment of the province from the other, which is . . . that 

government, I think, used to try to do with rural Saskatchewan. 

It kind of had a divide that, you know, leaving you on your own 

and trying to work that rural-urban split with that. 

 

You know, agriculture. I mean the member talked about 

opposite about the hurt in that. And yes, there is. But this, you 

know, this government put in $40 a head. That’s what the 

producers were asking — at least a show of support and respect 

that we recognize that your industry is suffering and that we 

will try to help you the way we can. 

 

And you know, I have a lot of cattle producers in my area, and 

they were happy with the $40. I mean, yes, they’d like to see 

more money. Right now the prices are slowly on the rise. But 

you know what they said? At least you’ve showed a 

commitment that you were there, trying to help us through some 

difficult times. And we know that if difficult times persist, we 

will be there to help any way that we can at that end of it. 

 

When we talk about CAIS and AgriStability, was another thing 

the opposite government — when they were in power, the NDP 

— did not do was fully fund them. So you never knew at the 

beginning of the year if you were going to be getting your full 

money from that program. And I know there was, I think, one 

or two years that they didn’t fully fund it. We’ve at least made 

that statement that any of the federal programs that are out 

there, we will be participating in them and working with the 

federal government to make sure that them dollars flow to the 

producers’ pockets and to help them any way that we can. 

 

We talk about the tax on land. We talk about the education 

portion of the tax problem. That’s been a problem around for 

many, many years. I mean all governments have talked about it. 

All governments realize it, that has been a problem. The 

difference with this government is that we took action. We 

knew that that problem has to be addressed. 

 

And that’s something that I’m very proud of this government; 

when it recognizes a problem, it will work to work solutions. It 

won’t just put its head in the sand and say, you know what, 

we’re going to ignore this problem and maybe it’ll go away, or 

it could be a slightly controversial, we may have to make an 

odd tough decision. This government’s not like that. It knows 

that some decisions have to be made, and that’s what the people 

respect. What they want is a growing, strong, vibrant province, 

and that’s what we have under this government. We have that 



April 30, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2927 

all through it. 

 

We have it in rural Saskatchewan which is growing now. It 

never grew under their administration. It never grew once under 

that. And with our government, it has grown. And it’s going to 

keep growing because we’re willing to do something they were 

never do. We are willing to listen to the people out there. We 

are willing to work with them and try to help them any way we 

can — the communities, the villages, the schools. And that is 

why the people have returned us and myself to government and 

put us in government. And with that, Mr. Speaker, I thank you 

for the time on speaking on the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to rise up 

and speak to the motion. I want to point out as well, Mr. 

Speaker, that I would assume that anything outside of the major 

cities in Saskatchewan — which includes northern 

Saskatchewan — would be considered rural. And I want to 

make sure that I also contribute to the discussion here. 

 

I want to point out very quickly, Mr. Speaker, not so much as a 

response to their rope-a-dope motion here because what’s 

happening, Mr. Speaker, is these guys are so busy trying to 

deflect from their dismal performance as a government that they 

throw out these little motions, whether it’s potash privatization, 

or whether it’s oh, you ignored rural Saskatchewan for 16 years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are very intelligent 

people. They know what this is all about. It’s about pure crass 

politics, and what they are trying to figure out is, how did these 

guys manage to win this amount of seats that they won? And, 

Mr. Speaker, quite frankly, it’s going to catch up to them. 

 

I’ll point out, after the last election I got interviewed by the 

Northern Pride newspaper out of Meadow Lake and the 

interviewer said, well how do you feel about this whole 

process? The Sask Party’s claiming that after 16 years of 

government you guys are gone. How did you feel about that? 

You didn’t do a lot of things that you wanted to do. And, Mr. 

Speaker, the absolute answer is yes, the NDP had a lot of plans 

and wanted to do a lot of wonderful things. But the problem we 

had, Mr. Speaker, is it took us 13 or 14 years to clean up their 

mess, Mr. Speaker, and that’s the bottom line. 

 

When we took over government in 1991 — and I wasn’t part of 

that, but so many of my colleagues were; many of my 

colleagues were, Mr. Speaker — they were almost to a point 

where they couldn’t even make payroll, Mr. Speaker. And 

that’s how difficult it was to be government in 1991. When the 

Sask Party comes along and says to people, oh we didn’t do 

anything for 16 years, well every time they say that, Mr. 

Speaker, on this side of the House we say that’s how long it 

took us to clean up their mess, Mr. Speaker. That’s how long it 

took us to clean up their mess. 

 

And I’ll point out that the most amazing thing about the 

Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker, as they throw out these little 

motions here and there, you know, they’re trying to deflect 

from what they’re doing. Whether it’s trying to bring a private 

nuclear plant or whether they’re trying to do a lot more 

privatization of our Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker, they’re 

trying to deflect from what they’re all about, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They’re trying to deflect from their inability to govern and 

inability to lead. So what do they do? They go back to their old 

tried-and-true method of the Sask Party, which is: well every 

time we get stuck for an answer and every time we’re asked a 

complicated question and every time we’re asked to provide 

leadership, oh we’ll talk about, oh 16 years, 16 years there those 

guys there didn’t do anything. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are a lot more 

intelligent than that. They’re a lot more intelligent that that, Mr. 

Speaker. And the most amazing thing about the Saskatchewan 

Party — as we sit over here, we listen to what they have to say 

— is that they’re so critical of the NDP, Mr. Speaker. They’re 

so angry at the NDP. They’re so different from the NDP. And 

yet, Mr. Speaker, the money and the economy that they’re 

currently sitting on is compliments of NDP policy and the 

people of Saskatchewan. And that’s the most amazing thing, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So when they talk about 16 years versus their 16 months, Mr. 

Speaker, I will tell people right now that there’s no question 

that on this side of the House, every time the Sask Party 

mentions 16 years, on this side we say, that’s how long it took 

us to clean up your mess and start developing an economy for 

the people of Saskatchewan, alongside the people of 

Saskatchewan — and that includes rural Saskatchewan people, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So it’s a shame. Every time we had a tough decision to make to 

try and bring this province back from the brink of bankruptcy, 

those folks over there ought to know it was caused by them. It 

was caused by them, Mr. Speaker. There’s no way, there’s no 

way that a party can come and make all the changes that is 

necessary if you’ve got a fifteen and a half billion dollar debt 

hanging over your head. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as much as they want to argue about 16 

months versus 16 years, I’m going to say one thing, Mr. 

Speaker. It took us seven or eight years to balance the budget, 

seven or eight years of tough decisions on this side of the 

House. And, Mr. Speaker, we did it. Mr. Speaker, it took us 16 

years to pay down $11 billion in interest payments alone, Mr. 

Speaker, interest payments alone. And I want to talk a bit about 

that every single day, between what we paid in interest, Mr. 

Speaker, versus what we paid down in debt as a governing party 

during those 16 years. It’s almost $2 million per day in interest 

payments and $1 million per day that we were in government to 

pay down the debt, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So you come along and say, oh you didn’t do this; you didn’t do 

that. And, Mr. Speaker, there’s no question in my mind that it’s 

a result of the tough choices made in those 16 years that we sat 

in government that today that the economy’s doing well, and 

the debt is being paid down. It has nothing to do with them, Mr. 

Speaker. Absolutely nothing to do with them. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when I look at some of the history — not 

their history, the revisionist history over there — I look at some 

of their history and I say, oh my goodness. I couldn’t believe at 



2928 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2009 

one time when the NDP took over government, our education 

budget was one-third of our interest payments each and every 

year. Our education budget was one-third of the interest we paid 

every year. Now how do you manage an economy, how do you 

build a province on that kind of debt hanging over your head? 

 

Mr. Speaker, my colleagues — and I was not here at the time — 

they made the tough choices. They made the tough choices to 

pay down some of that debt. And yes, the rural parts of 

Saskatchewan and yes, the urban parts of Saskatchewan and the 

northern parts of Saskatchewan, we all buckled down together 

because we knew we had a job to do. We knew we had to make 

certain that this debt was slain and that the monster of this huge 

deficit each and every year was tamed. And this government 

showed leadership. It showed vision, and it showed 

perseverance in doing that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger: — And those guys across the way should be 

happy we done that, Mr. Speaker. Because all they do today, as 

my colleague from Saskatoon said, they’re out there spending 

money. They’re out there spending money. And we 

congratulate them on a few initiatives, but we warn people, be 

careful. Be careful, because they don’t want to go back to their 

style of government which is budget deficit and, of course, 

more debt for the people of Saskatchewan. We don’t want that. 

And anybody that’s not learned off our history is repeated to 

make the same mistake again. That’s the danger. They’re going 

to repeat the same mistake again, and people of Saskatchewan 

know that. 

 

And I’m listening with great intent here, great intent, and they 

say to us, oh you guys didn’t fix our highways. You didn’t fix 

certain roads. And, Mr. Speaker, when we took over 

government, not only we didn’t have no money, we barely 

could make payroll as a government. We had to make some 

very tough choices. But we said, we’ll still continue building so 

let’s go fix some of the roads. Then we find out, well we can’t 

now because they sold the highways equipment. Oh okay. So 

we have no money. We have no highways equipment. So how 

are we supposed to fix these roads they’re talking about? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the most amazing thing is they sold that 

highways equipment for 10 cents on the dollar. And now the 

people of Saskatchewan are saying to us, well how did the 

roads get so bad? Well because a) we had no equipment; b) we 

had no money. And now all of a sudden after 16 years of hard 

work, Mr. Speaker, they come back and they promise to do 

everything for everybody. 

 

And what’s going to happen? History is going to teach us if you 

trust the same party again, Mr. Speaker, you’re going to make 

the same mistakes. In five to ten years from now we’re going to 

see evidence of what those guys are doing today. That’s why 

it’s important in 2011 to get rid of them, Mr. Speaker. Get rid of 

this government because they’re using all these silly messages. 

They’re insulting the people’s intelligence of Saskatchewan 

because, quite frankly, thank goodness for the NDP and the 16 

years they were in government, because they’re the ones that 

worked with the people to rebuild this province’s economy and 

rebuild our finances, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger: — We’re not some rich, spoiled kid that all of 

sudden gets this huge inheritance and tries to be friends with 

everybody. Because at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, at the 

end of the day that money will be gone and true leadership will 

be shown, Mr. Speaker, as to how to govern and how to manage 

this party in this side of the House. The New Democratic Party 

has nothing to be ashamed of, Mr. Speaker, of the tough choices 

that were made. And we’ll continue making those tough 

choices. Mr. Speaker, every time you say 16 years on that side 

of the House, we say that’s how long it took to clean up your 

mess. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Time has elapsed on the 65-minute debate. 

Time for questions. I recognize the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose. 

 

Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, during 

16 years of NDP government, rural taxpayers were promised 

relief from an unfair portion of education property tax. In fact 

the former NDP premier announced in 2003 at the SARM 

convention — and I was there, Mr. Speaker — he announced 

that the status quo was not on. The government of the day did 

nothing for another year and then re-announced in 2004. The 

NDP never did deliver a long-term plan, yet in 16 months our 

government has delivered a long-term plan for education 

property tax relief. 

 

My question is for the member from Regina Northeast. Why 

does the member not support education property tax relief for 

rural Saskatchewan? 

 

[12:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, the . . . And I want to thank the 

member for his question. The reality of rural Saskatchewan 

today is being able to exist and be able to run a profitable 

operation in your farming operation, Mr. Speaker. And a part of 

that is being able to insure yourself against unforeseen losses 

such as through crop insurance. Crop insurance is a very 

worthwhile tool for farmers to be able to protect themselves 

against the unforeseen, against weather, and so on and so forth. 

 

And that is why farmers out there across this great province of 

ours have wanted to have spot loss hail included in crop 

insurance. But, Mr. Speaker, with the review of crop insurance, 

spot loss hail was not included. And I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, 

that farmers across this province are disappointed, very 

disappointed and really let down by this government. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the member 

from Arm River. And I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, no 

government in the history of Saskatchewan or the country have 

ever received any kind of dollars in a booming economy that 



April 30, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2929 

that government has, ever, ever, ever inherited in the history of 

Canada. Of all the provinces, no government has ever inherited 

that kind of benefit. 

 

So I’m going to ask the member from Arm River: does he 

believe that the debts that we had — the debt that we had that 

we had no choice but to buckle down, as the rest of the people 

of Saskatchewan had, to make sure that we regained our 

financial footing as a province and that we didn’t have to worry 

about bankruptcy and making payments to people that work for 

the provincial government — does he believe that that debt is a 

fictional debt? Does he believe that, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 

River-Watrous. 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know what I 

believe is I believe that government couldn’t govern very well 

under the number of years that you were there. This government 

has worked with business to increase profits and increase 

people coming here to Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and that is 

why this province is growing right now. 

 

Under that present government when it was government, that 

government never grew. There was 190 school closures. There 

was highways in disrepair, businesses leaving. They chased out 

the oil business under that. They chased out every 

manufacturing because they would not work with business. 

They wanted to have a closed shop when it came to 

Saskatchewan. They did not want to work with other provinces, 

and they ran this province . . . If they’d have kept in power, this 

province would have been in a lot worse shape than when they 

first came in because every year that they were in it was getting 

worse and worse. That, Mr. Speaker, is what I believe. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Under the NDP dozens 

of rural hospitals closed. We were left with massive health care 

infrastructure deficit for 16 years and the NDP denied that there 

was a critical nursing shortage. Our government has made 

significant investments in health care and infrastructure. We are 

opening new hospitals. 

 

We have entered into a historic partnership with the 

Saskatchewan Union of Nurses which is already producing 

results in terms of addressing the nursing shortage. 

 

To the member from Regina Northeast: do you support these 

initiatives to address the health care deficit that was created 

when you were in government? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I really appreciate 

the question because we have always enjoyed in this province a 

very good health care system. We even do today and we have 

enjoyed that in the past. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I can attest to this personally because in the 

mid-1990s a very close family member of mine, at nearly 

midnight on a Tuesday night, suffered a heart attack at our 

home on the farm. She is still with me today because of the 

reaction of our health care system when she was treated with 

the quality system that is out there, was out there, still is out 

there. And I’m so thankful that we have that system so I can 

have my loved one with me today. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Under the NDP, 

farmers were overtaxed. Agriculture funding was cut. Parched 

farmers and ranchers struggling to make ends meet because of 

drought received no assistance. Crop insurance premiums rose 

even as coverage dropped. Our government has taken action — 

cut farmers’ taxes, increased agriculture funding, implemented 

a drought relief program, and lowered crop insurance premiums 

while increasing coverage. 

 

To the member from Saskatoon Nutana: why do you and your 

colleagues not support Saskatchewan producers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, one of the things I can tell the 

members opposite, that when we were in a position we 

significantly increased the rebate to agricultural producers when 

it came to education tax on farm land. I believe we started that 

in 1998 and in fact we went to . . . 60 per cent of funding for 

education on agricultural land came from the province and 40 

per cent on average was paid by agricultural producers. 

 

Secondly, when the member talks about increase in premiums 

and reduced coverage in crop insurance, we went through a 

number of years of drought in the province, particularly in the 

mid-2000s or about 2002, 2003. And we had about a $1.2 

billion deficit in crop insurance. And of course the member 

knows that you have to pay that back through increase of 

premiums, and the government had to put more money into it in 

order to get crop insurance stable. I’m now pleased to report 

that crop insurance has money in the kitty, and that’s good. And 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. I recognize 

the member from Regina Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Fertilizer prices 

being what they are, and the cost of fertilizer a major, major 

cost of input to our farming community out there. And we look 

at nitrogen fertilizer being a very major component to seeding 

in this great province of ours and we look at the fact that natural 

gas a year ago was trading on the market at somewhere around 

$8.50 a gigajoule and today is trading just slightly over $3 a 

gigajoule, but yet fertilizer prices today are very near what they 



2930 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2009 

were a year ago. 

 

So my question is for the member from Carrot River Valley. 

Does he believe that his farmers in his constituency deserve to 

pay the price they’re paying for fertilizer today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you for the question from that 

member. He talks about the fertilizer prices. You’re right. They 

were very high last fall. I think what we’re going to see this 

spring is . . . I wouldn’t be a bit surprised if the fertilizer prices 

are coming down. And actually I’ve heard that at home, that 

they will be coming down. 

 

The other thing is, is we have given the farmers so much more 

money now, it makes it easier to pay some of these higher 

prices because we did the tax cut. We did the tax cut on the 

farmers’ land; that makes it way easier. 

 

Not only that — we’re making the farmers safer because the 

other thing that we’re also doing, Mr. Speaker, is we’re going 

ahead with our power supply in the yard site to make it safer for 

farmers so they don’t have to worry about catching their auger 

on a power line as they’re dragging it around. These are some 

of the good things that we’re doing for our farmers, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Batoche. 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 

to start with a quote: “People in my constituency have to deal 

with horrendous road conditions . . . Road conditions that could 

affect the safety and yes, even the lives of these people.” 

Another quote: “Hundreds of people become stranded every 

season because the road conditions are atrocious and 

maintenance is non-existent.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, these statements were made by the member from 

Athabasca when he was a Liberal and he was condemning the 

NDP. Now he says the NDP were doing a good job. We can’t 

have it both ways. So will he now support our program for 

highways? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll point out, Mr. Speaker, that 

it’s amazing that we put $65.5 million into northern roads 

strategy, so a job accomplished. Those guys come along and 

they not only cancelled projects to Patuanak, they not only 

cancelled projects on Highway 155, they cancelled . . . 

[inaudible] . . . Pelican Narrows projects and they cancelled 

Cumberland House’s projects. 

 

So before that member from Batoche starts spouting off old 

statements that I’ve made, and I stand by every statement I 

make in this Assembly, but before he goes around spouting off 

old statements that I’ve made, I stand . . . 

The Speaker: — Time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, to ask leave for an extended 

introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave to introduce 

guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I thank all 

members of this Chamber for granting this. I’ll try not to make 

it too extended. 

 

Here today to witness the passing of the highway traffic 

amendment Gallenger Act, we have in the gallery Mrs. Sharon 

Gallenger. I’m going to ask, just give a wave rather than 

everybody popping up and down. So when I mention your 

name, just give a wave. Sharon, of course, we introduced earlier 

in the Chamber. 

 

With Mrs. Gallenger is her son, Trevor; a grandson, Tanner; 

Kim Gallenger. The late Jim Gallenger’s father, Joe Gallenger, 

is here. Darlene Spock is a sister of Jim’s; and Mick is Jim’s 

brother. We have Pat Lasby. We have Patty Katzberg that’s 

Tanner’s other grandma. We have Brian and Maxine Hanofski, 

and that’s Mrs. Gallenger’s brother and his wife. We have 

Barry Hanofski and Dave Hanofski, Yvonne Schmalenberg, 

who’s a neighbour that works at Highways. Part of Jim’s crew 

are here today and we’re very honoured that they were able to 

share some time with us. We have Jim’s bunky, Reg Robinson. 

These were absolutely best pals. I know that. We have Ken 

West and Kim Lupichuk. As well as from Highways we have 

Shelly Jorstad. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I invite all members to welcome our guests for 

this historic passage of a Bill in a few moments. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Highways has asked leave to 

introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, at 



April 30, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2931 

this time I would like to join my colleague from Coronation 

Park in the introduction once again of the Gallenger family. 

We’ve had the opportunity to do this on a couple of occasions. 

What we have that’s unique today is we have not just the 

immediate family members, but the extended family members. 

And I think that’s an appropriate presentation of the family 

having their presence in so many numbers here today because 

we’re going to do something quite unusual in this legislature 

today. We’re going to work together with the opposition to 

move a piece of legislation that is appropriate to the 

circumstances for which Mrs. Gallenger has advocated. 

 

I’d also like to recognize the various members of the Highways 

ministry who have joined with the family to be here today. I 

know that there’s an intimacy that develops when you work so 

closely with an individual over the number of years that many 

of these Highways employees spent with Jim Gallenger. And I 

think that it’s appropriate that they be here to witness the 

proceedings of the House as well. 

 

I’d like to thank each one of you for the part you played in this 

proposal and this endeavour today. Thank you for your support 

of Jim’s family. Thank you to the family members for their 

courage and for their attendance here. We respect the efforts 

that you’ve put in and offer our condolences publicly once 

again. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 605 — The Traffic Safety (Maintenance Workers — 

Gallenger) Amendment Act 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you very much. Thank you, thank you, 

Mr. Speaker, and I thank all members. I thank the Minister of 

Highways for his kind remarks of welcome to our guests. And 

I’ve enjoyed working with the minister in the creation of what 

we’re about to do today and look forward to that continuing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I move the Bill, I do have some remarks 

and in those remarks or maybe even outside of those remarks, I 

want to acknowledge two people that are in the gallery that 

should need no introduction and certainly don’t to me. One is 

my wife, Lorna, who members know how we depend on our 

partners, our spouses through life. And today is a good example 

of, in my intent on this Bill, I overlooked recognizing my wife, 

the love of my life, Lorna. And my constituency assistant 

beside her is Fred. So welcome to the Legislative Assembly, 

both of you. 

 

[12:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, at the conclusion of my remarks, I will be moving 

Bill No. 605, the highway traffic maintenance workers 

Gallenger amendment, that it be read a second time. 

Today we’re taking the opportunity to make a good choice. And 

we’re taking this opportunity to pass legislation that will make 

highways safer — safer for all highway workers and safer for 

the general public. We are starting with snowplow workers and 

extending it to all aspects of highway operations. Because this 

legislation says that vehicles can only pass highway vehicles 

when they have their warning light, their ministry-issued 

warning lights flashing, you can pass them only at a maximum 

of 60 kilometres an hour. 

 

And I want to say that the ministry — and before that when it 

was known as the department — has had a very long-standing 

policy of no one riding in ministry vehicles. And I’m not saying 

that I did, and I’m not saying that I didn’t. But if I had ridden in 

a snowplow with my brother-in-law some years ago on a 

Christmas Eve, if I had, I would have witnessed an incredible 

attention to detail. 

 

If I had been there, I would have witnessed my brother-in-law 

out at 2 o’clock Christmas Eve, keeping the highways clear so 

that everybody could get to their families Christmas Day. If I 

had been there, I would have seen this plow hitting drifts, and I 

think I would still remember to this day the thrill of the 

deceleration when you enter into the snowbank — if I had been 

there. I also know from talking to highway workers that they 

take safety incredibly seriously. And highway workers deserve 

to be safe. 

 

I know that when I was talking with Crystal Gallenger, Jim and 

Sharon’s daughter who is not able to be with us today . . . She’s 

down at, I believe it’s apple city about half an hour out of 

Minneapolis. She’s down on some work-related training and 

just was unable to be here today. 

 

But I know that Crystal shared that . . . not saying she was or 

she wasn’t out with her dad the evening that the Riders won the 

Grey Cup, but I will say that if she had been out with Jim that 

night, they would have come across some roadkill right about at 

the corner of the highway intersection and the northwest part of 

Pilot Butte. And if Crystal had been there, she would have 

witnessed her dad put on the warning lights and lighting up the 

area kind of like a movie, just very, very, very bright. She 

would have witnessed Jim put on the highways-issue vest. She 

would have witnessed him waiting at the side of the road while 

traffic whizzed by, waiting for an opportunity to rush out, grab 

the roadkill, and try and wrestle it off the highway, keeping the 

highway safe for everyone else. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today’s legislation is to provide a level of safety 

and certainly a reminder to all people in the public that we have 

an obligation to each other. We have an obligation to make 

highway workers know that they’re valued, and make them 

know that they have every right to get home safely just as you 

or I have every right to expect to get home safely today. 

 

And so that’s really what today’s legislation is about. Mr. 

Speaker, I want to tell you that highway workers are out in all 

conditions. Snowplows, the thing that predicated this — we’ve 

got to recognize this — snowplows are out in many conditions 

on Saskatchewan’s highways. But the many conditions 

typically involve snow, freezing rain, sleet, slush. Very seldom 

does it involve 80-degree weather where the sun is shining. 

Highway trucks, snowplows are out in the worst of weather. 



2932 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2009 

They’re out trying to keep our highways passable. Mr. Speaker, 

I think it is asking very little of us to slow down at the 

appropriate times. Any time we see the flashing light, we 

should slow down to a maximum of 60 and proceed passing 

only when it is absolutely safe to do so. 

 

Before I take my place, Mr. Speaker, there’s a couple of things I 

want to do. One is to point out I’m wearing an orange wristband 

that Sharon Gallenger gave to me last night, and it says on this: 

Support our highway workers; slow down. And Sharon made 

this available at her own expense and has done so, and that’s 

very nice and I thank her for that. She’s starting an advertising 

campaign all on her own. This family has gone through 

petitions and gotten over 2,000 signatures for petitions. They’ve 

pushed us to do some legislation, which I’m happy to report 

we’re responding to. And then they’ve also provided this 

wristband which I have taken steps to make available so that all 

MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] will have access 

to these wristbands. And for that, I thank you for that, Sharon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we owe a huge debt of gratitude to Sharon 

Gallenger, to all of her family, and extended friends for giving 

us as legislators an opportunity to do something very, very 

worthwhile and to enhance safety and to pass a piece of legacy 

legislation, a piece of legislation to the legacy of the late Jim 

Gallenger who, from everything I’ve heard of Mr. Gallenger, 

nothing would make him much prouder than knowing that at 

least, at least we’re trying to make some improvement in the 

lives of his co-workers and of the general public of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 605, The Traffic Safety 

(Maintenance Workers — Gallenger) Amendment Act be now 

read a second time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 

moved by the member for Regina Coronation Park that Bill No. 

605, The Traffic Safety (Maintenance Workers — Gallenger) 

Amendment Act be now read a second time. Is the Assembly 

ready for the question? I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of 

the Government of Saskatchewan, it’s a pleasure for me to 

speak to this piece of legislation, Bill No. 605, The Traffic 

Safety (Maintenance Workers — Gallenger) Amendment Act. 

 

As I indicated earlier, Mr. Speaker, this is a piece of legislation 

brought forward by my colleague from the opposition benches. 

He has worked on behalf of the family who have put a 

tremendous amount of effort into this particular initiative. I 

want to commend them again for taking this particular 

opportunity to not just memorialize the life of Jim and the 

sacrifice he paid, but to make it available as a broader 

opportunity to recognize the sacrifice and the efforts on behalf 

of all of us by highways workers in very difficult and 

sometimes trying circumstances. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when this Bill was first brought to our attention, I 

think without any doubt that my member colleague opposite 

could say that our response was positive to this. And when I had 

an opportunity to speak to Mrs. Gallenger and to her daughter, 

Crystal, in my office, we made it very clear that we would do 

whatever we could to support this legislation. 

 

And I said at the time, that if this particular Bill wasn’t the final 

sum and totality, that we would look at improving the Bill at 

some level. And we’ve also indicated that to the member, that 

this is the introduction and likely to be the passage of this 

legislation, but it may be an opportunity for us to look at other 

ways of expanding this same protection, the same allowance for 

safety to other workers that represent other government 

agencies and maybe particularly workers on behalf of the 

Crowns who might be in circumstances where they are utilizing 

flashing lights and where their safety needs to be addressed as 

well. 

 

And so we’ll take that opportunity as the summer unfolds. 

We’ll continue to engage the family and our colleagues in the 

opposition on this particular topic to make it the best Bill we 

possibly can. But that doesn’t mean that this Bill shouldn’t be 

addressed today, that it shouldn’t be passed today. 

 

This particular piece of legislation is what we would refer to as 

a legacy piece. And I think by its nature, it’s appropriate that we 

address the sacrifice of Jim Gallenger on behalf of the public of 

this province, that we take this opportunity to say thank you 

through this piece of legislation, and that we try to make sense 

of tragedy through this particular piece of legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve had opportunity actually to talk to a number 

of snowplow operators. I’ve sat in the cockpit of one of those 

trucks and, you know, that’s really what it is. If you’ve driven 

truck before, you haven’t seen anything until you sit in the seat 

of one of these snowplows because they are so well equipped 

with so many different pieces of safety equipment and 

operational equipment. And whether it’s a snowplow you’re 

operating or a wing that you’re dropping and having to move, 

given the circumstances, whether you’re spreading sand or salt 

— there is quite a collection of buttons and lights and whistles 

and so forth. 

 

So when you operate a snowplow, it’s just not a matter of 

getting a truck and driving down the road. You’re engaged as a 

specialist operating a very unique and significant piece of 

equipment. These are not small trucks. They are large, tandem 

trucks as a rule. They’re heavily equipped, and there is a lot of 

complicated material and gadgets that need to be attended to. So 

I would refer to operators of snowplows as specialists. And as 

such, not only are they operational specialists, but they are 

specialists in terms of the conditions they operate that particular 

equipment. It is never a nice day when a snowplow is expected 

to be on the road. Conditions are always wrong in some way or 

other, and so in every instance those operators put themselves in 

a very difficult and potentially harmful circumstance. 

 

To bear witness to the potential of hazard that exists, we have 

300 snowplows situated in various locations around the 

province, about 85 different communities. And at any given 

time, almost all those 300 trucks, if the conditions make it 

necessary, those trucks are on the road. So we have operators 

that are in harm’s way, putting themselves at risk, in significant 

numbers all around the province. 

 

Our ministry has worked very hard to try and improve the 



April 30, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2933 

safety record, though, of snowplow operations. We haven’t 

been perfect. Unfortunately we have had a number of accidents. 

I believe since records were kept going back to 1998, I believe 

there have been 50 separate instances where snowplows have 

been involved in accidents. That’s far too many. It’s not a 

satisfactory statistic to our ministry. And so as a consequence, 

we have undertaken a fairly aggressive advertising and media 

campaign. You’ve all seen, I’m sure, the ads about slow down 

in the snow zone and the couple who were talking about “where 

did that come from” and hit the back end of a snowplow. That’s 

been the reality for our operators far too often. 

 

As a consequence, Mr. Speaker, the ministry is undertaking a 

very significant initiative to try and reduce the potential for 

those kinds of mishaps. We have created a new visibility efforts 

for the back of snowplows, where we’ve got an illuminated 

checker board that is mounted on the box of the truck. And if 

that happens to get covered by snow, of course it renders it 

irrelevant I suppose, so we’ve also introduced a wind scoop that 

is unique to our trucks in this province. And that wind scoop 

catches air, blows down over the face of the box, and cleans the 

checker board-illuminated sign so visibility is much more 

constant. But if that’s still not enough, we’ve established or 

introduced highly placed wigwag lights to catch the attention of 

people before they penetrate that snow zone and accidentally 

engage the rear end of one of our trucks. Those are some of the 

things we’ve undertaken. 

 

[12:30] 

 

Most of these safety initiatives, Mr. Speaker, have not been 

brought into practice by our ministry or by our executive team 

on their own. Most of these new safety initiatives have been at 

the — not just request — but at the insightful concern offered 

by our own ministry members, people who are operating these 

trucks. That’s where a lot of these ideas originate and they’re 

great ideas. They move it forward, and as we are able, we try to 

implement these new safety measures. 

 

Most recently we have tried, on a pilot project basis, getting the 

attention of the motoring public by creating a system where we 

have a vehicle trailing the snowplow as a warning. So we have 

two vehicles in fact in place. We have the snowplow operating 

and . . . I don’t want to call it a pilot vehicle because it’s behind 

the snowplow, but it provides warning for drivers on the road. 

And we found that to be reasonably successful, and we’re 

hoping that if that pilot project proves its worth, that we’ll be 

able to introduce that in some of our more heavily travelled 

areas. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that has troubled me the 

most, I suppose, is that no matter how many measures we might 

undertake, how much public attention we might draw to these 

issues, how much public education we can achieve — and that’s 

part of the reason for having this Bill — there is still the 

dilemma of what to do about drivers who are absolutely 

insistent on getting from point A to point B within a record time 

frame. You know, the willingness of our drivers on our public 

highways to take the issue of safety seriously is compromised 

on a minute-by-minute, hour-by-hour basis. 

 

I know that to be true from personal experience. When I drive 

down No. 1, it’s a twinned highway and, by and large, pretty 

straight and people don’t see any road hazard necessarily. We 

get so intent. If I’m driving the speed limit, if I set my cruise at 

115 . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — 110. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — 110, oh that’s right; that’s the speed limit. 

110, Mr. Speaker, I’m the slowest car on the road. I might even 

be the slowest truck on the road, except for a few that are 

governed at 90 kilometres an hour. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, this is an important initiative that 

we’re undertaking here today. But until we can make it 

absolutely clear to the motoring public that the safety of other 

people on the highways, the safety of our Highways workers, 

the safety of motorists generally is a responsibility for each of 

us — and when we drive accordingly — we will not have 

achieved what we want to achieve. 

 

And so I see this particular piece of legislation as important, as 

a legacy piece, as an information opportunity, as a public 

awareness opportunity. I certainly see it as an important part of 

the equation in providing greater safety for the employees of the 

Ministry of Highways. But it’s not the end of this exercise. 

 

And so having said that, Mr. Speaker, I want to acknowledge 

the fact again that the family has put a tremendous amount of 

effort into raising our awareness by promoting this legislation, 

by having our ministry respond to it, by having our government 

say, we agree that this is a piece of legislation that we move 

forward for all the right reasons. But the work isn’t done, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And so I would conclude my comments on behalf of the 

Government of Saskatchewan at this time, and we’d like to see 

this legislation move forward. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion moved by the member from Regina Coronation Park 

that Bill No. 605, The Traffic Safety (Maintenance Workers — 

Gallenger) Amendment Act be now read a second time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the member from Regina Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I designate that Bill 

No. 605, the highway traffic (maintenance workers — 

Gallenger) amendment Act be committed to the Committee of 

the Whole and request leave for this said Bill to be considered 

in the Committee of the Whole immediately. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Committee of 

the Whole, and the member has requested leave for the Bill to 



2934 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2009 

be considered in Committee of the Whole immediately. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. I do now leave the 

Chair for the House to go into Committee of the Whole. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE ASSEMBLY 

 

Bill No. 605 — The Traffic Safety (Maintenance Workers — 

Gallenger) Amendment Act 
 

The Chair: — The item of business before the committee is 

Bill No. 605, The Traffic Safety (Maintenance Workers — 

Gallenger) Amendment Act. 

 

Clause 1, short title. Is clause 1 agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. 

 

[Clause 1 agreed to.] 

 

[Clauses 2 to 4 inclusive agreed to.] 

 

The Chair: — Her Majesty, by and with the advice and consent 

of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, enacts as 

follows: The Traffic Safety (Maintenance Workers — 

Gallenger) Amendment Act. I recognize the member for 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Chair, I move that the committee report the 

Bill without amendment. 

 

The Chair: — It has been moved that the committee report Bill 

No. 605 without amendment. Is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. Will a member move the committee 

rise and report progress and ask to . . . I recognize the 

Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I move that 

the committee rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit 

again. 

 

The Chair: — The Opposition House Leader has moved that 

this committee rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit 

again. Is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. 

 

[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the committee. 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the committee 

to report Bill No. 605, The Traffic Safety (Maintenance Workers 

— Gallenger) Amendment Act without amendment and ask for 

leave to sit again. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read the third time? I 

recognize the member from Regina Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By leave, I move that 

this Bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has requested leave for Bill No. 

605, The Traffic Safety (Maintenance Workers — Gallenger) 

Amendment Act to be now read the third time and passed under 

its title. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Leave has been granted. I recognize 

the member. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 605 — The Traffic Safety (Maintenance Workers — 

Gallenger) Amendment Act 
 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now read a 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 

Regina Coronation Park that Bill No. 605, The Traffic Safety 

(Maintenance Workers — Gallenger) Amendment Act be now 

read the third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly 

ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Third reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? 

 

Mr. Trew: — Next sitting. 

 

The Speaker — Next sitting. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Now that 

this important work has been completed, I move this House do 

now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that this Assembly do stand adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



April 30, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2935 

The Speaker: — This Assembly stands adjourned until 

Monday afternoon at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 12:42.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2909 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2909 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2909 

  LeClerc .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2909 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2909 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2910 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2910 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2930 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2930 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2910 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2910 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2910 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2911 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2911 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2911 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Missing Children’s Month in Saskatchewan 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2911 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2911 

 Notre Dame Hounds Win Championship 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2912 

 Northern Hockey Champion 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2912 

 Business Excellence Awards in Moose Jaw 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2912 

 Prince of Wales Scholarship Recipient 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2913 

 2008 Income Tax Savings 

  Chisholm .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2913 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Minimum Wage and the Government’s Record 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2913 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2913 

 Utility Rates and Emissions Reduction 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2914 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2914 

 Profits From Crime and Victims’ Rights 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2916 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2916 

 Severance of Public Servants 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2916 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2916 

 Gender Equity Issues 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2918 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2918 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2918 

MOTIONS 

 Granting of Leave of Absence 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2919 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2919 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Support for Rural Saskatchewan 

  Bradshaw ....................................................................................................................................................................... 2919, 2930 

  Atkinson ......................................................................................................................................................................... 2921, 2929 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2923 

  Harper ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2924, 2928 

  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2925 



 

  Belanger ......................................................................................................................................................................... 2927, 2930 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2928 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2929 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2929 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2930 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 605 — The Traffic Safety (Maintenance Workers — Gallenger) Amendment Act 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2931 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2932 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE ASSEMBLY 

 Bill No. 605 — The Traffic Safety (Maintenance Workers — Gallenger) Amendment Act ..................................................... 2934 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 605 — The Traffic Safety (Maintenance Workers — Gallenger) Amendment Act 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2934 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 




