




















































Hansard: April 09, 2009


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 48A  THURSDAY, APRIL 9, 2009, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2737 

 April 9, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood River. 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to the Assembly, I‟d like to introduce 18 grade 8 to 

11 students in the west gallery from Mankota. And they‟re 

accompanied by their teacher Rhonda Pilgrim and chaperones 

Ron Ficzel, Lana Nogue, Stan Scribner, Ross Schafer, and 

Dennis Dyck. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these students have been through a year-long 

leadership training program. The teachers have been working in 

collaboration with the University of Regina‟s Greystone Centre 

for Interprofessional Collaboration to explore leadership 

opportunities for our youth and address issues facing youth in 

our school and communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will be meeting with the group after question 

period, and I would ask all members to please join me in 

welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It‟s 

my pleasure to introduce to you and through you to the 

members of the Legislative Assembly a guest that is seated in 

your gallery. He moved to Saskatchewan in July 2007, and he 

and his family now reside in Grenfell where he is establishing 

his own business. And I wonder if the members would join with 

me in welcoming Mr. Danny Thompson. Thank you very much. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition in 

support of the indexing of minimum wage. Mr. Speaker, the 

indexing of minimum wage would ensure that minimum wage 

earners would be able to maintain a standard of living as cost of 

living increases. And the prayers reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to indexing Saskatchewan 

minimum wage to ensure that the standard of living of 

minimum wage earners is maintained in the face of the 

cost of living increases. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

The petition is signed by residents from Maple Creek, Melville, 

and Webb. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for wage equity for CBO 

[community-based organization] workers. And we know these 

workers in the community-based organizations throughout 

Saskatchewan have been traditionally underpaid, and because of 

that there is an issue around high staff turnover, and the 

subsequent lack of caregiver continuity has a negative impact 

on the quality of care clients give. I‟d like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the development and 

implementation of a multi-year funding plan to ensure that 

CBO workers achieve wage equity with employees who 

perform work of equal value in government departments. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these folks come from Zealandia, Regina, and 

Saskatoon. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition on 

behalf of rural residents of Saskatchewan who question why the 

Sask Party government is leaving them behind when it comes to 

providing safe and affordable water. Mr. Speaker, the prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to financially assist the town of Duck Lake 

residents for the good of their health and safety due to the 

exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency, and that this government fulfills its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions, Mr. Speaker, are signed by the good residents 

of Saskatoon, Prince Albert, and Duck Lake. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. I‟m pleased today to rise to present a petition in 

support of a new Saskatchewan hospital, Mr. Speaker. The 

petitioners recognize that the existing nearly 100-year-old 

structure is in much need of replacement. The petitioners ask 

that: 



2738 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2009 

. . . the Legislative Assembly call upon the Government of 

Saskatchewan to immediately recommit funds and 

resources for the continued development and construction 

of a new Saskatchewan Hospital at North Battleford and 

provide the Prairie North Regional Health Authority with 

the authority necessary to complete the essential and 

much-needed project. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petitioners are all from The Battlefords 

constituency. I so present, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition in support of fairness for graduate students in 

Saskatchewan through the expansion of the graduate retention 

program. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately expand the graduate retention 

program to include master‟s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are 

students from the University of Regina, University of 

Saskatchewan, as well as a number of health care professionals 

practising here in the province who have graduate degrees. I so 

present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood River. 

 

National Day of Remembrance of 

the Battle of Vimy Ridge 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

Canada is a country that came of age as a nation on the 

battlefields of the First World War. Today is the National Day 

of Remembrance of the Battle of Vimy Ridge. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on this day 92 years ago, the Battle of Vimy Ridge 

began, a four-day battle that led to the capture of the critical 

high ground by the Canadian corps, including the soldiers of 

four battalions that hailed from Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this battle has become a national symbol of 

sacrifice and bravery. The actions of these soldiers defined the 

character and strength of our country and province. We owe a 

debt of sincere gratitude and must never forget the defining 

contribution of those who served, those who came back and 

helped continue to build our nation, and those who never 

returned home to enjoy the freedom for which they fought so 

bravely. 

 

So in their honour, Mr. Speaker, flags on the Saskatchewan 

Legislative Building are at half mast. Mr. Speaker, I encourage 

everyone to take a moment today to reflect on and honour their 

legacy etched into the lives and freedoms that each one of us 

enjoys every day here in Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

St. Ann’s Senior Citizens’ Village 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to acknowledge the 

dedication and commitment of the people at St. Ann‟s Senior 

Citizens‟ Village to providing quality housing and health care to 

all of their residents. St. Ann‟s, located in Saskatoon Eastview, 

operates as a special care home and independent living and a 

supported independent living apartment facility. 

 

St. Ann‟s is a Catholic seniors‟ home with a mandate of 

affirming the spiritual needs of residents, enabling them to live 

in dignity while enjoying the respecting companionship of their 

peers. St. Ann‟s provides physiotherapy programs, social and 

recreational programs, pharmacy and laboratory services, 

family physician services, and spiritual and religious services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would also like to acknowledge all the hard work 

done by the organizers of the St. Ann‟s Annual Spring Gala 

being held on Sunday April 19. The Spring Gala is a refreshing, 

exciting day of entertainment, Mr. Speaker, and an important 

fundraiser for St. Ann‟s. The funds raised go to support capital 

projects at St. Ann‟s, such as room renovations. The Spring 

Gala is not only a chance for residents, family, friends, and 

community members to socialize with each other, but it also 

raises funds to make sure that St. Ann‟s is able to fulfill its 

mandate of providing quality housing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, thanks to the hard work and dedication of St. 

Ann‟s staff and the organizers of the Spring Gala, residents of 

St. Ann‟s have much more than just a living space. They have a 

home. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Saskatchewan Legislative Internship Program 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

Saskatchewan legislative internship program is in its eighth 

year. I‟m proud to say that I was one of the first MLAs 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly] to have an intern work 

with me when the program first started in 2002. Since that time, 

I‟ve had the enjoyable experience of working with four interns 

and am currently completing a term with one of the current 

interns, Ms. Dawn Gibbons. 

 

I must say every experience and every term that I‟ve had an 

intern working with me has been very productive, very 

enjoyable, because these young people who sign up for this 

program are eager. They‟re bright. They look to expand the 

members‟ horizons with new ideas, and they certainly do 



April 9, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2739 

whatever is asked of them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We are currently completing the first term, so those interns who 

are working with government members will, after Easter, start 

their term with opposition members, and of course vice versa, 

Mr. Speaker. As I have said, my experience has been very 

enjoyable and productive, and I know the member from 

Saskatchewan Rivers, who has had an intern working with her, 

has had the same experience. 

 

I would just encourage all members in this Assembly, when 

asked, to sign up for the intern program because it is a very 

productive program that does great things for both the member 

and the interns. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Vimy Ridge Day 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, today is Vimy Ridge Day. 

Ninety-two years ago today, Canadian troops under Canadian 

leadership engaged the German army entrenched on Vimy 

Ridge. Four days later, Mr. Speaker, thanks to skilful planning, 

innovative tactics, determination, and great, great courage, the 

Canadians prevailed and Vimy Ridge was taken. 

 

It was a pivotal moment in the history of this country, Mr. 

Speaker. Some say it was the moment that a loose confederation 

of provinces and territories matured as a country, and we took 

our place among the nations of the world. And it should then 

come as no surprise, Mr. Speaker, that Canada has become 

known as a country that values and defends human freedom, 

justice, and peace because it was formed in the terrible crucible 

of a war. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today we honour and remember the Canadian 

soldiers who fought at Vimy Ridge. There will be ceremonies 

of tribute and remembrance across the country to honour their 

memory. And while doing so, we can‟t help but remember and 

pay tribute to all the Canadian men and women who down 

through the years have sacrificed and served in the cause of 

peace including, Mr. Speaker, and perhaps especially, the 

Canadian men and women of our armed forces who today are in 

harm‟s way. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Meadow Lake. 

 

NDP Leadership Candidate 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, with the humour and fun 

replaced with hypocrisy and opportunism, it‟s my duty to 

announce to the House that That ’70s Show is coming to 

Saskatchewan. Yes, Mr. Speaker, after eight years of palling 

around with senior Tories in Cowtown, Calgary big oil lobbyist 

Dwain Lingenfelter has returned to Saskatchewan preaching a 

back-to-the-future version of 1970 socialism. 

 

And so far the reviews have been decidedly mixed. The 

StarPhoenix‟s Les MacPherson refers to Lingenfelter‟s recent 

pronouncements on state expropriation of the potash, oil, and 

gas industry as “crazy talk” and says, “The supposed 

freebooting capitalist has transmogrified into something more 

like a frothing socialist.” 

 

But can Lingenfelter actually believe what he says? After all, 

for the past eight years, he‟s been collecting paycheques from 

Nexen energy, one of the most aggressive oil and gas 

companies in the world, with a gleaming 37-storey headquarters 

in downtown Calgary that‟s been described as a shrine to 

capitalism. 

 

Surely Lingenfelter understands the lunacy of what he‟s 

proposing. But what is even more revealing than Lingenfelter‟s 

words are what those words reveal about his character. One day, 

a Calgary big oil lobbyist, happily collecting big paycheques 

while jetting around the world, and the next, an NDP [New 

Democratic Party] leadership candidate spouting discredited 

nonsense and saying anything to get elected. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people have seen this show before, and they 

didn‟t like it the first time. With scenes like this one, it‟s little 

wonder that people have changed the channel on the NDP. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Easter Message 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Easter is one of the holiest times 

of the Christian calendar. While Christmas has evolved to be a 

larger . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Massey Place 

may start over. 

 

Mr. Broten: — From the top. Mr. Speaker, Easter is one of the 

holiest times of the Christian calendar. While Christmas has 

evolved to be a larger cultural celebration, Easter is for many 

the most important time of the year from a personal and 

theological perspective. Whatever branch of the Christian faith 

one belongs to, Catholic, Orthodox, or Protestant, this is a very 

special time. 

 

For Christians around the world, Easter provides hope through 

Christ‟s redemptive work. It is a hope through faith that 

promises a better tomorrow and motivates better actions today. 

The Easter story is an example of personal sacrifice for the 

benefit of many. It is an example that spurs active hope as 

opposed to passive or accidental hope. 

 

As Jesus stated, there is no greater love than to lay down one‟s 

life for one‟s friends. Mr. Speaker, regardless of religion or 

personal beliefs, this is a principle that serves as a guide for 

many around the world. It‟s a principle that causes us to 

consider how we might put aside our own interests to meet the 

needs of others. I believe it calls us to seek co-operation and 

collective action over the lure of unbridled self-interest. 

 

In these days of economic uncertainty, many Canadians are 



2740 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2009 

relying on hope. In countries where conflict is the norm, hope is 

all that keeps people going. Mr. Speaker, as Easter approaches, 

I encourage all of us to reflect on the spirit of hope and ask how 

our actions can better reflect the hope we each believe in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official opposition, I would like to 

wish all members and all Saskatchewan people a Happy Easter. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Although 

Christmas is probably the most recognized holiday of the year 

and is very important as it does celebrate the birth of Jesus 

Christ, many in the Christian community see Easter as the most 

significant and important event as it is the foundation of the 

Christian faith. 

 

Today is Holy Thursday, Mr. Speaker, which recognizes the 

last supper that Jesus shared with the apostles, when he broke 

bread and shared wine, signifying his body and blood — the 

basis for communion celebrations of Christians to this day. It 

also recalls the betrayal of Jesus that would ultimately lead to 

his death. 

 

Mr. Speaker, tomorrow is Good Friday, when we remember the 

ultimate sacrifice as God gave up his only Son who faced 

ridicule and pain and gave his life for the sins of mankind, his 

true identity confirmed in Matthew 27:51 where it was written:  

 

The earth shook. The sky darkened. The temple curtains 

tore in two. And the soldiers stated, “Surely then this man 

was the son of God.” 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this Sunday symbolizes the third day after 

Jesus was so brutally tortured and killed. We celebrate Easter 

Sunday, the day of Christ‟s resurrection when he triumphed 

over death as he said he would when he stated, “Tear down this 

temple and I will rebuild it in three days.”  

 

As this holiday has to many become a season of candy and 

bunnies, let us not forget the real, the ultimate sacrifice made by 

a Son and a Father, who through death created new life. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[10:15] 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Plans for Regina Stadium 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In December the 

Premier said that the Sask Party had little interest in investing in 

the new stadium in Regina saying, “. . . there‟s a long list of 

priorities first.” 

 

Yesterday the Minister of Municipal Affairs revealed that, at 

the same time the Premier was saying no, they had no interest in 

a new stadium, Crown Investments Corporation — apparently 

the Sask Party‟s new source of mad money — was allocating up 

to $70,000 to study the concept of a new stadium, something 

that the Minister of Municipal Affairs himself calls a large, a 

huge undertaking. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why did the Sask Party claim it 

had no interest in a new stadium at the same time it was 

allocating $70,000 of taxpayers‟ money to the study? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The fact that the 

government has been working on some options, should there be 

some resources available down the road or some innovative 

way to achieve changes either to Mosaic Stadium or perhaps 

something new, shouldn‟t come as a surprise to members of this 

House. In fact, I think on News Year‟s Eve, on December 31 in 

the Leader-Post it was reported in Rob Vanstone‟s column in 

the sports section that the government was looking at, was 

doing a study that considered different options. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government believes that we need to be 

prepared for what might be able to be achieved down the road 

or, you know, depending on the resources of the province, and 

so work‟s been under way. We know that something needs to 

be done with respect to Mosaic Stadium. Either we need to do 

some renovations to the stadium itself, as is widely known; 

there‟s the option of perhaps of a new open-air stadium; and 

there‟s potentially the option of an entertainment complex, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan thinks it‟s important for us to 

be prepared for that eventuality, and so the study‟s been 

happening for some time — quite well known to the public — 

to explore different options, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this is very interesting. In 

December, the Premier — the Premier, in December — claimed 

no interest in a stadium. He said they had other priorities. When 

asked again budget day, the Premier said, no, we have other 

priorities ahead of a stadium. 

 

Now we find out yesterday that there were consultants had been 

contracted back in December and allowed to spend up to 

$70,000 at the same time that this Premier was claiming no 

interest in a stadium. Amazingly now we find out that the 

studies prepared by the city‟s independent consultants that the 

province is trying to look at have only recently come into the 

hands of the province. 

 

We found out yesterday that the province is considering the 

option of a new open-air stadium. This happens despite the fact 

that apparently the city is not considering that as an option. To 

the minister: what exactly are — or to the Premier — what 



April 9, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2741 

exactly are the province‟s consultants studying? Will that report 

be made public? And why is the Sask Party considering options 

that the city is not, unless you‟ve already decided what you‟re 

going to do? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member says that he 

found out yesterday that the government was doing some work 

into the potential down-the-road feasibility of changes to 

Mosaic or perhaps some other stadium options. He found out 

yesterday, but it‟s been in the newspaper now for months. 

 

December 31, Rob Vanstone in his column reported, and I 

quote: 

 

The provincial government is preparing a report on the 

stadium issue. Once the report is completed, all parties 

will be able to consider the options . . . [more clearly]. 

 

Some of the options were laid out yesterday for the media by 

the minister responsible. 

 

Then on February 21 again, secretly hidden in the pages of the 

Leader-Post, were the following quote: “A feasibility study is 

being conducted by the provincial government — with which 

the city hopes to partner to pay for any kind of improvements 

— [or] to . . .” 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has been recognized. Please 

allow the Premier to respond. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Hidden in the Leader-Post on March 19 

were my comments to the media, Mr. Speaker, when asked 

about the stadium. The media quite rightly said the stadium‟s 

clearly not in the budget. I said, no it‟s not in the budget; neither 

will any money for any stadium improvements or any other 

structure for a sports entertainment complex come from 

infrastructure dollars, ready-for-growth money for the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

But I said very clearly in the media, if there are other innovative 

partnerships, other ways we can explore to achieve what might 

be an international-class facility for our province, we‟d be 

prepared to look at those innovative ways. And we are doing 

that study that has been made clear to the public now for 

months, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, speaking of the media, in a 

popular blog hosted by Rod Pedersen, the voice of the Riders, 

reported December 23 last year: 

 

. . . I‟ve managed to rub elbows with some significant 

government officials . . . 

 

I‟m sure they would string me up if I divulged the details 

. . . but suffice it to say that by sound financial planning 

and management over the next few years, this 

stadium/entertainment complex will be paid for. 

 

My question to the Premier is two: why did he deny in 

December interest in a stadium? Why did he again deny interest 

budget day in a stadium, and how much money are you going to 

spend on a stadium? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, let me again direct that hon. 

member to a quote from the newspaper, the Leader-Post, the 

Rob Vanstone column dated December 31 last year, Mr. 

Speaker, where it says in the newspaper: 

 

The provincial government is preparing a report on the 

stadium issue [Mr. Speaker]. Once the report is completed, 

all parties will be able to consider the options . . . [more 

clearly]. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟ve said from the very beginning, members of 

this side of the House have said from the very beginning, that 

we need to do something about the stadium. We know . . . 

 

The Speaker: — We‟re only a few hours away from the Easter 

break. Maybe we could allow the members presenting the 

question and the ministers the opportunity to respond without 

interference. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we‟ve been saying for some 

time that this government has other infrastructure priorities, Mr. 

Speaker. And more than saying it, we‟ve been acting on it. We 

said a children‟s hospital was a priority for this government. 

Mr. Speaker, we acted on it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — We said highways budget, record 

expenditure on highways is a priority of this government. 

We‟ve acted on it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Now I want to be very clear. What I said on 

budget day is precisely what I‟ll again say, and it‟s for the 

public record. We are not going to use ready-for-growth 

infrastructure dollars for any proposal for any stadium, either 

the current one or a new one. But if there are some innovative 

opportunities, some partnerships that we can explore that could 

achieve some fundamental change that we know will have to be 

made — that Calgary is doing it; BC is doing it; Winnipeg‟s 

announced a new stadium — we‟ll look at those innovative 

approaches, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Provincial Sales Tax on Used Equipment 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Speaker, just like in 



2742 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2009 

opposition, the Sask Party members feel free to say whatever 

they want on any given day. In opposition, Mr. Speaker, the 

Sask Party ran around the province . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Member from Regina Douglas Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — In opposition they spent a lot of time 

running around the province promising whatever they wanted 

without giving any real consideration as to whether or not they 

could keep those promises. For example, they said if oil prices 

go too high, we‟ll reduce the fuel tax. Of course we haven‟t 

seen that. 

 

They said that there wouldn‟t be a Fiscal Stabilization Fund. Of 

course now we have an even larger one. But one of the things 

that they were critical of was the PST [provincial sales tax] 

charged to business owners for used equipment. And so my 

question is to the Minister of Finance: what is the Sask Party 

government‟s position today regarding the PST on used 

equipment? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the member opposite would likely know that the 

current policy of tax on used equipment was introduced by the 

former government in approximately the year 2000. It is 

broadly applied, which is one of the main reasons why 

Saskatchewan has the ability to keep the rate of PST at the 

lowest rate outside of Alberta in Canada. It‟s because it‟s 

applied on a very broad base. 

 

The second part of it is, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party did make a 

commitment to remove the PST on used vehicles in strategic 

categories. That was accomplished the day after the election, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, there is still application of PST on used 

equipment. That, we think, is appropriate following the formula 

that‟s been in place for some time. And we certainly believe 

that that is appropriate, to keep the base broad so that the rates 

can be as low as possible. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, it wasn‟t the NDP that was 

running around the province with respect to the PST on used 

equipment. It was the Sask Party. The NDP was frankly too 

busy lowering the sales tax rate to the 5 per cent that the 

minister speaks of. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, Danny Thompson is a 

Grenfell man that recently came to Saskatchewan from Alberta. 

He and his family moved here to start their own business. They 

bought a grocery store — including its used equipment — but 

four months after purchasing his business he was presented with 

a bill for the PST on the used equipment, although much of it 

was too old and had to be thrown away, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the question to the Sask Party government is that they‟ve 

now had an opportunity to address this issue of taxing used 

equipment for well over 16 months. Why do they continue to 

force Saskatchewan businesses to pay the tax on used 

equipment? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I am reluctant to get into details and specifics of any 

individual client of the Finance department or the ministry. But 

I will say this, Mr. Speaker. There are procedures that are 

available . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — There are certainly procedures that are 

available to all clients of provincial sales tax whereby if 

equipment indeed does not have a value on it as determined by 

the Department of Finance, there is methodology in order to 

have that equipment valuated at its real, proper current value. 

There are also the possibilities that some equipment is actually 

included with the physical premises and that is also possible to 

mitigate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will say that the Ministry of Finance stands 

ready to meet with the individual involved and to make sure 

that the application indeed of these taxes are fair and 

appropriate. And certainly that offer has been extended, and I 

understand has been accepted. And I would hope that this will 

work its way through as there is a complete understanding and 

ability to work with the ministry in terms of the specifics. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Speaker, saying that you have 

a tax regime that people ought to know — even while Sask 

Party MLAs are still making comments to the effect that 

charging the PST on old equipment is a tax on a tax on a tax 

and have pointed out that it is “regressive and inhibits small 

business” — so what is a business owner in Saskatchewan 

supposed to deduce from all this, Mr. Speaker? My question is: 

will the minister . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The member from Regina Douglas 

Park can phrase his question. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — My question is: will the minister sit 

down, undertake to meet with Mr. Danny Thompson with 

respect to his particular case? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 



April 9, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2743 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we have 

attempted on a number of occasions, starting late last year, in 

order to be fair and appropriate in dealing with any of the 

clients, have attempted to make sure that we communicated 

appropriately with the individual involved. 

 

I would be pleased, immediately after question period, to meet 

with Mr. Thompson, and have some officials to make sure that 

he completely understands the proper procedures that are 

available in this issue. I would be more than pleased to meet 

with him as immediately after question period as is possible. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Regulation of Nuclear Activity 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, the 2009-2010 working plan for 

the Ministry of Environment includes the following under its 

list of key actions in the coming year: 

 

Seek to . . . [minimize] provincial regulation of nuclear 

activity under the Nuclear Safety and Control Act in 

Saskatchewan through an administrative agreement with 

[the] Canadian Nuclear Safety Commission. 

 

To the minister: can she confirm that the Sask Party intends to 

pursue provincial regulation of nuclear activity? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟ll take notice of 

that question. Thank you. 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Apparently no one can answer on behalf of the 

government. The 2003 agreement between Saskatchewan and 

the federal government was intended to cover uranium mines 

and mills, and included the Department of Labour. It does not 

address either a nuclear reactor or nuclear waste storage. 

 

On January 28, 2008 The StarPhoenix reported that: 

 

The Saskatchewan Party government is concerned the 

length of time it takes for new nuclear . . . projects to come 

on-line in Canada could close the “window of 

opportunity” it sees opening for the province‟s uranium 

supply. 

 

The article goes on to describe the Premier‟s frustration at all of 

the difficulties and challenges that are holding Saskatchewan 

back from being able to develop what he calls “next-generation 

technology.” 

 

To the minister: given that regulation of the nuclear industry is 

a federal responsibility, will she admit that the Sask Party is 

pursuing provincial regulation so that it can wrongfully make 

the decision to endorse a nuclear reactor without federal 

interference? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the basis for some of those, 

the quote the hon. member read may have been a speech I gave 

to the Canadian Nuclear Association in Ottawa earlier this year, 

Mr. Speaker, where I did point out that we need to make sure 

we have rigorous regulatory regimes around the uranium 

industry, around the nuclear industry as well in our country. 

 

But we also need to avoid duplication, Mr. Speaker. And so 

I‟ve also said outside in the rotunda that I welcome comments 

from the federal government and from other premiers that we 

need to work together to make sure we‟re not duplicating the 

processes. That‟s what we‟re talking about here, while not 

sacrificing the due diligence that‟s required in a proper 

environmental process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in terms of a non-uranium mine in our country, I 

think it‟s about three to five years to get a mine commissioned 

and operating. It‟s almost 10 years on the uranium side. And 

we‟re simply asking questions of the federal government to 

make sure that we have as streamlined but as rigorous a process 

as possible so that we can ensure safety but also see continued 

development of that sector, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, on Tuesday the Sask Party 

provided some insight as to what provincial regulation of the 

nuclear industry might look like. The Minister of Environment 

said that the Sask Party‟s new approach to environmental 

regulation will be achieved by leaving “. . . the „how‟ of 

regulation to those who run the plants, factories and mines.” 

 

The government‟s response to a consultant‟s report released 

Tuesday as well described how this will work. It states that the 

environmental assessments will be conducted “. . . according to 

attached proponent developed Draft Project Specific 

Guidelines.” 

 

To the minister or the Premier: is the Sask Party getting ready 

to conduct an environmental assessment according to the 

guidelines developed by Bruce Power? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — This is a tough one. Thank you. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. Again I take notice of that question. Thank you. 

 



2744 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2009 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Export of Nuclear Power 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, according to Bruce Power, 

according to the UDP [Uranium Development Partnership], and 

according to this government, the economic viability of a 

nuclear reactor in Saskatchewan is dependent upon export 

power. In committee on April 7, the minister responsible for 

this file said that the export grids would be a private company 

venture. He said, and I quote, “. . . any discussions . . . I‟ve ever 

had with Bruce Power, the risk was always going to be on the 

private sector for any grid associated with the export of power.” 

 

To the minister: will he confirm that if Bruce Power operates a 

nuclear reactor in Saskatchewan, that Bruce Power will be 

responsible for 100 per cent of the costs of export grids? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I 

thank the member for that question as well. You know, we have 

a number of steps to proceed through before any decision will 

be made as to whether there will ever be a nuclear power 

generating station built in this province. 

 

But I can confirm that in the few conversations that I‟ve had 

with Bruce Power that there was never any reference to 

SaskPower or the Government of Saskatchewan building any 

grid that would be dedicated to the export of power, Mr. 

Speaker. I can confirm that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — He said he‟s never had the conversation, but he 

won‟t offer the guarantee for the people of Saskatchewan here 

today. Now he said he‟s had conversations with Bruce Power. 

But Tuesday the Premier told us that his government is having 

hypothetical conversations with Alberta about buying exported 

power from Saskatchewan. Tuesday night the minister said he‟s 

having hypothetical conversations with Bruce Power about the 

private sector being responsible for the cost of export grids. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I invite both the minister and the Premier to 

join us here in the real world and have real world conversations 

with both those companies and the people of Saskatchewan 

about the costs associated with this business. 

 

To the minister: how can he expect the people of Saskatchewan 

to make a decision on a nuclear reactor in Saskatchewan if he 

can‟t tell us there‟s a market for export power, and he can‟t 

guarantee that the private sector‟s going to be paying for export 

grids? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I thank 

the member for that question as well, although it sounds very 

much like the last one. And I‟ll reconfirm, Mr. Speaker, that 

any conversations I‟ve had with Bruce Power to this date 

strictly referred to the private sector being responsible for a grid 

dedicated to the export of power, if ever that should happen. 

 

And clearly in his reference to is there a . . . I think he asked the 

question if there‟s a market for export power. Clearly there is, 

Mr. Speaker. Alberta will need at least 4 to 5000 additional 

megawatts of power by the time a nuclear power plant could be 

built. The United States is an insatiable market for power, Mr. 

Speaker . Of course there‟s a market. And now I‟ve reconfirmed 

my limited conversations with Bruce Power on the subject. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Public Opinion and Consultation 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In this 

same committee the other night, as my colleague from Prince 

Albert Northcote referred to, the Minister of Enterprise and 

Innovation also admitted that this government is making 

decisions regarding issues such as nuclear waste storage based 

on polling. Mr. Speaker, apparently the Sask Party has done 

some internal polls. When asked if he would make any of this 

polling information public, the minister said it will not be made 

public. 

 

To the minister: it begs the question, who paid for the polling 

that he refers to? Were there any taxpayers‟ dollars used in the 

commission of this poll? And why would this polling not be 

made public? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 

member for that question. Clearly we‟ve been told by the 

people of Saskatchewan that they‟re not ready at this point to 

consider spent fuel disposal option in the province. And we‟re 

responsive to that, Mr. Speaker. And we‟ve said consistently 

that we‟re not interested in that business being pursued in the 

province at this time, at least until we hear the results of the 

public consultations. Maybe we‟ll be surprised. 

 

And as far as the financing of the poll, that was a Saskatchewan 

Party endeavour, Mr. Speaker. And, you know, I think I‟ll leave 

it at that, Mr. Speaker. I‟d like to go on and talk about the 

inconsistencies from that side of the floor, but maybe, maybe if 

there‟s another question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 



April 9, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2745 

Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the government 

campaigned on a platform of increased transparency and 

accountability. And so far, Mr. Speaker, they are applauding 

failure on this campaign promise. 

 

In the last number of days, Mr. Speaker, we‟ve seen 

blacked-out reports, blacked-out freedom of information 

requests, a $70,000 concept review that the government failed 

to announce, and now a poll that they are making decisions 

upon that they are failing to make public. 

 

To the minister, Mr. Speaker: what other polls have been 

conducted and kept secret from the people of Saskatchewan? 

More importantly, Mr. Speaker, is the government now making 

decisions on the basis of polling data? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I 

thank the member for that question; I was hoping he would ask 

it. Mr. Speaker, we have embarked on the most open and 

accountable public consultation process ever, ever in the history 

of this province on the subject. 

 

The process began April 3 and will be concluded on June 15 

with multiple options for people to respond, including public 

meetings around the province, Mr. Speaker, but not limited to 

that. In contrast, Mr. Speaker, previous governments, 

particularly that one, conducted through SaskPower 17 secret 

nuclear studies — 17 — without any consultation, Mr. Speaker. 

None of the results of those studies were ever released to the 

public until after the election when our government released 

them all, Mr. Speaker. Not only was there not public 

consultation, there wasn‟t even the release of the studies, and 

there was even denial . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The minister‟s time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Study of Alternative Energy Sources 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 

opposition has been hoping to see a genuine dialogue with the 

people of the province on the future of energy productions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‟ve asked the minister responsible if he was 

willing to include consultations on alternate energy sources. Mr. 

Speaker, at the beginning of question period today relating to a 

football stadium in the province of Saskatchewan, the Premier 

says they‟re willing to spend money in advance to do the 

studies, and more importantly, quoting the Premier, “be 

prepared for that eventuality.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, why is this same philosophy not being applied to 

the idea of alternate energy sources to meet Saskatchewan‟s 

future energy needs? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I‟ve 

answered this question before, and I‟m more than happy to do it 

again. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government is looking at all methods of 

energy production in the province, including clean coal in 

which we‟re investing the better part of $1 billion, Mr. Speaker 

— and, Mr. Speaker, and levering $400 million from the private 

sector and $250 million from the federal government, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are doing work on geothermal. There‟s work 

being done continually on wind and research into solar, Mr. 

Speaker. Per capita we have invested and will be investing more 

money in renewable energy in this province than any other 

jurisdiction that I‟m aware of in North America. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 339 through 342. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 339 to 342 tabled. 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

NDP Leadership Candidates 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s an honour to 

have the opportunity to enter and lead in this debate this 

morning. Our government is opposed to recent pronouncements 

from NDP leadership candidates, and in particular comments 

that would appear to want to take this province back to where 

they were, instead of to where we want to be. 

 

Perhaps the most appalling recent comments were those made 

recently by a former member who is rumoured to be the leading 

candidate that would lead this party in opposition. And that‟s 

important, Mr. Speaker, that should that candidate be 

successful, he may very well lead that party in opposition for a 

long time. 

 

At a recent leadership forum held in Moose Jaw April 2, Dwain 

Lingenfelter had the following to say, and I quote. He said, and 

I quote: 

 

In the Blakeney government, we set up SaskOil, we 

nationalized the potash industry. What I regret in many 

ways is that we didn‟t fight harder the privatization of 



2746 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2009 

some of those things that we did in the Blakeney era . . . 

[example] allowing the potash corporation to be privatized 

was a big mistake for the province and a big mistake for 

the party. We fought it but I think there is a question of 

whether we fought it hard enough. We allowed the 

privatization of SaskOil which I think was a big mistake 

for the province as well. And we should get back to the 

point of setting up an energy company that does our own 

drilling and exploration for gas in this province. I‟m 

committed to do that if I‟m the Premier. 

 

Something that I find interesting, Mr. Speaker, is that he 

mentions it would be better for the province. It “. . . was a big 

mistake for the province and a big mistake for the party.” Now I 

don‟t quite understand how, if it was a mistake for the province, 

why that would be a mistake for the party. Is this a party thing? 

The nationalization of industries is something that a party takes 

great pride in? Just a question, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[10:45] 

 

Quite frankly, these comments are not only appalling, but 

they‟re also very confusing. Perhaps, Mr. Speaker, we should 

just dismiss these comments coming at a time and a locale in 

the home community of what some people believe is the base of 

the only credible potential opposition to Mr. Lingenfelter in this 

race, and these were ill-advised comments by someone seeking 

an opportunity to score some points on an opponent‟s base. Or 

perhaps we‟re dealing here just with the comments of simply an 

opportunist. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter supported Jim Dinning‟s bid to become the 

leader of the Conservative government in Alberta. As we recall, 

Jim Dinning was the front-runner early in that leadership bid; 

someone an oil executive in Calgary might want to align 

himself with. I‟d be interested in Jim Dinning‟s comments 

regarding Mr. Lingenfelter‟s recent stand on the changes that he 

is proposing to the energy industry. Jim Dinning was the lead 

on privatization in Alberta, and an Albertan who I certainly 

have enjoyed a friendship and a philosophical understanding. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, perhaps we‟re really just dealing with the 

comments of an opportunist here. Someone who is just playing 

for the particular crowd that shows up. And the crowd at that 

meeting on April 2 in Moose Jaw probably is somewhat 

different than the crowd at the Oilmen‟s in Calgary. It would be 

comforting if we could simply dismiss these comments as 

coming from an opportunist at the spur of the moment, but they 

are indeed disturbing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Does this potential leader of the opposition want to go back, go 

back to the glory days of Saskoil, which was at its best a 

mediocre operated oil company by all accounts? Do we want to 

go back to the glory days of the potash industry when it was a 

very minor industry within this province? He may want to, Mr. 

Speaker; this province does not wish to go back. And those 

were not the glory days. As our government proceeds on an 

agenda of continued growth, I would suggest Mr. Lingenfelter 

has sent out the wrong message to the corporate sector, the 

investor sector, and the people sector of Saskatchewan. 

 

A climate of growth need not be veiled with even a hint of 

nationalization of industry. Fortunately, Mr. Speaker, Mr. 

Lingenfelter is seeking the position of leader of the opposition 

in this province. And fortunately, Mr. Speaker, his ambitions 

and statements, albeit confusing and contradictory, will be 

contained on that side of the Assembly for a long period of 

time. That will be part of our history that we‟ll be able to look 

back on and say was rather insignificant. 

 

Would it be possible that what is driving Mr. Lingenfelter‟s 

plans are for himself, for our province? Our province would be 

able to host a repeat performance. If the potash industry was 

provincialized, would there be a place once again for Mr. 

Lingenfelter? Perhaps a head office in a neighbouring province 

or state or country, a takeover, an amalgamation, perhaps a 

vice-presidency or a presidency of this new formed company? 

 

We have, Mr. Speaker, other contenders in the ring that are 

seeking the position of leader of the opposition. Although Mr. 

Pedersen and I have never met, he does come originally from 

my constituency, from Cut Knife-Turtleford. And I certainly 

have encountered his parents in my brief political life. I can tell 

you, Mr. Speaker, the constituents of Cut Knife-Turtleford, by 

and large dismiss this young aspirant on a number of issues. 

Our constituency, and perhaps less in the Cut Knife area, Mr. 

Pedersen‟s home, not only benefits, but is in fact driven by the 

oil and gas industry. Simply, this province doesn‟t need or 

deserve a Yens Pedersen. 

 

The not-long-ago elected president of the NDP party, Mr. 

Pedersen, seems to be spearheading the initiative to eliminate 

the uranium mining industry completely in our province. And 

he may have a revelation like the Lingenfelter revelation, that 

maybe we could make this all better by provincializing. 

 

Here‟s the plan: perhaps a new Crown, a new Crown for the 

uranium industry. An interesting concept for business, Mr. 

Speaker, but the philosophy fails. A business philosophy of, just 

for example, we don‟t like our product, but if you — the rest of 

the thinking world — are interested, we would very much like 

to take your money. So, Mr. Speaker, I just don‟t think that will 

fly. 

 

Mr. Pedersen, the former NDP candidate and relatively recent 

party president, has come out with his ideas on our energy 

sector which includes amalgamation of SaskPower and 

SaskEnergy before buying up oil and gas wells for domestic 

production. Mr. Pedersen then wants a Saskatchewan-only 

pricing structure, apparently by cutting our exports at global 

prices. Saskatchewan does not need a mini-national energy 

policy. Our province knows the damage that such a program 

does to our resource sector. 

 

Mr. Pedersen talks of securing our energy, but what this policy 

will do is drive out private investment from our province and 

put thousands of people out of work. The people of 

Saskatchewan don‟t want another national energy program. 

They want a government that creates an environment that is 

friendly to investment and economic growth. 

 

As we are aware, there are a number of other candidates — or 

two other candidates — in the race. Mr. Meili‟s position 

apparently is that he‟d just kind of like to tinker with the royalty 

rates. Well we saw what happened in Alberta when there was a 

change in royalty rates, and albeit not that large a change. 



April 9, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2747 

But now the other member in the race, the minister who‟s 

presently talking, the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow, 

we‟re not sure about her position on a number of things. So I 

guess we just won‟t . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — What did you have to say about that 

member? 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — What did I have to say . . . Okay. 

 

In the most recent magazine from the Saskatchewan Chamber 

of Commerce, there‟s a couple of interesting charts that I 

noticed just came out yesterday. Population in our province in 

the third quarter of 2008, Saskatchewan experienced a net 

increase of 2,064 people from interprovincial migration, 

combined with 1,200 immigrants and a natural growth of about 

the same amount to generate the 10th consecutive quarterly 

population increase. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the charts in this go back to about 2005. 

And it‟s very interesting: on all of the charts included in this 

publication, if we draw a line on November 2007 and carry the 

future to today‟s date, in every one of these major sectors, the 

increases have been dramatic. It includes population, 

employment and earnings, international merchandise trade, 

retail sales. Every category that they go through in their analysis 

shows a dramatic improvement since November 2007. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don‟t think that is by accident, and neither do the 

people of Saskatchewan. And certainly neither do the people of 

Cut Knife-Turtleford constituency or my neighbouring 

Battleford constituency. 

 

There‟s a couple comments, Mr. Speaker, that have been made 

by other members regarding the whole issue of the potash 

industry and the legislation that our government saw come off 

the books. The minister from The Battlefords, in April 29, 2008 

said the minister says he‟s going to demand a standing vote on 

this issue. He may be wasting his time. I don‟t see any reason 

for the opposition to oppose the legislation. It was put in for a 

specific purpose. It basically achieved its purpose without ever 

having needed to have been used. The Act had a role to play. 

The role has passed. It‟s not necessary any more. Repealing the 

legislation is not a problem. I‟m happy to stand with the 

minister on whatever day this comes and vote for a repeal of 

this legislation. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I see . . . As my time is running out, I would 

like to present the following motion. I move: 

 

That the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan express 

its opposition to recent pronouncements from the NDP 

leadership candidates that would support the 

renationalization of Saskatchewan‟s potash and oil 

industries. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m 

pleased to rise today to speak on this private member‟s motion 

brought forward by the member from Cut Knife-Turtleford, Mr. 

Speaker, a private member‟s motion that calls for the 

expression of opposition to recent statements made by certain 

candidates for the leadership of the New Democratic Party. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for the sake of those who are watching or those 

who are reading my remarks, the rules of the Assembly call for 

speeches to be 10 minutes in length, Mr. Speaker, and so I 

intend to speak to that 10-minute limit, Mr. Speaker. The public 

should know that in fact, Mr. Speaker, were I to be allowed 

additional time to speak on this motion, Mr. Speaker, there are 

quite a few things that I could say. 

 

Mr. Speaker, more importantly, more importantly, Mr. Speaker, 

I‟d like to ask the member opposite and for those who are 

watching, why it is that on a day when Stats Canada is 

announcing that 3,000 jobs have been lost in this province in 

the last three months, why, Mr. Speaker, is this the motion of 

priority for the members opposite? Surely to goodness in Cut 

Knife-Turtleford, Mr. Speaker, there are issues of more 

importance to the constituents of the member opposite than this 

issue about what candidates for the leadership of the NDP are 

saying, Mr. Speaker. Obviously members opposite have got 

some concerns about where candidates may be taking this 

province, Mr. Speaker, but the leadership convention has not 

been held yet. And I‟ll say a few words about that in a few 

minutes. 

 

[11:00] 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, by and large with the priorities facing this 

province, with the worldwide recession surrounding us, Mr. 

Speaker, and with the challenges that a lot of people are facing 

in this province. For example in The Battlefords, Mr. Speaker, I 

have people phoning my office every week about the lack of 

affordable housing in The Battlefords, and I know that‟s general 

across the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people in The Battlefords are also phoning my 

office, Mr. Speaker, about the labour shortages in this province, 

Mr. Speaker. On saskjobs.ca today in the city of North 

Battleford, there are 330 jobs listed up for grabs. People can‟t 

find housing in The Battlefords to move in, to go to work for 

these businesses in our community, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This ready for growth agenda that the government announced a 

year and a half ago, Mr. Speaker, is going by us because we are 

not prepared, with the support of this government, to even 

debate or discuss these important priority economic issues, Mr. 

Speaker. Instead the member from Cut Knife-Turtleford is 

asking us to oppose comments that are being made in a 

democratic fashion in the democratic development of policy 

within a political party, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I realize that the members opposite have difficulty 

understanding how policy is developed democratically, Mr. 

Speaker, because virtually never, never does the Sask Party 

have a convention with massive, open, public debate about 

policy issues, Mr. Speaker. They don‟t understand this process. 

They don‟t understand how it unfolds or how it works or how 

you engage people in the province in consultation and 

discussion. Ideas get expressed, Mr. Speaker. People research 



2748 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2009 

those ideas. They think about them. They talk about them, Mr. 

Speaker. And then they make collective decisions. 

 

We have seen time and time again, Mr. Speaker, in this 

Chamber and over the last year and a half, this government 

legislating and then consulting. Mr. Speaker. They have said on 

the largest issue facing Saskatchewan people today — this 

question about do the people of Saskatchewan support or not 

support a nuclear reactor being built in this province, Mr. 

Speaker — they have limited, limited consultation with the 

people of this province to seven meetings in the province over a 

two-week period of time, Mr. Speaker. We have asked for this 

consultation period to be expanded to include information 

distribution on all energy sources. 

 

And we have asked, Mr. Speaker, that this consultation process 

be extended to at least the end of the year, Mr. Speaker. 

Because to engage the public, you need the ideas. You need the 

information. You need the discussion. And then, Mr. Speaker, 

you reach conclusions. And in this case, Mr. Speaker, 

consultation means understanding what those conclusions are 

and how they were reached. 

 

For the opposition to even suggest that a political party 

withdraw the process of democratically developing policy to 

oppose the democratic development of policy within a political 

party, Mr. Speaker, this simply says that the members opposite 

do not understand it. And for members like the member of Cut 

Knife-Turtleford, who‟s got a lot of issues in his constituency, 

to claim that this is the priority of the government on this 

particular day in this legislature, Mr. Speaker, this can only be 

described, Mr. Speaker, as a waste of our time, a waste of our 

energy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have a great respect for this place. And I think 

that every member knows I‟ve served in the House of 

Commons, I‟ve served in the municipal city council, Mr. 

Speaker, and I‟ve now served in this place for more than six 

years, Mr. Speaker. I have a great deal of respect for the process 

that members who are elected come together to debate issues of 

public policy to develop a vision, Mr. Speaker, a vision that 

takes into account the views of the grassroots in this party. 

 

It has been suggested, Mr. Speaker, that the grassroots of the 

Sask Party are really the same as Astroturf, Mr. Speaker. 

There‟s no real root there; it‟s just all on the surface, Mr. 

Speaker. This is another example of what‟s been called 

Astroturfing, Mr. Speaker — giving people the idea that the 

grassroots are there. But there are none, Mr. Speaker, only the 

views of the members opposite which are very partisan in 

nature. This is a political party, Mr. Speaker, that has 

demonstrated time and time again they are more interested in a 

partisan debate than they are in a debate that involves vision 

and the long-term future of our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite have to take the time to 

start governing this province and stop acting as if they were still 

in opposition. Every single day, Mr. Speaker, there are 

examples from members of the government party now, Mr. 

Speaker, examples that indicate they believe they still sit in the 

opposition benches. They would rather talk about some of the 

work that was done by the New Democrats in government than 

they want to talk about their own vision for the future, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And a good example of that, Mr. Speaker, is the Minister of 

Enterprise and Innovation who on CBC [Canadian Broadcasting 

Corporation] radio took credit, took credit for all the wind 

power generation in the province of Saskatchewan. And when 

confronted in the Chamber, Mr. Speaker, he said, I wasn‟t 

speaking for the time that the Sask Party was in the 

government, Mr. Speaker, I was speaking for the entire history 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Well by golly, Mr. Speaker, a good part of that history in 

Saskatchewan was ideas developed by grassroots New 

Democrats who had a long-term vision for this province and 

were not afraid to talk about it in public because of fear of what 

somebody might say about it. 

 

The members opposite are simply trying to say to the public of 

Saskatchewan, be afraid of these ideas. Be afraid of these ideas. 

Well I want the members opposite to dig out the speech by 

Tommy Douglas about black cats and white cats. Mr. Speaker, 

they have forgotten the history of this province. A history, Mr. 

Speaker, that allowed the public to fully understand that 

because you listen to people doesn‟t necessarily make it correct. 

You need to, Mr. Speaker, consult with each other and work 

through these issues and develop policies. 

 

The black cats, the white cats, the spotted cats over there, Mr. 

Speaker, are still chattering away but the mice in the province, 

Mr. Speaker, have got to stop listening to the members over 

there to talk amongst themselves. And, Mr. Speaker, it is time 

for the government to start governing — not living, Mr. 

Speaker, in the policy discussions of other political parties — 

but to start governing. Make some policies of their own. Create 

some visions of their own, Mr. Speaker. Package them in a way 

that provides information to all Saskatchewan people, so we 

know exactly where we‟re going to be, exactly where we‟re 

going. 

 

New Democrats are not afraid of that. Never have been afraid of 

it, Mr. Speaker. In fact if New Democrats had been afraid of it 

and acted like the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker, there‟d be no 

hospitalization in Canada. There‟d be no medicare in Canada, 

Mr. Speaker. We‟d be living in a world governed like the 

United States, Mr. Speaker, because that‟s what the members 

opposite were looking for in the ‟60s, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I say this is a waste of time, Mr. Speaker, and I . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The member‟s time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a pleasure to rise 

in the Assembly this morning and to take part in the debate 

today to speak on this motion. And we do support this motion. 

It‟s a motion that supports our province‟s continued growth, 

and our government is committed to moving forward and 

promoting a strong and steady government. 

 



April 9, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2749 

I believe the NDP leadership candidates supporting the 

renationalization of Saskatchewan‟s potash and oil industries is 

moving backwards. And, Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to quote Les 

MacPherson from the Star Phoenix, January 12, 1999: 

 

There‟s no use trying to tell them that Saskatchewan‟s 

NDP administration welcomes business. This only invites 

a painful rehash of ancient political history and the NDP‟s 

nationalization of the Saskatchewan potash industry. 

Never mind that the industry has long since been 

re-privatized and is prospering in the province as never 

before. 

 

The issue of nationalization represents possibly what could be 

characterized as some of the darkest days in terms of 

development in Saskatchewan. The Potash Development Act 

was brought forward in the mid-‟70s under Premier Allan 

Blakeney‟s regime. Mr. Speaker, that government said to the 

resource companies, either you will sell, or we will take it from 

you. 

 

And what we saw was the legislation passed and the 

government of the day, to the detriment of the Saskatchewan 

people, decided to buy up potash companies and put at risk 

hundreds of millions of taxpayers‟ dollars. Mr. Speaker, the 

consequence of it was really quite shameful. What happened 

was the companies that looked at investment opportunities in 

Saskatchewan absolutely recoiled from it. 

 

The Saskatchewan people said, how could we ever trust a 

government that will use the legislative arm of government to 

expropriate whatever they see the need to? Mr. Speaker, I 

cannot think of any other thing you could do as a government to 

extinguish investor confidence than to do something of that 

nature. And that‟s exactly what we saw. 

 

People, our heart and soul of the province, those people left our 

province in droves. And our children and our grandchildren that 

could‟ve grown here in the province, they left. And what were 

we left with? Many can remember during that time frame in 

history watching our Saskatchewan residents, person after 

person, absolutely abandoning this province for opportunity 

elsewhere. And you can just look at the exodus of people that 

there was to Alberta at that time and to other provinces as well. 

 

The ones that went to Alberta, they went to Calgary; they went 

to Edmonton, those cities. And those cities were built by the 

people of Saskatchewan — with our youth, with our children. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan lost opportunities. They lost 

jobs. Saskatchewan lost our youth, and we lost investment. 

Saskatchewan lost in many ways that could be considered the 

heart and soul of this province. The investment community, the 

entrepreneurial class of people that in a progressive, 

forward-looking society look at nationalization as a clear signal 

to leave. So, Mr. Speaker, these Saskatchewan residents left, 

and we‟re still feeling the lasting effects of that to this day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the proof is in the numbers. People left this 

province in droves. Businesses left this province in droves. 

Investment left this province in droves. And we‟ve been 

chained by the ideology of the NDP and nationalization for 

some 35 years.  

Mr. Speaker, our government, our current government, believes 

the last thing business leaders ever thought would happen in a 

free and democratic country such as Canada was to see a 

government come forward and use a piece of legislation that 

would nationalize an industry. Mr. Speaker, our government is 

sending a signal to industry that Saskatchewan is now once 

again going to join the enlightened world in terms of 

development. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the NDP, the members opposite, represent a 

failed philosophy by a failed government. And it‟s very clear to 

me, as the people that I represent from Saskatchewan Rivers, 

it‟s very clear to them — it‟s clear to all the residents of 

Saskatchewan — that that is indeed the case. 

 

Our government will continue to move steadily forward despite 

the negativity by the members opposite. Mr. Speaker, the 

Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan is the largest company in 

Canada, precisely because the NDP philosophy is wrong. We 

see them flourishing because they understand the free enterprise 

system. They understand capitalism. They understand the 

marketplace. They understand entrepreneurial risk and reward. 

They understand the private sector, and it‟s not the public sector 

that has made this industry flourish. In fact it‟s the opposite of 

that. 

 

[11:15] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, people in Saskatchewan, the entrepreneurial 

class of this province, they were damaged. And they were 

damaged almost beyond repair by the actions of the NDP, the 

members opposite. And that has taken some 35 years to repair 

the damage, to salvage the years of neglect, and to move on 

with our government‟s attitude of steady growth which is good 

for the people of this province. 

 

The NDP is clinging to their nationalization philosophy, and it 

will be the exact thing that will be the undoing of the New 

Democratic Party for decades. It will be written down in history 

for all to read and discuss and to ask, what happened? 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would also like to discuss the 

potash profile with the value of potash sales. And it‟s currently 

a very substantial 3.1 billion annually. The potash reserves 

located in our province are massive, and by conservative 

estimates Saskatchewan could supply world demand at current 

levels for several hundred years. Saskatchewan offshore sales 

are made through a marketing company owned by the 

Saskatchewan potash industry. It has received numerous export 

awards and has a record of first-class, dependable service. 

 

Less than 5 per cent of Saskatchewan potash is sold in Canada. 

And about 45 per cent of Saskatchewan potash exports go to the 

United States, while most of the remainder of exports is sold to 

markets in the Pacific Rim and Latin America. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan has an exceptional size and 

quality of ore reserves, combined with the lowest production 

costs in the world. So our government, the Saskatchewan Party 

government, is committed to maintaining a fair and competitive 

royalty and taxation regime. We want to receive a fair return for 

our resources while encouraging investment and job creation. 

 



2750 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2009 

So I see my time is up, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I do support 

the motion, as well as my government. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, and I appreciate the opportunity to stand and enter this 

debate. I think it‟s kind of an odd motion because there‟s so 

much that we could be talking about in a world that‟s changing 

so rapidly. And the government has a lot on its plate and they 

could be talking about other things, but they choose to be doing 

this. 

 

But you know, on the other hand, Mr. Speaker, I do thank the 

opportunity to talk about some of our leadership candidates. In 

fact I will talk about them all because I think we‟ve got an 

amazing group of candidates out there talking to people right 

across this province. 

 

And it‟s an extended period. You know, some people thought 

our leadership campaign was a little too long, but they‟re 

getting a chance to actually talk to people about issues, 

compared to the two-week consultation period this government 

feels is more than adequate to talk about the nuclear reactors. 

And we know many people in Saskatchewan are very, very 

concerned. 

 

What are some of the kind of things that this government . . . 

I‟m surprised that they haven‟t raised this issue. Today we hear 

there are 3,000 jobs lost in the last three months in 

Saskatchewan. You would think that would be an issue. In fact I 

was listening to the previous speaker. She didn‟t talk about the 

jobs that potash create or oil creates in this province. She didn‟t 

want to talk about the jobs. She‟s talking about tax and that kind 

of thing, not the kind of things, bread-and-butter issues, that 

people in Saskatchewan are very interested in. 

 

We‟re not talking today about the value of building permits in 

this province. I understand that it‟s gone down some 43.5 per 

cent over the last year. The largest drop in Canada. The largest 

drop in Canada. We could be talking about that. And we‟ve not 

had a debate at all about the forestry sector, and I know there‟s 

members over there who represent some of the ridings affected 

by that. They‟ve chosen not to discuss that issue. And of course 

another major bread-and-butter issue is of course the 

skyrocketing utility and SGI [Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance] rates. We‟re not talking about that. We‟re not talking 

about water quality in this province and we should be talking 

about that, an issue that‟s facing people. Again a 

bread-and-butter issue that we need to be talking about. 

 

An issue that relates an awful lot to my riding, but I know right 

across this province, the HIV [human immunodeficiency virus] 

epidemic. The minister moved quickly to set up a committee 

that will study this. Unbelievable. He‟s known about this for 

several months and he‟s chosen on that day to meet with some 

folks. The duty to consult. Why aren‟t we talking about that? 

Well, you know, and I could go on and on about poverty issues 

and an anti-poverty strategy that we need so badly in this 

province. I may get to that, but clearly we‟re not talking about 

that today. 

 

My colleague, the MLA from Battleford, really said it well. So 

clearly. He can‟t understand the government‟s opposition to 

democracy where you have a full discussion in public about 

issues. Why are those people so opposed to that kind of thing? 

In fact, they bring it up as if it‟s a bad thing to be talking about 

issues here in Saskatchewan. We know, you know their 

leadership race last time was not so great. They only had one 

person brave enough to step forward. We know the kind of 

policy conventions they have, where actually — can‟t really call 

them policy conventions because they don‟t really have policy. 

You know we‟ve heard of conventions where they‟ve had one 

or two resolutions on some things. You‟d wonder, is this really 

the most important thing we can be doing? 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I really want to take a minute to talk about 

our four candidates and I‟ll have to go through this relatively 

quickly. I went through their websites today. It‟s just some 

fantastic stuff. In fact two of our candidates were in The 

StarPhoenix this morning. I was really proud to hear that my 

colleague from Moose Jaw . . . And I‟ll read the headline, and I 

quote, “NDP leadership hopeful Higgins vows to fight 

poverty.” What a brave, solid idea. Somebody stepping up to 

the plate in this province saying this is an issue we need to deal 

with. We‟ve got to hear more of this. And clearly it‟s 

responding. We know there are people. We‟ve heard from 

people right across the province. Why don‟t we have a strategy? 

Here I have my colleague and somebody I hope does really well 

in the race, stepping up to the plate, talking about poverty 

issues. Not on one-off announcements, but she has a good grasp 

of the issues right from housing to children‟s issues to basic 

wages. Very, very innovative and I‟m really glad to hear it. And 

you know, Mr. Speaker, it‟s on the website and the government 

can take a look at that. 

 

And she talks about other issues. She talks about democratic 

reform. Why aren‟t we talking about democratic reform? The 

kind of things that we need to have so that people do get 

engaged in, well for a policy. And of course she talks about 

women‟s issues, and clearly that‟s a huge issue for people in 

Saskatchewan. And I hear the government silent on this issue 

— silent. Only on women‟s day do they actually come forward 

and talk about some things. And we know some of the 

challenges that women face that we have to have a strategy to 

overcome. 

 

And what does she have to say about nuclear power, Mr. 

Speaker? And this is on the website. You can actually go and 

see this very clear. And I quote here: 

 

As leader of the NDP, I believe our time and energy is 

better spent looking to conservation and clean, renewable 

sources of energy than on finding ways to make nuclear fit 

our needs. Wind and solar power are reliable, 

cost-effective energy supplies that can help us build a 

cleaner future for our children in the jobs of the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is very well thought out. Really thinking 

about energy as a whole package, not putting all our eggs in one 

basket as this government seems intent on doing. 

 

And of course I want to go on to another candidate, Ryan Meili, 



April 9, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2751 

who today had an opinion piece in The StarPhoenix. And what 

does he say? I quote: 

 

Saskatchewan has the greatest potential for wind and solar 

energy . . . in the country. We can obtain all of our energy 

needs from renewable [energy] sources such as wind, 

solar, and small-scale hydro, rather than non-renewable 

technologies such as coal, fossil fuels and nuclear power. 

 

I think it‟s great that our candidates are stepping up to the plate 

and having a full discussion about the issues that are facing 

people here in Saskatchewan. Again, not putting everything in 

one basket and saying we‟ve got two weeks to talk about it. 

That‟s shameful, Mr. Speaker. And I think our candidates are 

bringing the conversations, hearing and listening to people out 

in Saskatchewan, talking about ideas that matter to people in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

He goes on and he‟s got a piece about environment, about 

education, about labour. And of course we could talk about 

labour, Bill 5 and 6, what this government did to working men 

and women in Saskatchewan, but we‟re not talking about that. 

And of course health care, very knowledgeable. 

 

Then of course we have Yens Pedersen. And again, he‟s out 

there. He‟s been out there talking to people. And again, a very 

good quality candidate who‟s putting forward some fresh ideas 

for our party and for our province. And I would really 

encourage the members opposite to take a look at some of the 

things he‟s talking about. Of course he talks about the 

cornerstones of Saskatchewan, principles for the new direction. 

I found this very engaging. I think this fellow has put a lot of 

thought into policy development. We need to be talking about 

these things right across Saskatchewan. 

 

He‟s talking about families. He talks about, our family is the 

most important aspect of our life. And I agree with him on that, 

Mr. Speaker, because it‟s clear we see challenges throughout 

the province. We see challenges that the Minister of Social 

Services is facing, because we have families that are being 

challenged by living in the economy that‟s making it more 

difficult. The cost of living. Utility rates are going up. Housing 

is not there. We need to support that. 

 

He goes on, talks about Saskatchewan‟s economy provides 

opportunities for innovation, security, and prosperity. He‟s 

thinking ahead of the game, not again like this government here 

putting all their eggs in one basket and going gung-ho on that. 

He‟s talking about the environment. 

 

And of course, Mr. Speaker, our fourth candidate — and of 

course he was the first one in the race — was Dwain 

Lingenfelter. And of course he has a lot of experience in this 

province in the oil industry, in agriculture, and of course in 

government generally. 

 

And if you go to his website, very engaging policy discussions 

that he has laid out for people in Saskatchewan to take a look at. 

And I would encourage members opposite to take a look at that 

and actually read what he has on his website. You know, he 

talks about gender parity — very, very important. And then he 

talks about the energy future. 

 

I‟m running out of time, Mr. Speaker. I wish I had more time to 

talk about this. But of course, you know, this week we‟ve heard 

about how one minister views blue skies. He doesn‟t like 

anybody talking blue sky. What we hear now is actually 

Chicken Little‟s speech talking about the sky is falling. Not 

talking about the future, but talking about the past. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there was a Jewish proverb I‟d like to quote, 

“What you don‟t see with your eyes, don‟t witness with your 

mouth.” And, Mr. Speaker, I hear that so much from the 

government, that they‟re willing to shoot off at the mouth about 

some ideas. They really need to take some time and get some 

experience. I will be against this motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member from Moose Jaw North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, it really is concerning when you‟ve got a 

political party in this province that has an agenda to limit the 

growth of this province. 

 

We have a slate of candidates that obviously do not understand 

the potential of this province. They do not understand business. 

They do not understand wealth creation or forward thinking to 

move this province forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And then in the past 16 month, this government has created 

more investment opportunities, more jobs, a larger tax base, and 

tax reduction for the people of this province then ever before. 

And I think we should be grateful for that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Michelson: — The people of this province deserve better 

than what the NDP has to offer. Where this province should 

have been advancing over the past decades, they‟ve had a 

mindset of a wee province, a mindset that we‟ll be in and out of 

equalization and limited vision for the future. 

 

When Dwain Lingenfelter says allowing the privatization of 

Saskatchewan oil and potash corporation was a big mistake, and 

that he is committed, he‟s committed to setting up his own 

drilling and exploration company if he becomes premier, Mr. 

Speaker, this is very frightening indeed. 

 

[11:30] 

 

Arguably the front-runner, Dwain Lingenfelter, used the 

socialist theme to line his pockets with the profits and then went 

into the private enterprise to do more of that and now is coming 

back to nationalize the strongest industries that contribute to 

this provincial revenue. He‟ll say anything that will benefit 

himself. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, if we look at this province and the wealth that 

it has within its boundaries, Mr. Speaker, almost half the 

agricultural land — we‟ve got the second-largest oil producer in 

Canada, the third-largest producer of gas, the largest deposits of 

uranium in the world, Mr. Speaker, the largest deposit of 

potash, quality products — the opportunities in this province 



2752 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2009 

are huge indeed. 

 

But history has shown that socialism has restricted our growth. 

It doesn‟t work. It didn‟t work, and it never worked. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if we take this whole concept of socialism, and 

just for an example, let‟s put it in the classroom. Let‟s say 

we‟ve got our 40-50 per cent students. We‟ve got our 60-70 per 

cent students and the 80-90 per cent students. If you implement 

the socialist idea, you‟ll say, well these 40-50 per cent students 

need some assistance, so we‟ll take some points from the 80s 

and 90s and move it back. And what really happens is the whole 

class average just diminishes because you haven‟t got the 40-50 

per cent students working like they should, and the 80-90 per 

cent students will obviously not work as hard because they‟re 

not getting the advantage of the efforts that they put into it. 

 

The whole concept of socialism implemented just doesn‟t work. 

And, you know, we‟ve got proof of this. In fact we should all 

have an education, a university diploma in regards to this 

because this whole lesson cost us over $200 million to the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 

 

They did it because the government was trying to run business 

— business that they don‟t know anything about, that they 

should never have been involved with. And I‟ll tell you some of 

the courses in this degree that we should have. Tappedinto.com 

cost us $6.7 million. Navigata cost us $43.3 million. SPUDCO 

[Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company] another 

$35 million. Like, we should have university degrees for these 

because there was a lesson we should have learned. But 

obviously on that side, they have never learned it. 

 

Government cannot and it should not be in business. It lacks the 

knowledge. It lacks the expertise. It lacks the vision. 

 

Government in business will drive out private investment from 

our province, and it will put thousands of people out of work. 

Let business do business. Let government govern. Business 

needs to know that they will always be able to do business in 

this province without the threat of being overtaken or being 

placed in competition with the public purse. 

 

Saskatchewan had another big lesson on this. It was The Potash 

Development Act of the mid-‟70s that arguably was the most 

restrictive legislation ever introduced in this House. The NDP, 

the power of the day, used this bully tactics to bring into the law 

The Potash Development Act which literally drove business out 

of the province, and it further discouraged investment in this 

province 

 

The government of the day got their way. They bought out the 

potash companies and consequently devastated the investment 

opportunities in this province. Companies were saying, how 

could we ever trust a government that will use the legislative 

arm of government to exploit whatever they want, whenever 

they want? 

 

People of this province . . . It drove out people of this province. 

People were absolutely abandoning this province to find 

opportunities elsewhere, and they did. The NDP nationalized 

the industry, giving our province the label of being one of the 

worst places to invest in the country. 

In 1989 the government got out of the potash business, and the 

Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan became the largest 

company in Canada. It became the largest since then because 

the NDP philosophy just didn‟t work. It was wrong. This is 

even noted in The StarPhoenix on April 22, 2008: the Potash 

Corporation leads the pack. Saskatoon-based potash producers 

most valuable firm on the Toronto exchange. 

 

It went on to say, the market value of the Potash Corporation is 

now nearly 60 times of the initial worth after nationalization 

was reversed in the late 1989s. Twenty years and it went up by 

60 per cent. It shows you the power of the private investment 

and what it should be doing for this province. 

 

You know, the member from Coronation Park said in one of the 

debates regarding the repeal of this Act, “. . . the fact that this 

repeal of The Potash . . . [Corporation] Act is largely a 

meaningless gesture” is what he called it, Mr. Speaker. He went 

on to say, “I don‟t think it‟s going to increase their productive 

. . . [capabilities] by 1 tonne a year.” He went on to say, “I don‟t 

think it‟s going to increase investment by the potash industry or 

anyone else by a $1 year.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, he doesn‟t know what he‟s talking about. 

Last year, $930 million were in land sales. We set records in 

every jurisdiction. $1.5 billion in potash revenue, a huge record. 

When we talk about expansion investment, the potash industry 

is planning to spend $8.5 billion expanding by 2020, increasing 

productivity by up to 87 per cent. How wrong could that 

member be? 

 

The same thing could be said about SaskOil. Since 1986 when 

SaskOil was dissolved, Saskatchewan oil production has gone 

up from 73.7 per cent . . . 73.7 million barrels annually to 160.9 

million barrels in 2008 — well over doubling the production. 

The oil and gas industry brings with it the expertise, the capital 

necessary to unlock the resource potential, and does not put 

taxpayers‟ money at risk. 

 

Another leader talked about the floating royalty rates. Well let 

me tell you, Mr. Speaker, this would cripple the industry in 

Saskatchewan. When Alberta toyed with royalty rates, it sent 

investment away. Alberta recently proposed this. And while 

Saskatchewan had a record year in land sales, Alberta land sales 

were only 25 per cent of their 2006 sales. Saskatchewan and BC 

benefit by royalty changes to Alberta would be a grave mistake. 

 

Mr. Speaker, business has to run business. They have the 

expertise, the knowledge, the capital, and are willing to be 

involved. Let government clear the way for investment and 

collect the royalties and the taxes and benefit the people of 

Saskatchewan. That‟s the way business works. That‟s the way 

to create wealth and well-being for the people of Saskatchewan 

without putting public money at risk. It‟s been proven that it 

works. 

 

And we oppose the recent pronouncement from the NDP 

leadership candidates that would support the nationalization of 

Saskatchewan‟s potash and oil industry. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



April 9, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2753 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Regina Douglas Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, let me say at the outset that I think it‟s fairly clear, and 

certainly I‟ve made it clear to the media and hopefully to the 

public, that I support Dwain Lingenfelter in his quest to become 

the leader of the Saskatchewan NDP. 

 

And so at the outset I want to thank the members opposite for 

the motion they put forward and for focusing attention on the 

campaign of Dwain Lingenfelter as he pursues the leadership of 

the Saskatchewan NDP. It‟s a rare opportunity that the 

government members of a different political party would help to 

focus attention on a leadership candidate such as this, so I very 

much appreciate that. 

 

Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I might say that the motion is a 

very timely motion because the deadline for purchasing a 

membership or for renewing a membership in the Saskatchewan 

NDP, in order to be able to vote in the leadership contest on 

June 6, the deadline for renewing a membership or purchasing a 

membership is April 24. So I want to thank the government 

members for their timely motion and allowing us to talk about 

the leadership and our party. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m always pleased to speak about leadership in a 

political sense in Saskatchewan. Always pleased to have an 

opportunity to contrast and compare the leadership of the CCF 

[Co-operative Commonwealth Federation], which is the 

precursor of the NDP, and then the NDP in Saskatchewan, as 

compared to the leadership being offered by the right in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

We have seen on the part of the CCF and the NDP, whether it‟s 

Douglas, Lloyd, Blakeney, Romanow, and indeed, Mr. Speaker, 

also the member for Saskatoon Riversdale now, that the NDP 

has had real leadership or vision, competence, and ability for 

people of Saskatchewan. And I think one of the reasons that the 

NDP has formed government for much of the last 65 years is 

because we have been able to put forward competent leadership, 

and therefore I look forward to Mr. Lingenfelter carrying on 

with that tradition, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I just note in that vein that since 1944, when the CCF was first 

elected in Saskatchewan, in a period of about 65 years — 65 

years — the CCF-NDP has had five leaders in that period of 

time, from 1944 through till today. On the other hand, the 

Saskatchewan Party has had five leaders in 15 years, going back 

to 1994. And some days we thought they had a monthly 

revolving door in terms of leadership on the other side. Can‟t 

really judge the current leader of the right, of the Sask Party in 

Saskatchewan; he‟s only been Premier now for 16 months. It‟s 

hard to come to any conclusions, to make any informed 

judgment on the very little that we‟ve seen so far. 

 

His record in business prior to coming into public life wasn‟t a 

particularly great record. It‟s not one that‟s played up by the 

members opposite. Although, you know, it can be said that this 

was a Premier that took over at a stage in our history when 

things were going better than they ever had before on all of the 

indicators. And so he‟s had a lot of opportunity, has had lots of 

resources to play with, Mr. Speaker. Their problem over there is 

that they sometimes tend to associate coming into good fortune 

with their ability to manage, Mr. Speaker. 

 

On the news about the mover‟s comments about differences in 

the NDP leadership, I just would make the observation that that 

is so typical of that party opposite. Imagine that, that people 

running for a leadership would have different opinions, would 

have different ideas about how this province should be 

governed. Not to be contrasted of course with the Sask Party 

opposite. When they had a convention there is no debate. This 

is a secretive, highly stage-managed convention, Mr. Speaker, 

where they trot out one or two motions that they debate — no, 

debate‟s not the right word — they discussed that they all 

agreed to, Mr. Speaker. I can‟t think of a more secretive, 

stage-managed political party when they are trotted out for the 

public view than the Saskatchewan Party. 

 

And perhaps one of the reasons that the Saskatchewan NDP has 

done very well over the years is because we tend to take on the 

difficult issues that confront them. We debate them. We discuss 

them in the full light of day so that the public knows where we 

come from and where it is that we‟re going, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the issue raised in this motion is one of 

public ownership. I think the real question here on public 

ownership is to look at the Saskatchewan Party. I note that one 

day the member for Swift Current, shortly after his election, 

comes into the legislature and rails against Crown corporations 

and Crown ownership, and that‟s the thing that has held 

Saskatchewan back over all these years — never mind the fact 

that within a few years Saskatchewan was turning up and 

leading the nation in all kinds of indicators — but it‟s Crown 

ownership that held Saskatchewan back for so long. 

 

And then, you know, he becomes the Crown critic and then in 

the subsequent election people figuratively beat them over the 

head and said, don‟t touch the Crown corporations. And then he 

has, you know, an epiphany — an awakening. He says okay, we 

won‟t touch the Crown corporations, of course except through 

the back door, which they try to do at all times. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t think the ideology on that side 

has changed. They distrust, don‟t like, frankly would look for 

opportunities to divest the Saskatchewan people of the 

ownership they have in Crown corporations and other public 

investments, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[11:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, all of this raises the question why the Sask Party 

of the day, then called the PCs [Progressive Conservative], sold 

off the public‟s interest in PCS [Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan Inc.]. Because the motion talks about, I think, or 

Lingenfelter is supposedly talking about the Potash 

Corporation. 

 

There is still a question of why it is that the Sask Party of the 

day, then called the PC Party of Saskatchewan, would sell off 

the public share in an enterprise and sell it off at a period of 

record low potash prices, and therefore foist on Saskatchewan 

people a cost which is just exorbitant rate, selling things off at 

exactly the wrong time. 

 



2754 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2009 

Mr. Speaker, to us that was all about ideology, not good 

common sense, Mr. Speaker, as was the decision, the foolish 

decision by the Sask Party, then called the PC Party, in 1982-83 

to sell off all the equipment owned by the Department of 

Highways. What a stupid thing that was to do, Mr. Speaker. I 

can‟t for the life of me, and Saskatchewan people still can‟t 

understand why the right would be so blinded by their ideology 

that they would sell off the highways equipment from the 

Department of Highways, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a word about SaskEnergy. Certainly one of the 

dumbest decisions that‟s ever been undertaken by the right in 

Saskatchewan was to successively sell off the government‟s 

ownership, the public‟s ownership of gas reserves in 

Saskatchewan. Now here you have the situation of, we owned 

the natural gas — and natural gas is a commodity that‟s in great 

demand by people in Saskatchewan — we owned the natural 

gas in Saskatchewan. They have taken steps over the years to 

divest us of that ownership, to sell the natural gas to private 

interests, and then we purchase the natural gas back for our 

consumers. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, there are places in the world where they 

don‟t approach things in a straight ideological fashion such as 

that, and where they have far more enlightened leadership. Even 

in Alberta, you had the city of Medicine Hat that doesn‟t take 

the natural gas they have, sell it to private interests, and then 

buy it back from them to meet the needs of their customers, Mr. 

Speaker. No, they access the gas directly, and they maintain the 

ownership of that. 

 

So what we have here, Mr. Speaker, is a motion that speaks to 

straight ideology, and all I can say is that the public doesn‟t care 

about ideology. All the public wants is good services at low 

cost. What they don‟t want, Mr. Speaker, is philosophy lessons, 

and then paying through the nose. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Time has elapsed on the 65-minute debate. I 

recognize the member from Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, no party has displayed such 

flawed ideological tunnel vision as the Sask Party, its 

conservative predecessors, its roots in the Canadian Alliance 

party, and its roots in the Reform Party. 

 

A question to the member from Moose Jaw North: why did his 

Tory heroes sell PCS at a record low value? Why did his Tory 

heroes sell highway equipment at fire sale prices? Mr. Speaker, 

why does his party have such lousy business sense? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, you 

know, if the records serve me, the upgrader was sold at record 

low prices just prior to the election. And I would certainly talk 

about Wascana Energy, and all of those kinds of investments 

that they had and they sold at record prices. Cameco shares. 

That says nothing about SPUDCO and tappedinto, and all those 

kind of investments that weren‟t even sold; they were just lost 

investments from the people of Saskatchewan. And it cost 

everybody $200 a piece just for that lesson, for all the 

investments that that government made when they were in 

power and lost money on consistently. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Weyburn. 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, recent 

days the big oil lobbyist from Calgary — Dwain Lingenfelter, 

who‟s running for the NDP leadership — has said that the 

privatization of Saskoil was a big mistake for the province. He 

went on to say that the government should get back to setting 

up an energy company to do drilling, Mr. Speaker. So I would 

ask the member for The Battlefords — I believe the 

opposition‟s energy critic — with the Saskatchewan Oil & Gas 

Show coming up in about two months in the city of Weyburn, I 

was wondering if he would put on the record whether he agrees 

with leadership candidate Dwain Lingenfelter, that this 

province should get back into the oil and gas business; and 

whether or not he would also say that, should he be attending 

the oil and gas show this year in June, if he would put that on 

the record, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

appreciate the question of the member opposite. Members may 

have noticed that I had to duck out of the Chamber for a few 

minutes when this debate began, Mr. Speaker. And members 

would be interested to know that I was on the phone with 

SaskPower, because I wanted to see what was happening in the 

province, Mr. Speaker, when the member from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford began his remarks. And SaskPower reports . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 

SaskPower reports that power consumption in the province has 

dropped 20 per cent since this debate started, Mr. Speaker, as 

television sets all over the province are being turned off. The 

people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, want to have their 

government deal with issues that are pertinent — pertinent to 

the lives of people in this province today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I welcome the invitation of the member from 

Weyburn to the Weyburn oil and gas show. Mr. Speaker, I have 

great confidence in the oil and gas sector, and will continue to 

support the oil and gas sector working in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, this is a question for the member 

from Moose Jaw North. In his speech he talked a lot about 



April 9, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2755 

business savvy and the facts of his expertise in the business 

world. And we know one of the traits of somebody who‟s in 

good in business is thinking outside the box — thinking outside 

the box. So I‟m curious what his views are when it comes to 

how we develop our economy, especially through the energy 

sector, and what they often term in business as blue skying? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. Thanks to the 

opposition for the question from the opposite side. 

 

Mr. Speaker, government shouldn‟t be in business. They‟ve got 

the power to taxate. They‟ve got the power to regulate. That‟s 

what they do. Let the experts who know how to run business 

come into the province with their capital and investment it in 

here and create jobs. Create jobs and opportunities and no 

nationalization. It doesn‟t work. It hasn‟t worked in the past. It 

hasn‟t worked around the world, and it hasn‟t worked here. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose. 

 

Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Much of the province 

was shocked to hear that NDP leadership front-runner, 

apparently by a wide margin, Dwain Lingenfelter, has become 

anti-business with the desire to nationalize the resource 

industries in Saskatchewan. This announcement by Mr. 

Lingenfelter must be one of the biggest flip-flops in political 

history. We all know Mr. Lingenfelter left to work for one of 

Canada‟s largest oil companies. 

 

It‟s also well known that he supported Jim Dinning‟s attempt to 

become leader of the Conservative government in Alberta. Jim 

Dinning was a person who was the lead on privatization in 

Alberta. Does the member from Regina Douglas Park, who is a 

public supporter of Mr. Lingenfelter, actually believe that 

nationalization will make people move to Saskatchewan and 

start up a business, when the government could eventually take 

their business from them? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this is the kind of 

over-the-top, inflated rhetoric, ideologically based comments 

that concern Saskatchewan people. You know at the end of the 

day, Saskatchewan people just want very good services and 

they want it at the lowest cost possible, and they don‟t much 

particularly care as to how that takes place. That‟s what they 

want. 

 

The member will know from his own roots in rural 

municipalities that RM [rural municipality] members don‟t 

spend a lot of time wondering about what‟s the best thing to do. 

They think about what is the most cost-effective thing to do for 

their constituents and that‟s what they set out to do. 

 

I would just make this other observation, Mr. Speaker. In Mr. 

Lingenfelter, Saskatchewan NDP will have a leader that has a 

proven record of competence in business, as opposed to the 

Leader of the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The people 

across the province are absolutely fixated on why the 

Saskatchewan Party is so fixated on the NDP leadership, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we don‟t know if this is Lingenfelter 

envy, Mr. Speaker, or that they simply don‟t know how to 

involve the people of the province in the operations of the 

province. Mr. Speaker, and then they would rather waste time 

talking about irrelevant things . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The member may re-place his 

question. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, we‟ve heard for the last number of 

weeks repeatedly, either members‟ statements or motions like 

this dealing with the NDP leadership. Mr. Speaker, my question 

for them is, Mr. Speaker, if any of them would like to buy 

memberships — in particular, the member from Moose Jaw 

North — we‟re prepared to sell it after. Would he like to buy an 

NDP membership? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, you know I‟ve been 

offered this, to buy a membership, before this. One of the party 

faithfuls for them actually bought a membership from me in the 

campaign, and I appreciate it because they could see the value 

of the candidate. They could see the value of the person. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when he talks about the fixation of this side of the 

House, let me tell you, the fixation on the side of the House by 

the people on this side of the House are fixated about the future 

of this province, the advancement of this province, and the 

betterment for all the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu‟Appelle Valley. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, during the 

NDP leadership race, we‟ve heard many interesting comments. 

But nothing was more surprising than to hear the front-runner 

calling for the nationalization of the oil industry. This 

pronouncement shows his clear intentions to renew the NDP‟s 

support and desire to return to the 1950s mentality. I wonder 

what other businesses Mr. Lingenfelter is planning on 

expropriating. 

 

The question is for the member from The Battlefords. By his 

silence on these issues, the member must be supporting such 

regressive measures. Why has he not stood up for 



2756 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2009 

Saskatchewan and denounced this kind of NDP candidate‟s 

comments? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it is interesting that the 

member would say my silence. I think I‟ve been quite vocal 

today on this subject and others. 

 

Mr. Speaker, New Democrats believe in a mixed economy 

where the public sector, the private sector, and the co-operative 

sector work together in the interests of all the people of this 

province. Mr. Speaker, I stand by the principles of the New 

Democratic Party and will continue to talk about them, not be 

silent, for as long as I‟m an MLA. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

Bill No. 603 — The Reporting of Federal Transfers Act 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by Mr. Van Mulligen that Bill No. 603 — The 

Reporting of Federal Transfers Act be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood River. 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m very 

pleased to stand today to take part in the debate on Bill No. 603. 

Mr. Speaker, on reviewing this Bill, there‟s a number of issues 

that I have with the Bill. I don‟t think the Bill was very well 

thought out. I think it was put forward by the member from 

Douglas Park as some fictitious leaning of a personal thing. 

 

And I‟d like to comment. I‟m going to put some comments on 

the record, Mr. Speaker. But I do want to just comment a little 

bit about the member from Douglas Park‟s comments. And it‟s 

very, very clear from his comments he‟s still living in the ‟80s. 

Going through Hansard and looking at the numbers of times 

that he referred to the ‟80s, he‟s obviously still living there. And 

I think, Mr. Speaker, he talked about the ‟80s to the extent that I 

might talk about SPUDCO. I think that‟s only fair that I bring 

stuff like SPUDCO up equal amounts of time as he brought up 

the ‟80s. 

 

[12:00] 

 

I start looking at the member from Douglas Park‟s speech and 

he talks about, “Reporting of government activities, finances, 

results, is a long-held tradition.” Insert SPUDCO. How does 

that ring with the long-held traditions of the NDP for reporting? 

And that‟s why I‟m going to use SPUDCO, plus others, a few 

times in my remarks to this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And you start looking at the “. . . principle of reporting and 

accountability in Saskatchewan‟s legislative history.” These are 

the member from Douglas Park‟s words, Mr. Speaker, right out 

of Hansard. So again, looking at reporting and accountability, 

insert SPUDCO. How can members on that side of the House 

even address some of the issues when that cloud is hanging over 

them? It‟s very, very interesting to hear how hypocritical that 

those members are, and can be, when they start talking about 

being accountable and transparent. 

 

Now I could go through a whole a bunch of other issues, but 

SPUDCO has to be the one that really leads the case from the 

NDP because, Mr. Speaker, that was covered up for six years. 

Covered up. 

 

Now we know there‟s other areas. When you start looking at 

the Fodey incident, that was covered up, I think, for 12 years or 

11 years or 13 years or something like that. So accountability 

— they do not have a leg to stand on. 

 

When we start going through some of the aspects of his speech, 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Douglas Park even gets into a 

little bit of an argument with himself. And, you know, the funny 

thing about arguing with himself, Mr. Speaker, there wasn‟t a 

clear-cut winner. And he gets talking about well, you know, 

we‟d want to see this done, but that‟s federal jurisdiction. Then 

he‟d say, well the province should do this, but it‟s federal 

jurisdiction. And so he doesn‟t even know where he‟s going 

with his own talk on the subject. 

 

Now he also got into the topic of equalization. Again, Mr. 

Speaker, I would suggest that that member is living in the past. 

Because if you look at what equalization is for, equalization is 

for have-not provinces, to try and make the country more 

equitable in terms of services. So if a province is doing 

extremely well, they pay money to the federal government and 

into the equalization fund, if you wish. And if the province is 

not doing as well as others, then they receive equalization from 

the federal government. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, my recollection is today that we are a have 

province. So why would the member from Douglas Park be 

talking about equalization? He‟s obviously living in the past 

again because under the reign of the NDP government, we were 

a have-not province. For the majority of the time that they were 

in power, this province was a have-not province, so in fact we 

were the recipients of equalization. 

 

But for the member to now start talking today, in this day, about 

equalization when we‟re a have province, and he‟s brought that 

up on a few occasions in his speech, Mr. Speaker. So again very 

hypocritical, the member living in the past when this province is 

doing well, especially well when compared to other provinces 

in our economic downturn at the time. 

 

And . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes I think we should 

mention SPUDCO one more time because that was a provincial 

decision by the government. And did I mention that they 

covered it up for six years? They actually were not truthful to 

the people of Saskatchewan for a six-year period on SPUDCO, 

and yet they want to talk about openness and accountability. 

 

And there‟s many more cases such as SPUDCO, Mr. Speaker. 

But in the interests of time, I won‟t go through all of the cases 



April 9, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2757 

that they‟ve messed up in the past. 

 

But I do want to put some comments on record in direct relation 

to Bill 603. It will basically identify why this Bill . . . I know 

the member talked a little earlier in the debate about something 

being silliest and dumbest. Well I think some of that could go 

along with this Bill, Mr. Speaker. So I do want to enter into the 

record some issues that we have with the Bill and why I would 

be unable to support the Bill. 

 

If you look at the administrative side of it, provinces sign 

hundreds of federal-provincial agreements having financial 

implications, administered through various provincial and 

federal ministries. And you would think the member from 

Douglas Park should know that because he used to be Finance 

minister. Now it really makes me wonder what he did as 

Finance minister by not knowing all of these things. It is 

extremely scary to the province while he was there because if 

he didn‟t know all of this stuff, who‟s running the boat? 

 

While Saskatchewan knows what federal financial resources are 

allocated to our province, it would not know what other 

jurisdictions are receiving under their specific bilateral 

arrangements with Ottawa. And the member should know that. 

So how could we be accountable for other jurisdictions, what 

kind of money that they get? 

 

Each province may account for federal payments differently. 

An example is the way provinces and the federal government 

accounted for the 2007-2008 federal trust payments. While 

Saskatchewan recorded these payments as revenue — they were 

legally available after federal enacting legislation was passed 

and eligibility requirements were met — other jurisdictions 

applied different accounting and reporting treatment. This 

would make interprovincial comparisons very difficult and 

likely not very useful. Again the member should have known 

this. 

 

And what‟s not included, Mr. Speaker? A number of federal 

payments being invested in Saskatchewan would not be 

recorded as a federal transfer payment in the General Revenue 

Fund. Some federal payments flow directly to other parties, 

such as cities. A decision would have to be reached on how to 

account for these federal transfers and whether there is 

consistency between provinces and how these payments are 

accounted for, significantly increasing complexity and 

compliance. 

 

Saskatchewan wouldn‟t know what other jurisdictions have as 

federal funding agreements that involve other parties like cities. 

Now you would think, you would think a former Finance 

minister would know that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And access — there‟s no certainty that other jurisdictions would 

be prepared to share the level of detail being requested under 

Bill 603. It would require all provinces to report details of 

federal payments, requiring both significant compliance efforts 

and potentially the agreement of each province‟s third parties 

who benefit from these payments. That basically puts this Bill 

into the not well thought out category, Mr. Speaker. And for 

those reasons I will not be able to support this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m quite surprised 

this morning that the government seems to be so afraid of this 

Bill. It basically requests that the government provide the 

legislature with some simple information based on the federal 

public accounts. And the whole point of the Bill is to have clear 

information about the federal transfers that come to this 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we work here in the province, we end up 

wanting to understand what kinds of funds are coming from the 

federal government. Unfortunately we don‟t always get clear 

information when it‟s directed out of the Prime Minister‟s 

office or out of the Premier‟s office. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, what this particular legislation would do 

would allow for the Public Accounts Committee to review what 

the Provincial Auditor assesses, based on working together with 

the report of the federal Auditor General. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

think that one of the clear roles of both government and 

opposition in the legislature is to get clear information that we 

can all use to develop public policy. 

 

Now we know from a number of different situations over quite 

a number of decades that it‟s not always clear what the federal 

transfers are as far as money coming to the province. I was a bit 

surprised that the Minister of Finance did not enter into this 

debate to set out some of the concerns, although I do appreciate 

the member who did speak, that he identified a couple of areas 

where there could be some work. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I think that the Provincial Auditor, working 

together with the federal Auditor General, could deal with those 

kinds of payments that are made by the federal government to 

cities. It all shows up in the federal legislation. I think that we 

could also deal with some of the accounting treatment of how 

payments are made. There is a body of federal provincial 

auditors and provincial auditors who actually set out the rules 

so that there is more common reporting across the country. 

 

But frankly, Mr. Speaker, I think that the government is afraid 

of this Bill because of the defence that they‟ve made of our 

present Prime Minister and some of the promises that he made 

to the people of Saskatchewan that he has not kept. And that 

goes right to the heart of getting clear information to the 

legislature. 

 

We will continue to push this concept and I encourage the 

members opposite to carefully look at what this particular 

legislation does, because what it will do is answer many of the 

questions that the public are concerned about. And I think that 

that‟s a fundamental reason for going forward with legislation. 

 

So I‟m speaking in favour of this motion and I look forward to 

the vote. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion presented by the member from Regina Douglas Park 

that Bill No. 603, The Reporting of Federal Transfers Act be 

now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 



2758 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2009 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — Those in favour say Aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed say no. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — I believe the nays have it. Standing vote. Call 

in the members. 

 

[The division bells rang from 12:12 until 12:19.] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The question before the Assembly is 

the motion presented by the member from Regina Douglas Park 

that Bill No. 603, The Reporting of Federal Transfers Act be 

now read a second time. 

 

Those in favour of the motion, please rise. 

 

[Yeas — 14] 

Junor Trew Van Mulligen 

 

The Speaker: — Order. 

 

Nilson Yates Higgins 

Furber Forbes Morin 

Taylor Quennell Broten 

McCall Wotherspoon  

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion, please rise. 

 

[Nays — 35] 

 

Wall Stewart Elhard 

Bjornerud Draude Krawetz 

Boyd Eagles McMorris 

D‟Autremont Hickie Cheveldayoff 

Tell Gantefoer Harpauer 

Norris Morgan Hutchinson 

Huyghebaert Brkich Hart 

Kirsch Allchurch Weekes 

Chisholm Wilson Duncan 

Michelson LeClerc Ottenbreit 

Ross Reiter Bradshaw 

Harrison McMillan  

 

Clerk: — Those in favour of the second reading motion, 14. 

Those opposed, 35. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion is defeated. I recognize the 

Government House Leader. 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the House 

do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — Prior to placing the motion, I want to extend 

best wishes for a happy and pleasant Easter weekend and Easter 

break. I look forward to seeing the members again on April 20. 

 

The Government House Leader has moved that this House do 

now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — This Assembly stands adjourned until April 

20 at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 12:22.] 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2737 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2737 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2737 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2737 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2737 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2737 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2738 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 National Day of Remembrance of the Battle of Vimy Ridge 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2738 

 St. Ann’s Senior Citizens’ Village 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2738 

 Saskatchewan Legislative Internship Program 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2738 

 Vimy Ridge Day 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2739 

 NDP Leadership Candidate 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2739 

 Easter Message 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2739 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2740 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Plans for Regina Stadium 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2740 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2740 

 Provincial Sales Tax on Used Equipment 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2741 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2742 

 Regulation of Nuclear Activity 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2743 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2743 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2743 

 Export of Nuclear Power 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2744 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2744 

 Public Opinion and Consultation 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2744 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2744 

 Study of Alternative Energy Sources 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2745 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2745 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2745 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 NDP Leadership Candidates 

  Chisholm .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2745 

  Taylor ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2747, 2754 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2748 

  Forbes ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2750, 2754 

  Michelson ....................................................................................................................................................................... 2751, 2754 

  Van Mulligen ................................................................................................................................................................. 2753, 2755 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2754 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2754 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2755 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2755 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2755 

 

 



 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 Bill No. 603 — The Reporting of Federal Transfers Act 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2756 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2757 

 Recorded Division....................................................................................................................................................................... 2758 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 


