




















































Hansard: April 20, 2009


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 49A  MONDAY, APRIL 20, 2009, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2759 

 April 20, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave 

for an extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave for an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you to all members of the House today, I 

would like to introduce 27 members from the public service 

who are participating in the parliamentary program for public 

servants. 

 

These fine employees of the public service represent 12 

government ministries. Included in that group are Advanced 

Education, Employment and Labour. We have representation 

from Education, from Energy and Resources, from Enterprise 

Saskatchewan, from the Environment ministry, from Finance, 

Government Services, Highways and Infrastructure, Municipal 

Affairs, the Public Service Commission, Social Services; 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Mr. Speaker, after our proceedings today I‟m going to have an 

opportunity to talk with our represented group today and to 

field some of their questions. 

 

Now this program includes an extensive tour of the Legislative 

Building and briefings by the Legislative Library, the 

Legislative Assembly Clerk‟s office, and members of Executive 

Council as well as a member of the opposition. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to extend a warm welcome to these 

participants, and I‟d like to ask all members to join me in 

extending that welcome to them today. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join my 

colleague from the government side in welcoming the 

representatives from the public service to the Assembly today 

on behalf of the official opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟ve had an opportunity to speak with previous 

delegations from the public service. Mr. Speaker, I know that 

they have many questions because quite often the work that 

they do relates to the work that government members bring 

forward and that opposition members scrutinize in the course of 

our and their daily business. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that this is a valuable program. I 

congratulate those who have been eligible to be a part of that 

program. And on behalf of the opposition, I offer our welcome 

as well to the delegation from the public service today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a 

great privilege and honour for me to introduce two very special 

people in your gallery today. Joining us are John and Alice 

Wall from Swift Current, my mom and dad. Mr. Speaker, 

whatever modest, very modest achievement or contribution I 

can point to at some point in my life, I would owe largely to 

them. Any problems I‟ve caused, however, they should not be 

held accountable for, Mr. Speaker. And it‟s just a great pleasure 

to have them here in the legislature today. I want to welcome 

them. 

 

And just before I take my seat, I also want to welcome Dave 

Marit and Doug Steele from SARM [Saskatchewan Association 

of Rural Municipalities]. We think it‟s them up in the gallery. 

They don‟t have the brown jackets on, Mr. Speaker, so we‟re 

not sure. But we want to welcome them as well to the Assembly 

and to my folks, John and Alice Wall, welcome to their 

Legislative Assembly as well. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today it‟s my pleasure 

again to introduce through you to all members of the Assembly 

two people seated in your gallery, in the persons of Sharon and 

Crystal Gallenger who I introduced here a couple of weeks ago. 

They‟re here to witness some of the proceedings of today‟s 

legislature and I ask all hon. members to join me in welcoming 

Sharon and Crystal Gallenger. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟d like to join 

my colleague in welcoming once again Sharon and Crystal 

Gallenger to their Legislative Assembly. We look forward to 

the unfolding of the proceedings today and we know that 

they‟ve played an important part in seeing the activities as they 

develop. And we‟re happy to have them here once again. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 



2760 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2009 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today it is my duty and 

honour to present well more than 500 petitions respecting 

changes to The Highway Traffic Act. And the second signature I 

have on here I defy anyone to rule out of order. It‟s that of 

Tanner Gallenger who is just tomorrow, I believe, 11 months 

old. Tanner signed in crayon but it‟s very legible. It‟s very 

legible. It‟s Tanner Gallenger, grandson. Mr. Speaker, the 

petition says: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to enact changes to The Highway Traffic Act, 

to be referred to as the Gallenger amendment, which 

would require all vehicle traffic to slow to 60 kilometres 

when passing a snowplow with their warning lights 

activated on Saskatchewan roadways. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s my honour to table these petitions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

present a petition that speaks to the issue that it is well known: 

that inadequate access to quality and affordable child care is a 

major roadblock for parents who want to access the labour 

market or further their own education, and that today too many 

Saskatchewan families are struggling with this very issue. And 

the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government, through consultation with the child care 

community, to invest immediately in growing the capacity 

of the early child care community to enable new child care 

spaces. This investment must include infrastructure 

funding for new facilities and expansion, funding to 

significantly increase the number of early childhood 

diploma and certificate training seats, and funding to 

ensure that the sector is able to increase its wages and 

benefits to attract and retain the needed personnel. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present on behalf of Saskatchewan families. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you. I stand to present a petition in 

support of indexing the minimum wage. And as we all know, 

the indexing of minimum wage would ensure that minimum 

wage earners would be able to maintain a standard of living as 

the cost of living increases. And the petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to indexing Saskatchewan 

minimum wage to ensure that the standard of living of 

minimum wage earners is maintained in the face of the 

cost of living increases. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petitions are signed from residents of Saskatoon. I so 

present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for wage equity for CBO 

[community-based organization] workers. And we know these 

workers in community-based organizations in Saskatchewan 

have traditionally been underpaid and many continue to earn 

poverty level wages. I‟d like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the development and 

implementation of a multi-year funding plan to ensure that 

CBO workers achieve wage equity with employees who 

perform work of equal value in government departments. 

 

And is in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And these folks, Mr. Speaker, come from Saskatoon, Regina, 

Moosomin, Maryfield, and Langenburg. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition on 

behalf of rural residents of Saskatchewan who question why the 

Sask Party government is leaving them behind when it comes to 

providing safe and affordable water. Mr. Speaker, the prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to financially assist the town of Duck Lake 

residents for the good of their health and safety due to the 

exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency, and that this government fulfills its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

These petitions, Mr. Speaker, are signed by the good residents 

of Duck Lake, Rosthern, and Laird. I so present, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition in support of fairness for Saskatchewan 

students through the expansion of the graduate retention 



April 20, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2761 

program. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately expand the graduate retention 

program to include master‟s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are 

students from the University of Regina, University of 

Saskatchewan, as well as a number of health care professionals 

who are working here in the province who have graduate 

degrees. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

in support of a new long-term care facility in La Ronge. The 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately invest in the planning and 

construction of long-term care beds in La Ronge. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by the good people of La 

Ronge, Stanley Mission, Air Ronge, Sucker River, Hall Lake, 

Southend, Prince Albert, and area. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Remembering Allan Barsky of Prince Albert 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, Allan Barsky, four-term mayor of 

Prince Albert, passed away last Wednesday at the age of 86. 

Mr. Barsky served as councillor for five years and as mayor for 

four terms. He gave 13 years of faithful service to the city of 

Prince Albert, retiring from public service in 1968. 

 

Under his watch, many changes came to Prince Albert as the 

city grew, including the development of the pulp mill. He was a 

thoughtful mayor who was always aware of the burden of the 

taxpayer paying for changes to the city. It was a fine line that 

Mayor Barsky walked between the city‟s growth and progress 

and fiscal responsibility. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Allan Barsky received many awards and 

commendations during his years of public service including 

commendations from Prime Minister John G. Diefenbaker, 

from the British High Commissioner, and the province of 

Saskatchewan. He was also a recipient of the Queen‟s Silver 

Jubilee Medal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while he was in office as mayor, Mr. Barsky was 

chairman of the Board of Police Commissioners for eight years 

and chairman of the labour relations committee for eight years. 

He also served as the president of the Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association and vice-president of the Canadian 

Federation of Mayors and Municipalities. In his capacity 

operating his family business, the Blue Chain Department 

Store, he served as president of the Prince Albert Retail 

Merchants Association. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join with me in extending 

our deepest sympathy to the former Mayor Barsky‟s wife, 

Marilyn, and to each of his children and grandchildren in their 

time of need. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Weyburn. 

 

Quota International of Weyburn 

Women of the Year Awards 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, earlier 

this month I had the pleasure of attending the ninth annual 

Quota International of Weyburn Women of the Year Awards 

Luncheon. For close to a decade, Quota has recognized and 

honoured women of Weyburn who have made a lasting 

contribution to our community. Quota recognizes women with 

awards in four categories: SaskPower Workplace Excellence 

Award, exceptional entrepreneur, Young Woman of the Year, 

and community service. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this year 13 exceptional women were nominated. 

Prior to the awards being announced, the capacity crowd at 

McKenna Hall heard from keynote speaker, Noela 

Crowe-Salazar, the manager of First Nations and Métis services 

in the Ministry of Social Services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the winner of the Access Communications 

Exceptional Entrepreneur Award was Lois Hawryluk. This 

year‟s Quota International of Weyburn Community Service 

Award was Violet Leclair. The Investors Group Young Woman 

of Distinction Award winner was Joleen Tuchscherer. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it was my pleasure and privilege to present 

the SaskPower Workplace Excellence Award. Mr. Speaker, this 

year‟s recipient is Corrine Calder. Corrine is a valued member 

of the team at the Family Place, working as a team leader with 

children who attend the Mini Go school and facilitates the 

Smiles & Tears program. Mr. Speaker, I know that she is loved 

by everybody that she works with and is a very worthy recipient 

of the SaskPower award that recognizes women that have 

displayed a superior effort and true desire to improve their work 

environment and workplace efficiency. 

 

Congratulations to all the nominees and award recipients and to 

Quota International of Weyburn. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 



2762 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2009 

Students Participate in Geocaching Expedition 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a pleasure to rise 

today to speak to you about the students from John Chisholm 

School in Moose Jaw, who partnered with the Burrowing Owl 

Interpretive Centre and the Saskatchewan Dragoons to organize 

a geocaching expedition using global positioning systems. 

 

Geocaching is an outdoor treasure hunting game in which the 

participants use a GPS [Global Positioning System] receiver or 

other navigational techniques to hide and seek containers called 

geocaches, and it can be anywhere in the world. Students 

learned how to use the GPS units from Sergeant Everett 

Buckmaster of the Saskatchewan Dragoons, and an ammunition 

case donated by the Dragoons was used to hide works of art the 

students had created. 

 

So the art in the cache were traceable items, each fixed with a 

travel bug. The students showed that they have incredible 

ability and put a lot of work into this project — starting with 

creating the pieces of art, showcased their emerging talents and 

their navigational skills in searching out the cache. 

 

The Burrowing Owl Centre was pleased to partner with the 

school and hopes to see more geocachers this summer at the 

centre, as the students have created a clue for those looking for 

the geocache located at the centre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in congratulating 

the students from John Chisholm School and to thank the 

Saskatchewan Burrowing Owl Centre and the Dragoons for 

involving these young minds in this innovative learning 

experience. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Maidstone Student Recognized for Leadership Skills 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to offer 

congratulations to Kelsey Wilkinson, a remarkable Maidstone 

grade 12 student from my constituency. Kelsey‟s been selected 

through the Absolute school of leadership as one of the top 10 

grade 12 students from across the country and will be joining 

the program in Hamilton, Ontario next year. 

 

The Absolute Leadership Development program is a 

not-for-profit organization that exists to empower emerging 

generations to live with purpose and change their world. As part 

of the program, Kelsey will be putting her university aspirations 

temporarily on hold and will be touring Canada presenting 

motivational presentations and workshops to young people. She 

will also have the opportunity to travel to Mexico as part of a 

humanitarian aid trip. Taking part in this rewarding experience 

certainly demonstrates Kelsey‟s exceptional level of maturity 

and her passion for passing on her leadership skills to others. 

 

Kelsey says that her interest in taking part in the Absolute 

Leadership Development was piqued by a program initiative in 

the Northwest School Division which was introduced two years 

ago. This initiative promoted and fostered leadership skills 

within the communities served by the division, and Kelsey took 

advantage of the opportunities it created. 

 

As I understand it, this program continues to operate in the 

Northwest School Division, and we hope it will continue in the 

future. I would ask that this Assembly join with me in 

congratulating this very special young lady on her impressive 

achievements. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Saskatoon Society for the Prevention of 

Cruelty to Animals 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, on Saturday, April 18, I along 

with the member from Saskatoon Sutherland had the pleasure of 

attending the third annual Saskatoon Society for the Prevention 

of Cruelty to Animals Gala. Attendees at the SPCA [Society for 

the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals] enjoyed a scrumptious 

Saskatchewan theme meal, the entertaining emceeing of Global 

Television‟s Warren Dean, and the opportunity to bid on a 

variety of silent and live auction items. 

 

We also had the pleasure of hearing from local artist Al Nelson 

Weitzel and viewing a sampling from his impressive portfolio. 

Mr. Weitzel is well known for his exceptional ability to capture 

the beauty and wonder of the animal kingdom. 

 

Animals hold a special place in the hearts of many 

Saskatchewan people. No group displays this care and respect 

for animals more so than the volunteers and staff of the SPCA. 

Saturday‟s gala was an event to raise much-needed funds for 

the Saskatoon SPCA as well as a time to recognize the amazing 

contributions of energy and resources by the many volunteers 

who support the SPCA throughout the year. 

 

I know as I spoke to some of the board members during the 

evening, their commitment to the organization and its mission 

was very clear to me. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatoon SPCA‟s motto is, “Helping those 

who cannot help themselves.” I would ask all members to join 

me in thanking the SPCA as it carries out this important task 

and wish them all the best in the upcoming year. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Funding for On-Reserve Housing 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, our 

government recognizes the important role the First Nation 

community plays in Saskatchewan. We are working hard to 

ensure that they too share in our government‟s strong and 

steady vision for the future of Saskatchewan, which is why we 

are humbled to be able to play a part in securing federal funding 



April 20, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2763 

for on-reserve housing. 

 

While at the first ministers‟ meeting, our Premier played a role 

in the establishment of the $60 million fund for on-reserve 

funding. The money will be spent over two years of 

renovations, the conversion of band-owned housing to 

individual ownership, lot servicing, and the construction of 

multi-unit housing. 

 

Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations Chief Lawrence 

Joseph singled out the Premier for his assistance. But it is 

because of the foundation laid by Chief Joseph and other First 

Nation leaders that we were able to play a part. As Chief Joseph 

suggested, there are many worthwhile ways this money could 

be spent, such as building on-reserve care homes so that the 

elders could be closer to friends and family. 

 

We echo the chief‟s sentiment that, while this won‟t solve 

housing, poverty, and health issues, it is a good investment and 

a positive step towards ensuring First Nation people in 

Saskatchewan will continue to play their important role in 

ensuring our province remains strong and steady. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Arts Festival at Nutana Collegiate 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — On April 1 to April 3, Nutana Collegiate 

hosted a dessert theatre and arts festival as a fundraiser to 

support both Nutana Collegiate fine arts program and the 

Family Service Saskatoon performing arts program. 

 

This event is an example of dynamic community partnerships 

established between Nutana and businesses and service clubs in 

Saskatoon. In forming such relationships with community 

groups, Nutana Collegiate has expanded its walls to allow 

students greater life experiences to help prepare them for their 

lives after high school. Students form community links that will 

lead to career and social opportunities after graduation. 

 

On April 1 and 2, students celebrated a play performed by 

Family Service Saskatoon‟s performing arts group. The play, 

Hamlette, is a 30-minute spoof of Shakespeare‟s Hamlet. The 

heroine is referred to as a man because the society of the day 

couldn‟t imagine a female as the main character. 

 

Another Family Service class performed A.A. Milne‟s The Ugly 

Duckling, a play which also looked at gender stereotypes when 

the inner beauty of a young girl proved more magnetic than the 

audience expected. 

 

A third play performed by Nutana Collegiate students 

dramatized auditions held by a new high school teacher for 

parts in a forthcoming school play. The hopeful actors range 

from shy to outrageous, from diva to determined, with everyone 

taking a turn in the spotlight, vying for coveted parts in a school 

play. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I applaud Nutana Collegiate on their dessert 

festival and arts festival, as well as their bold partnerships with 

business and CBOs to enrich the lives of students, preparing 

them for a future of success. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Regulation of Nuclear Activity 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on April 

9 I asked the Sask Party government some questions to which 

they took notice, so I‟d like to ask the question again. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the 2009-2010 working plan for the Ministry of 

Environment includes the following under its list of key actions 

in the coming year: 

 

Seek to . . . [minimize] provincial regulation of nuclear 

activity under the Nuclear Safety and Control Act in 

Saskatchewan through an administrative agreement with 

[the] Canadian Nuclear Safety Commission. 

 

To the minister: can she confirm that the Sask Party intends to 

pursue provincial regulation of nuclear activity? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank 

the member opposite for her question. On the agreement, I 

would like to read the following and I quote: 

 

Following discussions and negotiations between senior 

levels of the federal and provincial governments and the 

Canadian Nuclear Safety Commission, a Memorandum of 

Agreement was developed. Under the agreement, the 

parties commit to the incorporation of provincial 

legislation in the federal regulations under the Act . . . The 

process will considerably streamline the regulatory 

environment and should result in cost-savings to the 

industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it sounds like a Sask Party position paper, but it is 

not. It is actually an NDP [New Democratic Party] position 

paper by then energy and mines minister, Eldon Lautermilch, in 

2000 at a presentation at the Uranium Institute in London. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, apparently the NDP and the Sask Party agree 

on this, that we should find ways to streamline the regulatory 

process while protecting the environment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Well unfortunately the minister is still not 



2764 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2009 

answering the question that I pose. And the 2003 agreement 

between Saskatchewan and the federal government was 

intended to cover uranium mines and mills and included the 

Department of Labour. It does not address either a nuclear 

reactor or nuclear waste storage, in case you didn‟t read far 

enough into that. 

 

Two weeks ago the Sask Party provided some insight as to what 

provincial regulation in the nuclear industry might look like. 

The Minister of Environment said the Sask Party‟s new 

approach to environment regulation would be achieved by 

leaving “. . . the „how‟ of regulation to those who run the plants, 

factories, and mines.” And the government states that the 

environmental assessments will now be conducted “. . . 

according to attached proponent developed Draft Project 

Specific Guidelines.” 

 

To the minister: is the Sask Party getting ready to conduct an 

environmental assessment according to guidelines developed by 

Bruce Power? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The answer to 

the member‟s question is no, Bruce Power is not the 

organization in charge of the regulatory process in this 

province. As the member opposite would know, the 

environmental assessment process on nuclear power plants is 

the most onerous process in the entire country for any industry, 

Mr. Speaker. And any environmental assessment in this 

province will follow every legislation and regulatory guideline 

outlined through both provincial and federal legislation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party seems to want sole 

jurisdiction to regulate the nuclear industry, even though this is 

federal responsibility. Their consultant‟s report recommends it. 

The government‟s response to it agrees to it. And the goal is 

contained in their department‟s plans for the coming year. The 

Sask Party also wants to give industry the power to determine 

how it will be regulated. Meanwhile the Sask Party is trying to 

ram through the decision to approve a nuclear reactor, instead 

of giving Saskatchewan people the time to consider all of the 

energy options. 

 

To the minister: why is the Sask Party going to such lengths to 

ensure a nuclear reactor gets built in Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I don‟t think that the 

member opposite fully understands the process or what we‟re 

looking for in a results-based regulatory framework. I think the 

answer is in the title; it is results-based. It is based on provincial 

regulation and legislation. And what we‟re allowing industry to 

do is be innovative and come up with ideas on how to meet the 

goals with the rules and the guidelines that are established by 

the province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that openness for innovation was not 

something that ever really happened under the NDP. But as far 

as regulations go, Mr. Speaker, the NDP proposed in their 

economic plan in 2005 to “. . . stimulate further uranium 

exploration and development by working with the industry and 

pressing the federal government to address regulatory burdens 

and duplication [Mr. Speaker].” 

 

They were looking for provincial oversight of regulations and 

the environmental assessment process as well, Mr. Speaker. So 

I don‟t really know what she‟s complaining about today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Consultation Process Regarding Nuclear Development 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we are 

coming closer and closer to the month of May. It is during the 

month of May and June that the government opposite proposes 

that the public of Saskatchewan have an opportunity — a very 

brief opportunity — to give consideration to the UDP [Uranium 

Development Partnership] report. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question I think will be directed to the 

Minister of CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan]. Unless something has changed in the last 20 

minutes, we still do not have the dates nor the locations for the 

public consultation meetings that are to be scheduled for May. 

 

Mr. Speaker, would a minister of the Crown or the Premier 

today tell us when are these meetings to be held and where? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much for the 

question. As the Hon. Leader of the Opposition has indicated, 

Saskatchewan residents will be asked for their opinion 

regarding nuclear power and nuclear power generation in the 

province. The most extensive consultations ever held on this 

particular topic will be starting very soon in May. As the 

member‟s indicated, May is coming very near, and we will be 

undertaking those consultations over a six-week period until the 

middle of June. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I can tell the government 

opposite there is an appetite among the people of Saskatchewan 

to participate in this process. There is a much greater appetite to 

participate in a much more substantive process, and I hope to 



April 20, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2765 

say more about that later. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m also told that the mandate 

letter for the consultation indicates that there should be five 

facilitators hired and three other staff. My question then to 

government today is will among these five and these three, will 

there be expertise brought to these public hearings that can 

answer many of the questions that I‟m sure Saskatchewan 

people will want to hear answers to at the meeting? So again, I 

ask the minister: what are the dates and who will be doing the 

facilitation? Will they bring expertise? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, we are very pleased 

to announce just a few days ago that Mr. Dan Perrins, career 

public servant, one of an extraordinary career that has served 

many administrations. Certainly he‟s served the members 

opposite when they were in government, previous 

administrations, and continues to service his province today. 

Negotiations are ongoing for Mr. Perrins and what he needs as 

far as backup to ensure that the consultations have all the 

information necessary to provide to Saskatchewan people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, a recent Sigma Analytics poll 

reinforces what we have been saying since this government 

began steamrolling ahead with their plan to build a nuclear 

reactor in this province and that is that people want more 

information. 

 

Mr. Speaker, 40 per cent of the people surveyed felt that they 

were poorly informed on the question of a nuclear reactor. 

That‟s a huge number. Forty per cent of the people felt they 

needed a whole lot more information about cost, export 

markets, storage, safety, and future energy requirements. 

 

To the minister: will he listen to the people of Saskatchewan? 

Will they do the responsible thing, and postpone the 

consultation process until Saskatchewan people feel that they 

can be better informed to make a decision? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. I‟m very pleased to see the Sigma Analytics poll in the 

newspaper. It shows that there‟s a strong basis of support, but 

more importantly it shows that Saskatchewan people are 

open-minded and willing to educate themselves to learn more 

about it and to make a decision, an important decision for the 

future of our province — one that previous governments have 

ignored over the last 30 years, one that should be made going 

forward, one that should be made by the people of 

Saskatchewan — and indeed that‟s what‟ll happen over the next 

couple of months. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Well he‟s correct in one thing. The people of 

Saskatchewan are certainly open-minded. The people that call 

my office are open-minded, but what they feel is they haven‟t 

been properly consulted, and nor are they provided with the 

proper information from this government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, this government is afraid to 

postpone the consultation process because they‟re afraid to take 

this debate to a well-informed public. The poll indicates that 

from November ‟06 to April ‟09, support for a nuclear reactor 

has dropped substantially while opposition has risen 

significantly. 

 

To the minister: is this government afraid to postpone the 

consultations and provide more information because the longer 

he mismanages this file, the more people are opposed to it? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Well, Mr. Speaker, maybe we do 

need a little bit more time for consultation because maybe we‟ll 

put a . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Maybe an hour or two more to 

hear everything Mr. Dwain Lingenfelter has to say because he 

sure had a lot to say about the subject. 

 

For instance back in 2005 on October 26, while many of his 

former New Democratic Party colleagues remained 

uncomfortable with uranium development, Lingenfelter said a 

reactor might change Saskatchewan‟s economic prospects. 

 

That was back in 2005. Remember, Mr. Speaker, when we were 

a wee province, and we were in and out of equalization — 

that‟s what they said, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Lingenfelter went on to 

say during a telephone interview from Calgary, and I quote, “If 

Tommy Douglas were here, [and I quote] it would be exactly 

what he would be doing [Mr. Speaker].” 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 



2766 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2009 

Low-Income Housing 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, people are growing frustrated with the Sask Party‟s 

lack of leadership on affordable housing. The government‟s 

own figures say that the number of affordable housing units 

developed through housing programs doubled between 2006 

and 2008, all the result of the actions taken by the NDP. But it 

took more than 15 months for the Sask Party to deliver one red 

cent for new affordable housing projects. 

 

Meanwhile, the mayor of Regina is speaking out on the lack of 

a provincial government direction on housing incentives. In the 

April 17 Leader-Post, Mayor Fiacco said, and I quote, “. . . it 

would have been nice for the province to at least be a partner 

with us. That doesn‟t seem to be the minister‟s interest right 

now, and that‟s too bad.” 

 

To the minister: why is the Sask Party failing to provide 

leadership on affordable housing? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, shortly after the election, 

when we had the task force take a look at the housing issue 

because we recognized that it was a difficulty within our 

province, we addressed the immediate recommendations right 

away, which had to do with affordability. 

 

But I also recognize that availability was an issue. As I‟ve told 

the member opposite before, the Sask Housing Corporation had 

money within its funds, within the corporation, and so we 

accelerated direct delivery of housing through the HomeFirst 

home rental development program. 

 

As such, Mr. Speaker, we‟ve completed 59 units within Regina 

alone; 72 units are under construction; 237 units are at various 

stages of development, which is a total of housing in Regina 

which is very significant. In the last six years of the NDP 

government, on average they delivered, in the entire province 

they only delivered 341 units per year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We know 

critical in Regina — and communities right across the province 

— has been the need to rebuild the inner-city neighbourhoods 

like north central Regina. And most people agree that the key to 

restoring these neighbourhoods is higher levels of home 

ownership. Home ownership allows families to invest in their 

future, and communities with high levels of home ownership 

are safer, more vibrant, and more secure places to live. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party still has no plan to replace the 

neighbourhood home ownership program. It‟s claimed the 

program ran out of money. But rather taking that as a sign that 

this program was well needed, they have instead let it die on its 

own. To the minister: why has he closed the door to home 

ownership for so many Saskatchewan families? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I have said that it is 

difficult to come up with a home ownership program in today‟s 

marketplace. But when the member makes reference to the 

home ownership program, the NHOP [neighbourhood home 

ownership program] program, which died, it died when they 

were government, Mr. Speaker. It ended when they were still 

government, and it was replaced with HomeFirst home 

ownership program which, quite frankly, did not address 

today‟s market. It allowed for a forgivable loan as well as a 

low-interest loan for incomes up as high as $52,000. That is not 

low-income housing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I have said before, I will say again, we‟re putting forward a 

board for the Housing Corporation that will look at a home 

ownership program that is doable and sustainable within this 

province in today‟s market and not keep looking back to 

yesterday and what wasn‟t working. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And we 

know this minister, she tends to like to blame others. She 

blames her bureaucrats. She blames Saskatchewan 

communities, of course, for failure to act. And of course she 

likes to blame us, the NDP.  

 

But I want to talk about a program in today‟s market that I think 

is worth looking at. Alberta recently . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well we know 

Alberta just recently announced a 10-year, $3.3 billion plan to 

address homelessness and housing. Alberta officials estimate 

that the plan will save the government more than twice the same 

amount in costs to manage chronically homeless people. But 

our minister seems to be waiting for the new board of Sask 

Housing or someone else to show the leadership she was 

elected to provide. 

 

To the minister: when will the minister stop riding the NDP‟s 

coattails on this issue and come forward with a comprehensive 

plan to address the housing crisis? When will she show the 

leadership on affordable housing that communities like Regina 

are calling for? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 



April 20, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2767 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, as that member well 

knows that they had not addressed shelter rates for years. They 

allowed the rate to languish for 12 years, even though the cost 

of renting in Saskatchewan had gone up significantly. What did 

they do? Ignore it. We did not. 

 

We understood that the most vulnerable needed that issue 

addressed first. We stepped up to the plate, and we did it. We 

did it in an unprecedented manner because we made it reactive 

to the community in which the person lives. And so it is 

responsive to that community and the rates in that community, 

and we indexed it. There was a significant increase just 

recently, Mr. Speaker, because the rates have gone up yet again. 

 

Second is availability. We have over 1,100 units across the 

province in various stages of construction. I have to repeat 

again, the NDP had an average of 341 units each year in the last 

six years. So maybe they don‟t want to live up to their record, 

maybe they don‟t want to take responsibility for their record, 

but we have significant more housing in construction in this 

province than this province has ever seen. So would they like to 

say, should we just stop that and pause and say, okay let‟s just 

not do that any more because we need a bigger plan, we need a 

better plan. Let‟s just build houses, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Before I recognize the next questioner, I 

would like to ask members to have the respect of allowing the 

member to place the question and the minister responsible to 

respond without interference. 

 

I recognize the member from Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Support for Post-Secondary Institutions 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On March 18, the 

opposition asked the government questions about the potential 

impact to Saskatchewan people because of big losses in a 

number of public sector investment funds, including those of 

the University of Saskatchewan. Last week the president of the 

University of Saskatchewan told the Saskatoon Chamber of 

Commerce that the university is facing a $100 million shortfall, 

thanks to losses in its investment funds. 

 

U of S [University of Saskatchewan] students and their families 

are understandably concerned about how this will affect them. 

To the minister, can he tell us here today how much tuition fees 

at the U of S will have to rise to make up for this $100 million 

shortfall? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I 

certainly appreciate the opportunity to provide an update to the 

people of the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, based on a meeting that I had last Thursday with 

the provost from the University of Saskatchewan, happy to 

report that in fact the member opposite doesn‟t have a clear 

understanding of what‟s actually going on. First and foremost, 

what we‟ve heard from the University of Saskatchewan, among 

others, is to turn and say thank you for the generosity of the 

money that‟s forthcoming, regarding the investment that‟s just 

been shown in the budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as far as institutions — not just across Canada but 

around the world — dealing with some of the financial 

implications, I would say the University of Saskatchewan is as 

well placed as any, Mr. Speaker. Certainly that . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As an 

autonomous institution, it‟s coming up with its own 

contingency plan of how to go forward. It will be a 

multiple-year response, it‟s my understanding, Mr. Speaker. I 

continue to have every confidence in the University of 

Saskatchewan, in the administration, in the governance, and in 

the people of that academic community to ensure that the 

University of Saskatchewan continues to be a strong institution 

for this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this isn‟t about the governance 

model at the University of Saskatchewan; it‟s about $100 

million that needs to be made up from somewhere. Mr. Speaker, 

in times of economic uncertainty, post-secondary education is a 

wise investment in the future. Unfortunately a very real 

consequence of the shortfall faced by the U of S could be cuts 

to classes and other important programs that students are 

depending upon to build that future. 

 

To the minister: can he tell us which classes and programs at 

the U of S will be affected or cut to make up for this shortfall? 

At a time of global economic uncertainty, why is he making 

education less accessible and less affordable for Saskatchewan 

students? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Again thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, 

for the opportunity to offer some insight into this. First and 

foremost, Mr. Speaker, it does have everything to do with 

governance, Mr. Speaker, and that is, it‟s an autonomous 

institution. Mr. Speaker, what we‟ve seen is a response from the 

University of Saskatchewan, among other institutions, saying 

thank you very much for the generosity and the investment 

that‟s been forthcoming. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on a relative scale, institutions across the world 

are actually making a whole series of steps. I‟m happy to report, 

Mr. Speaker, that we respect the autonomy of the institution. 

The institution is coming up with a plan, Mr. Speaker, to help 

them handle this contingency, Mr. Speaker.  

 



2768 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2009 

And it‟s obvious, Mr. Speaker, in fact I‟m a little bit alarmed 

when the member opposite . . . [inaudible] . . . it doesn‟t have to 

do with governance. It has to do with ensuring the sustainability 

and success of one of the most important institutions in this 

country, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the minister is all too willing to 

wash his hands of the responsibility to help with the challenges 

faced by Saskatchewan students and their families. At a time of 

economic uncertainty, a knowledge economy is essential to 

securing our financial prosperity in the years to come. But sadly 

this minister simply shrugs his shoulders and says it‟s not his 

problem. 

 

It certainly seems that way to students and their families, given 

his decision to end the tuition freeze and his continued failure to 

extend the graduate retention program to master‟s and Ph.D. 

graduates. To the minister: what is he prepared to do, if 

anything, to assist students and families who will be adversely 

affected by this shortfall? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I especially appreciate the 

opportunity to talk about the $665.6 million for our 

post-secondary institutions. I‟m happy to talk about the $26.4 

million booster shot, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that our 

post-secondary institutions had increased infrastructure 

investment. I‟m happy to talk about student housing, Mr. 

Speaker, that during the entire duration of that former 

government, they didn‟t touch housing at the University of 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, happy to talk about the $23.5 

million, Mr. Speaker, to help with tuition support. 

 

I‟m happy to talk about the student loan funding that‟s been 

increased for the first time since 1994, Mr. Speaker, happy to 

talk about the graduate retention program, Mr. Speaker. And 

most especially, I‟m happy to talk about the lack of integrity 

regarding those questions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, a $100 million shortfall for the 

University of Saskatchewan and no assurances by the minister 

responsible that he will do anything to help the . . . 

 

The Speaker: — It sounds like there‟s a lot of people who 

would like to ask the question, but I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — A $100 million shortfall and no comfort for 

Saskatchewan families and Saskatchewan students, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

In the province, we‟ve seen increases in fees and possibly 

decreases in services from SGI [Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance] Auto Fund and possibly at the University of 

Saskatchewan as well. 

 

So our question is when will the other shoe drop? Are WCB 

[Workers‟ Compensation Board] premiums the next rise in the 

province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I really 

appreciate the opportunity to highlight the contrast between 

what we‟re doing, Mr. Speaker, and what‟s been done in the 

past. 

 

While the members opposite were in government, tuition went 

up by 99 per cent at the University of Regina, Mr. Speaker. 

And, Mr. Speaker, it went up by 88 per cent at the University of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we‟re happy to do is highlight, regarding the 

WCB, that report has just come out today, Mr. Speaker. Very 

sound financial ground, Mr. Speaker, in the midst of global 

economic turmoil. Saskatchewan continues to lead the way — 

80,000 people taken off the tax rolls, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, from there you can see the investments in 

post-secondary education. Mr. Speaker, for the first time in 

Saskatchewan‟s history, more than $800 for a weekly average, 

Mr. Speaker, and that is ranked third, Mr. Speaker, as it relates 

to the amount of money that people are making in 

Saskatchewan, ensuring the people of this province are sharing 

in the benefits of growth. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Increase in Daily Food Allowance 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I am pleased to inform the House that earlier today, at one of 

the 10 group homes operated by Chip & Dale Housing of 

Regina, I made an important funding announcement that will 

benefit nearly 1,200 adults and children across the province. 

 

Through the Ministry of Social Services, our government is 

increasing the daily food allowance to $9 per day for group 

homes that serve people with intellectual disabilities and at-risk 

children. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



April 20, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2769 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — The previous rate, Mr. Speaker, was 

only $4.85 per day and had only seen a 45 cent increase since 

the year 2000, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this funding increase of 1.7 million annually 

provided to CBOs will help ensure that CBOs will no longer 

have to struggle to provide healthy, balanced meals for their 

clients. This initiative demonstrates further action by our 

government in response to community-based organizations‟ 

suggestions from the summits held across the province last fall. 

In fact the funding increase to the food allowance is just the 

latest in a series of significant funding increases to address gaps 

that have been allowed to develop in areas of services by our 

CBOs. 

 

Over the past 16 months, general funding increases to CBOs 

have totalled a combined 12.3 per cent, representing a $27.2 

million investment by our government in the CBO sector during 

that period. And today we have announced a further 1.7 million 

annual funding in the food allowance for group homes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all of this new funding reflects our government‟s 

commitment to listening to the thoughts and the ideas of the 

community-based organizations and to take action on their 

suggestions. Saskatchewan would not be one of the best places 

in the world to live, work, and raise a family without the 

ongoing efforts and the commitment of so many staff and 

volunteers of this province‟s network of CBOs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And first 

I‟d like to thank the minister for sending over an advance copy 

of this statement so I could prepare for this. And I can 

understand that those who work in the group homes are excited 

about this announcement, but I must say that myself, as critic 

for Social Services, I‟m not happy nor delighted about this 

announcement. It just represents another ad hoc announcement 

how this minister operates. There is no plan, no strategy to deal 

or to help with those who are in need, and this is just yet 

another example of an ad hoc approach in that ministry. 

 

We see the news last week with the food banks — and I don‟t 

have the clipping in front of me — third record month of 

growth or people going to the food banks. Every time we meet 

with anti-poverty groups, what‟s the first thing they talk about, 

is food security. And is anything happening in that front? Not at 

all. 

 

And so I would urge this minister, and I would urge the officials 

in the ministry to go back and talk about the adequacy of how 

they deal with food and how they support those in need — the 

vulnerable families right across our province— how they‟re 

dealing with and how are they supporting families to date to 

make sure they have healthy food. 

 

We know last year the CPI, the consumer price index, was the 

highest across Canada here in Saskatchewan, here in 

Saskatchewan. And what are they doing about this? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think while I understand group homes would 

be very . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — So clearly, Mr. Speaker, there‟s work to be 

done here. And I hope and I would encourage the minister to 

work on this, not to take a piecemeal approach to this, not to 

take an ad hoc approach, but to do a strategy — a long-term 

strategy — so people do have access to healthy food here in 

Saskatchewan. And the first step she could do is to index this, 

index this. Why wasn‟t that part of her announcement today? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I look forward to hearing more announcements 

from the minister, but there is more she could be doing. Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 605 — The Traffic Safety (Maintenance 

Workers — Gallenger) Amendment Act 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill No. 

605, An Act to amend The Traffic Safety Act to provide for the 

health and safety of all highway maintenance workers 

Gallenger amendment be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Coronation Park 

has moved first reading of Bill No. 605, The Traffic Safety 

(Maintenance Workers — Gallenger) Amendment Act be now 

read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 

 

Mr. Trew: — Next sitting. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 

allow the work of the Human Service and Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice Standing Committees to do their work, I 

move that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that in order to allow the committees to proceed the Assembly 

do stand adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 



2770 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2009 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. This Assembly stands 

adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 14:25.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2759 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2759 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2759 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2759 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2760 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2760 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2760 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2760 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2760 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2760 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2761 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Remembering Allan Barsky of Prince Albert 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2761 

 Quota International of Weyburn Women of the Year Awards 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2761 

 Students Participate in Geocaching Expedition 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2762 

 Maidstone Student Recognized for Leadership Skills 

  Chisholm .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2762 

 Saskatoon Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2762 

 Funding for On-Reserve Housing 

  LeClerc .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2762 

 Arts Festival at Nutana Collegiate 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2763 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Regulation of Nuclear Activity 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2763 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2763 

 Consultation Process Regarding Nuclear Development 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2764 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2764 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2765 

 Low-Income Housing 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2766 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2766 

 Support for Post-Secondary Institutions 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2767 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2767 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Increase in Daily Food Allowance 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2768 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2769 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 605 — The Traffic Safety (Maintenance Workers — Gallenger) Amendment Act 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2769 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 


