




















































Hansard: March 05, 2009


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 28A  THURSDAY, MARCH 5, 2009, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2153 

 March 5, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, with leave of the Assembly 

for an extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Highways has asked for leave 

for an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the Minister of 

Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you, I‟d like to introduce a large 

group of guests in our galleries today. 

 

But first, Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to preface this introduction by 

officially proclaiming the weeks of March 6 to 22 as Les 

Rendez-vous de la Francophonie 2009 in Saskatchewan. For 

these two weeks, Saskatchewan‟s francophones and French 

speakers will join those from across the country to celebrate 

francophone culture and heritage. This year‟s national theme is 

Celebrate Canada‟s Francophonie Today — Rich in its 

Diversity! Mr. Speaker, this theme speaks to Saskatchewan‟s 

own tradition of embracing the diversity of our multicultural 

heritage as illustrated by our provincial motto, “from many 

peoples, strength.” 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to introduce to all members 

of the legislature a group of young French-speaking students 

from École Monseigneur de Laval and from Campbell 

Collegiate and also representatives from the francophone 

community that are here today as part of the celebrations. 

Would our honoured guests please stand to be acknowledged 

today? 

 

We welcome each one of you to your Legislative Assembly. 

Thank you for coming. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Merci, Monsieur le président. Pour 

l‟opposition officielle, je veux dire félicitations pour la 

proclamation des Rendez-vous de la Francophonie en 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Aussi je veux dire une grande bienvenue et bonjour à tous les 

fransaskois qui sont ici aujourd‟hui, spécialement les étudiants 

de l‟École Monseigneur de Laval et Campbell. Merci pour 

toutes les choses que vous faites pour la province de la 

Saskatchewan. 

 

À tous les citoyens de la Saskatchewan et particulièrement les 

fransaskois, bon Rendez-vous en Saskatchewan. Merci. 

 

[Translation: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the official 

opposition, I would like to say congratulations on the 

proclamation of Rendez-vous de la Francophonie in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Also I would like to say a big welcome and hello to all the 

Fransaskois who are here today, especially the students from 

l‟École Monseigneur de Laval and Campbell. Thank you for all 

the things that you do for the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

To all Saskatchewan citizens, and particularly the Fransaskois, 

good Rendez-vous in Saskatchewan. Thank you.] 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today it is indeed 

an honour for myself to introduce to the members of the 

Legislative Assembly some very distinguished people and very 

recognizable people from our province, some that go without 

needing an introduction, but I‟ll do it anyway. 

 

With us today in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, are Telemiracle 

Teddy . . . 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — And someone is here but not really seen, 

Mr. Speaker — Curtis Kimpton. He‟s the PR [public relations] 

chairman for Telemiracle, past president of the national 

Kinsmen Club, and Kinettes, and understand a dear friend of 

the member from Saskatoon Greystone. And as well I‟ve been 

told he‟s also a new father. So congratulations to him. 

 

As well today, we have Sheldon Bergstrom and Brad Johner, 

two of the national cast for Telemiracle, who again go without 

needing introduction — very recognizable figures; Lorne 

Steinke, Telemiracle 33 chairman; Mark Blatz, the Kinsmen 

governor of Saskatchewan; and members of the Kinsmen and 

Kinettes from Regina. 

 

So I ask all members to welcome them to their Legislative 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu‟Appelle Valley. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As we 

recognize the outstanding work done by Telemiracle and the 

Kinsmen Foundation today, I would like to welcome a very 

special guest seated in your gallery. Ms. Candace Weimer of 

Regina joins us here today. 

 

Candace‟s story is itself a miracle. Diagnosed with a form of 



2154 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2009 

leukemia in 2005, Candace needed emergency bone marrow 

transplant in order to have a chance to survive. The procedure 

was done in Seattle, and it was the Kinsmen Foundation which 

helped with the travel and accommodations and the costs for 

Candace. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while medical technology surrounding a bone 

marrow transplant has been with us for some time, this 

procedure is in no way routine. It takes a strong will, along with 

prayers and support of the family and friends for bone marrow 

recipients to have another chance at life. In Saskatchewan that 

support often includes funds which come from Telemiracle. 

Today we should all welcome Candace. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Mr. Speaker, through you and to you, in your 

east gallery is 27 of the finest grade 8 students in Saskatoon, 

Saskatchewan. I had the privilege of speaking to them not too 

long ago on Say No to Drugs, and I thoroughly threatened them 

and scared them. And they‟re accompanied by their teacher, 

Christine Rayner, Kristen Wieman, and their educational 

assistant, Diane Theissen. 

 

I‟d like the Assembly to welcome these fine young people to 

our Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 

and through you, I too would like to recognize that Brad Johner 

is in the gallery today. Brad lived in my constituency for a long 

time prior to his move to Saskatoon, and his family still lives in 

my constituency. And in fact last week they were recognized as 

the Farm Family of the Year. So I‟d like all members to join me 

in welcoming Brad. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Before we move on, I just would like to 

extend a welcome to all the guests that have joined us this 

morning, but also ask that the guests not participate in the 

debate from here on in this morning — thank you so much — in 

any form. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I stand to read a 

petition that‟s in support of the government‟s policy on green 

vehicles, and the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government ministers named in this petition to follow 

their own platform and government policies, and trade in 

their Jeep Libertys for vehicles that are on SGI‟s 2008 list 

of recommended fuel efficient vehicles. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition on wage equity for CBO 

[community-based organization] workers. We know that on 

average CBO workers make about $8 — $10 less an hour than 

those who do similar work in government departments. I‟ll read 

the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the development and 

implementation of a multi-year funding plan to ensure that 

CBO workers achieve wage equity with employees who 

perform work of equal value in government departments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some of these people are living in the towns of 

Hubbard, Kelliher, and Ituna. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of a new Saskatchewan 

Hospital in North Battleford, Mr. Speaker. The petitioners 

acknowledge that the existing nearly 100-year-old structure is 

in much need of replacement. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners pray: 

 

. . . that the Legislative Assembly may be pleased to call 

upon the Government of Saskatchewan to immediately 

recommit funds and resources for the continued 

development and construction of a new Saskatchewan 

Hospital at North Battleford and provide the Prairie North 

Regional Health Authority with the authority necessary to 

complete this essential and much-needed project. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by residents of The 

Battlefords and the surrounding area. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition in support of fairness for students through the 

expansion of the graduate retention program. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately expand the graduate retention 

program to include masters and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals that signed this petition are 

students from the University of Saskatchewan, students from 

the University of Regina, as well as a number of health care 

professionals who hold graduate degrees and work in the 

province. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 



March 5, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2155 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions in support of a reduction in the education 

portion of property tax. This is needed by Saskatchewan 

families and business, increasingly more with the implications 

of reassessment here in 2009. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to stop withholding and to provide 

sustainable, long-term property tax relief to owners by 

2009 through significantly increasing the provincial 

portion of education funding. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by good folks and concerned citizens 

here in Regina, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

33rd Kinsmen Telemiracle 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 2009 marks the 

33rd Kinsmen Telemiracle, a true Saskatchewan institution, to 

be held in Saskatoon this weekend on March 7 and 8. 

 

This week is declared Telemiracle Week through a private 

member‟s Bill in 2006 by Elwin Hermanson, the former 

member from Rosetown-Elrose, and celebrates the years of 

success and over $77 million raised to date through the selfless 

dedication of Kinsmen and Kinette members — not to mention 

the countless other volunteers associated with this event. It truly 

reflects the volunteerism and caring of Saskatchewan people, 

and our call to help those in need. 

 

Thoughts of Telemiracle and the Kinsmen Foundation often 

come to my mind when I recall my own family‟s struggle with 

a terminally ill child, and those offers of help if needed, and the 

many examples of families and individuals helped by the 

Kinsmen Foundation throughout our great province. 

 

Telemiracle also helps to showcase national and international 

talent, this year expected to include Beverly Mahood, Brad 

Johner, Sheldon Bergstrom, Jim Witter, Bob McGrath, Donny 

Parenteau, Doc Walker, Jimmy Rankin, Jaydee Bixby, The 

Higgins, Andrea Menard, and Sue Foley, and local talent such 

as Saskatchewan Express and the Ukrainian dance by the Fetsch 

family of Yorkton. Even my own daughter, Rayanne, had the 

honour of performing last year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Congratulations to all the volunteers and Saskatchewan people 

that make Telemiracle such a huge success. And I know that 

this year we will ring those phones and pass the $80 million 

mark. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it makes me proud to be a Kinsmen from 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Annual Award to Trade Unionists 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatoon and District 

Labour Council and the United Way of Saskatoon and area hold 

an annual event to recognize the achievements of a dedicated 

trade unionist who‟s active in both the community and their 

union. This award has come about because the labour council 

and our community‟s United Way saw the importance of 

celebrating labour‟s contribution to the health and well-being of 

our community. 

 

This year I was privileged to see Robin East, a member of the 

Professional Institute of the Public Service of Canada, receive 

this prestigious award. The list of Robin‟s achievements is 

endless, but I‟ll attempt to list a few. 

 

Currently Robin is on the board of directors with the Council of 

Canadians with Disabilities, is national president of the Alliance 

for Equality of Blind Canadians, member of the Canadian 

Transportation Agency advisory committee, member of the city 

of Saskatoon accessible playground committee, member of the 

North Saskatchewan Living Centre, member of the Saskatoon 

Blind Skiers, a roaming advocate for persons with disabilities, 

and a member of numerous union committees. 

 

Robin has a bachelor‟s degree in Social Work, a certificate in 

rehabilitation work, and has completed the assistive technology 

application certificate program through the Center on 

Disabilities at the California State University. He has worked as 

a teacher associate, a behavioural therapist, and finally an 

officer with the federal public service. 

 

An advocate is like a catalyst that mixes with an ally and 

inspires empowerment — this is a favourite phrase of Robin‟s. 

Robin believes in working with allies to overcome barriers and 

address common issues. Robin has been involved in advocacy 

since the early ‟80s and continues to be a strong leader in 

whatever role he takes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join me in 

congratulating Robin East and to thank him for inspiring all of 

us to participate in building a better community for all. Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

[10:15] 

 

International Adult Learning Week 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Mr. Speaker, our government is proud to mark 

March 2 to 9 as International Adult Learning Week. Mr. 

Speaker, myself personally, at 38 years of age only had a grade 

5 education. Through opportunity, today I have a university 

honours degree which has obviously radically changed my life 

in so many ways, and in fact has allowed me to have a life. 

 



2156 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2009 

Mr. Speaker, adult literacy and lifelong learning is an important 

part of building the skilled workforce we need to meet our 

province‟s ongoing talent challenge, as well as building strong 

and vibrant families and communities. 

 

We have built upon this commitment, Mr. Speaker, through 

ongoing investments in our province‟s post-secondary 

education institutions. Through these institutions, we offer our 

province‟s adult learners opportunities to continue and upgrade 

and even to begin their post-secondary education studies and 

training. We have also built upon this commitment through key 

investments in adult basic education. In 2008 and ‟09, these 

investments are providing opportunities for well over 6,000 

Saskatchewan residents who have not completed high school to 

upgrade their academic credentials and develop essential skills 

for employment and for life. 

 

And recognizing that the future growth and prosperity of our 

province is linked to the success of First Nation and Métis 

learners, we continue to create an adult basic education 

opportunities for that community living on reserves. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Juniper Manor Opening 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On January 15, 

Juniper Manor on the corner of Avenue F and 19th in 

Riversdale was officially opened. I was delighted to be present 

along with my colleagues, the MLA [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly] for Saskatoon Riversdale and the Minister 

Responsible for Sask Housing. 

 

Abraham Yuel, president of the board says, Juniper Manor 

represents a success story of government, industry, and 

community working together in meeting the affordable housing 

needs of our seniors and new immigrants. 

 

While Juniper Manor was conceived in late 2004 at a kitchen 

table meeting, its history has been described as a long journey 

to a place called home — spanning some 45 years. In the early 

1960s, a local Chinese community identified a need for a 

community centre in the Riversdale neighbourhood. Plots of 

land were purchased by the Saskatoon Chinese Benevolent 

Society. And in the 1980s, the need for a cultural centre was 

revisited as the demand for language training was increasing 

and interest in Chinese culture grew. In fact, drawings were 

made but the costs were just too high. 

 

Mr. Mak reflects that: 

 

The opening of Juniper housing is a remarkable 

achievement . . . Although early pioneers such as Charlie 

[Mack], Tom [Gee], Hong [Wong] and Guy [Mak] have 

all passed away, their efforts along with many other 

volunteers have not been wasted. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 

Juniper Manor, its residents, and all those who helped to make 

this dream a reality for a safe home for newcomers and seniors 

alike. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu‟Appelle Valley. 

 

International Women’s Day 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, each year 

on March 8, Saskatchewan joins with communities around the 

world to honour women as part of International Women‟s Day. 

 

This is a day of celebration that recognizes women for 

significant achievements and contributions to the economic, 

social, and cultural fabric of our communities. In our province, 

Mr. Speaker, we take this time to reaffirm our commitment to 

achieving equality for women. The goal is to build a stronger 

Saskatchewan and a better life for the people of this province. 

 

Over the next few days, many events will take place across 

Saskatchewan as communities and organizations honour 

women and work to improve the status of women everywhere. 

This year again I will be attending the Canadian Federation of 

University Women event held right here in Regina. 

 

This year Canada‟s theme is strong leadership plus strong 

women plus strong world equal equality. It is a reminder of the 

importance of supporting both women and men in leadership 

roles, helping all members of society to thrive and reach their 

full potential. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I encourage everyone to take time to honour 

women in their lives. I want all people to benefit from living in 

Saskatchewan and to have equal opportunity to find security 

and prosperity here in our province. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Donations to Heart of the City Piano Program  

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

so often business make meaningful contributions to our 

community beyond the important role of providing jobs, 

products, or service. 

 

I would like to specifically thank Mr. Tom Magnuson, owner of 

Grand Staff Music, for his donation of four pianos to students 

of the Heart of the City Piano program. I would also like to 

thank Curtis Jerome of Cary‟s Moving and Storage for the 

goodwill to transport these pianos to their new homes. Mr. 

Magnuson has committed his life to music, as a former teacher 

with Regina Public Schools and as a business owner. He knows 

the importance of music and the positive impact it can have on 

youth. 

 

One of the appreciative recipients is a constituent of mine, 

Brandon Daley. His mother, Elissa Daley, states that she was 



March 5, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2157 

trying to purchase one herself for her son for Christmas, but that 

as a student herself, this was cost prohibitive. Her son was 

thrilled with the piano received from Mr. Magnuson, and I 

understand he has put it to great use. 

 

Many businesses make contributions such as this that benefit 

the quality of life and opportunities for our young people. We 

are thankful. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this Assembly 

to join with me in extending our gratitude. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Weyburn. 

 

Saskatchewan Takes Centre Stage 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatchewan under this government has finally taken its place 

on the world stage. Over the past 24 hours, the Saskatchewan 

story has been the top story on CNN [Cable News 

Network].com. It was both the number one viewed story and 

the number one emailed story on the media giant‟s website, and 

as of last night had received a million hits. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on the Saskjobs.ca website, the CNN story 

resulted in a thousand per cent increase in US traffic, Mr. 

Speaker — visitors from all 50 states and the District of 

Columbia. In fact, Mr. Speaker, there was an 87 per cent . . . or, 

87 per cent of hits were from new visitors. Mr. Speaker, the 

quote from a Leader-Post interview with the CNN reporter, she 

said, quote: 

 

A lot of people are looking for hope right now, they‟re 

looking for places that have this glimmer of hope, and it 

seemed like this was really a [good] . . . opportunity to 

showcase a story where the government was doing as 

much as they could to put money into the economy, [Mr. 

Speaker]. 

 

In these uncertain economic times, millions of people around 

the world know about the positive Saskatchewan story. They 

know that there are jobs and opportunities here, Mr. Speaker. 

Because of the CNN story, media outlets from across Canada 

and in the US want to interview the Premier of Saskatchewan 

and find out about the opportunities here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while most of the world struggles under the 

weight of the global recession, Saskatchewan is the bright spot 

on the international stage. And it‟s more proof of our 

government‟s historic tax cuts, infrastructure investments, and 

measures to make life more affordable for Saskatchewan 

people. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: —I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty‟s Loyal 

Opposition. 

 

Provision of SaskTel Services 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday it became 

clear, I think, to Saskatchewan people and the shareholders of 

SaskTel that this government is out to privatize another 

important service of SaskTel — to outsource its email services. 

 

Yesterday in this House, we asked government to provide for 

the people of Saskatchewan a list of those companies who had 

been provided with an RFP [request for proposal]. The minister 

at that time didn‟t have the list, or refused to answer. So again, I 

ask the question: will you provide the list of those companies 

who have been invited to submit a proposal? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the president of 

SaskTel was here in this very building, and outlined to the 

media exactly what has taken place at SaskTel. My 

understanding is that the RFP went to 17 companies all at the 

same time. This was by invitation, Mr. Speaker; this was for the 

purpose of providing email hosting — five in the province of 

Saskatchewan, six in the United States, and six in Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hear the member opposite from Saskatoon 

Nutana say, provide the names. She knows full well that 

SaskTel‟s business decisions require confidentiality. For that 

member who has sat in this House for far too long to not 

understand that she cannot receive those names is simply 

ridiculous, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if it is so ridiculous to 

provide the names of companies who have been invited to 

provide an RFP, why is it then, in the month of January, 

SaskPower provided just such a list publicly in a news release 

on their website? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask again to the Deputy Premier, provide the list 

of companies because it‟s clear from today‟s press that some 

companies are being left out. The people of Saskatchewan — 

the taxpayers, the shareholders in SaskTel — deserve to know 

what this government is doing with their company. Mr. 

Speaker, I ask again for that government to produce the list 

today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, let‟s take a little bit of a 

review and take a walk back to what the NDP used to do. Mr. 

Speaker, in 2004 — in 2004 — the NDP outsourced spam and 

virus company services to a company outside of Saskatchewan. 

Mr. Speaker, in 2005 the NDP outsourced Web services to 

another US [United States]-owned company, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I find it rather interesting. The member opposite 

asks the questions about releasing the names. The president, 

Robert Watson, yesterday made it quite clear as to why 

SaskTel‟s position is exactly that. Mr. Speaker, this is a 



2158 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2009 

procedure that is going to involve probably saving $900,000, 

Mr. Speaker. The current cost estimate is about 1.5 million and 

the anticipated cost will be about 600,000. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if that‟s something that that member does not 

support, providing better services at a cheaper rate, then he 

should stand in this Legislative Assembly and say so. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — I‟ll tell you exactly what this member, what 

this caucus, and what the people of Saskatchewan support: they 

support publicly owned Crown utilities in this province; they 

support Crown utilities that are employing Saskatchewan 

people, that are contributing to the growth of our economy, Mr. 

Speaker. That‟s what we support, and that‟s what the people of 

Saskatchewan support, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Again I ask the minister: why are they so hesitant to provide the 

list of companies who have been invited to make a proposal? 

Because we see in today‟s press, Mr. Speaker, that some 

companies are on the list apparently and some local companies 

are not. We hear that in terms of the list that has been mailed 

out, that some of these companies may in fact be in Fort 

Lauderdale, Florida, or perhaps beyond, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Power Corporation is upfront with the companies they are 

inviting for requests for proposals. We only ask the same from 

this government. Be upfront and tell the people of 

Saskatchewan who you want to do business with. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite has 

raised two very specific issues. First of all, the Saskatchewan 

Party government has made it very clear about our stand on 

privatization of the Crowns. There will not be one, Mr. Speaker. 

We will not be privatizing the Crowns. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, and the second point that 

the member opposite raises about is the NDP [New Democratic 

Party]. When the NDP was in government and outsourcing — 

and outsourcing, Mr. Speaker — they never provided one media 

advisory, Mr. Speaker, not one about outsourcing of services to 

companies outside of the province of Saskatchewan. Not once, 

Mr. Speaker. And I‟ve already identified that this occurred in 

2004 and it occurred in 2005. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, the questions asked yesterday and 

today have been clarified by the president of SaskTel. And you 

know what, Mr. Speaker? The questions are not only ridiculous; 

they‟re very hypocritical. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Before I recognize the next questioner, there‟s 

been a fair bit of debate from both sides of the Assembly when 

either the questioner or the minister‟s responding, so I‟d ask 

members to be mindful of this when the next individual‟s 

recognized to ask the question. 

 

I recognize the member from Regina Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This government is all 

about secrecy and about stealth. Mr. Speaker, no one trusts 

them on the Crowns. We know they‟re about privatization. 

 

This administration, this government, has just spent $800,000 to 

invite 86 families to Saskatchewan, and we welcome that. But 

please to tell us how it is that by giving away six good jobs at 

SaskTel and exporting them out of province, how is this going 

to help the job situation in Saskatchewan? How is this going to 

help people in Saskatchewan that are currently employed at 

SaskTel and the Crowns? And how is it going to create a single 

new job? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Before I recognize the minister, I would ask 

government members to be mindful of what I just asked of 

members in the Chamber. 

 

I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

[10:30] 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated yesterday, 

and the president of SaskTel, Mr. Robert Watson, indicated 

yesterday that in fact there are no job losses to SaskTel. There 

will be no job losses to SaskTel. 

 

The member opposite has difficulty understanding that. I hope 

he doesn‟t have . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. It obviously appears that 

members would prefer just an open session. But I think we need 

to be mindful of the Chamber and people that are observing the 

proceedings. I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, there will be no 

privatization of the Crowns. There will be no privatization of 

SaskTel. There may be some outsourcing, which is the 

procedure that the NDP followed in 2004-2005. We‟re going to 

try to ensure that the people of this province get better services 

for a greater economy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I can‟t make that any plainer other than to say again there will 

be no job losses at SaskTel. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the Deputy 

Premier says there‟s no job losses and we know full well that 

there‟s at least six positions that are being outsourced — at least 

six — and we think to out of province. We think Fort 

Lauderdale, Florida is perhaps one of the places. 

 



March 5, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2159 

My question to the Deputy Premier is: what other outsourcing is 

there? How many other jobs are you planning on bleeding from 

our Crown corporations? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — As the president of SaskTel indicated 

yesterday, there are thousands of RFPs that are released on an 

annual basis. SaskTel‟s position has never been to publicly 

release those RFPs. I think the president also indicated 

yesterday that if the opposition wanted to see the RFPs, he 

would have absolutely no problem posting those RFPs on the 

website so that they can be seen online. That‟s the position 

taken by SaskTel. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member raises a very interesting question. 

Could he tell this Assembly how many jobs were moved out of 

this province in 2004 or 2005, out of SaskTel, when the NDP 

outsourced provision of services, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is all about 

secrecy and stealth. One of the companies being discussed is 

based in Fort Lauderdale and makes the following claim on its 

website. It claims, because our services, this is a quote: 

“Because our services are completely invisible to the end user, 

our partner‟s customers believe they are providing the data and 

infrastructure behind . . . [the site].” In other words, Mr. 

Speaker, customers would never know that the service was 

being received from somewhere other than SaskTel. 

 

To the minister: what was the Sask Party‟s plan? Were they 

hoping that most Saskatchewan people would remain unaware 

of those very steps they‟re taking to gut SaskTel? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I should have had the 

member opposite join me at a opening ceremony of LEADS 

[League of Educational Administrators, Directors and 

Superintendents] conference — LEADS standing for the 

directors and superintendents and administrators in this 

province — on Sunday night when a gentleman by the name of 

Ian Jukes, who‟s world renowned, off to speak to a conference 

in Dubai now about services, about Internet, about the 

continued expansion and how we do business, and how now 

business is being done worldwide. 

 

We don‟t know, when we‟re doing online banking, whether or 

not we‟re being given the services from Calgary, Regina, or 

maybe some city in India, Mr. Speaker. We don‟t know that 

because it is a worldwide provision of services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that we have to get better. We know in 

this province that SaskTel is going to be around for a long time. 

As I indicated yesterday, Mr. Speaker, we‟re providing an 

additional $90 million to SaskTel to make sure that they‟re a 

company that will provide the services necessary for the people 

of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Meanwhile, back in Saskatchewan. Hostopia, 

they brag and quote, “Because our services are completely 

invisible to the end user, our partner‟s customers believe they 

are providing the data and infrastructure behind . . . [the site].” 

Stealth and secrecy is clearly the modus operandi of the Sask 

Party government. 

 

Why do you say you value openness? Why do you say that and 

then be so secretive about so many of your plans? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we‟re really 

secretive about the plans of wanting to improve Saskatchewan, 

to change Saskatchewan from a time when the NDP were in 

power and we lost 35,000 people. We really want to be 

secretive about the fact that Saskatchewan is a better place to 

live. We want to be secretive about the fact that there are job 

opportunities, that the Conference Board of Canada says that 

this is one of the bright spots in the country of Canada. Mr. 

Speaker, we‟re so secretive about this that in fact CNN is 

actually using this province as an example of how things are 

moving forward and the rest of the world should pay attention 

to Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I am sure it would be appreciated 

if the minister would come somewhere close, somewhere close 

to the questions that he‟s being asked, in his answers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the outsourcing of the email service raises a 

particular concern for many subscribers, and I‟ve heard the 

concern addressed to me already overnight. If in fact, if in fact 

this government wants to privatize and outsource the email 

services, and if that contract is awarded to an American 

company, there are significant concerns being raised about 

privacy issues, about the privacy of Saskatchewan consumers‟ 

emails. 

 

A significant concern has been raised. It‟s been raised under the 

PATRIOT [Providing Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept 

and Obstruct Terrorism] Act. And so, Mr. Speaker, my question 

then to the Deputy Premier, who apparently now is responsible 

for the Crown corporations: can he assure, can he assure 

SaskTel subscribers of email services that there will not be a 

privacy threat as a result of this outsourcing? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



2160 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2009 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I have been assured by the 

president of SaskTel, Mr. Robert Watson, that there will not be 

any privacy concerns that the people of Saskatchewan should 

worry about. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, that is not the opinion of some 

other very significant folks in this industry. In January . . . Well 

the members opposite shout from their seats because they don‟t 

like these questions, Mr. Speaker. They shout from their seats 

. . . Well let me talk about who. In January 2008 of this year, 

the federal policy review panel, the federal policy review panel, 

a submission made to that group notes that CSIS [Canadian 

Security Intelligence Service], CSIS has reported that Canadian 

companies operating in the information technology sector, 

among others, have been targeted by foreign interests. 

 

Given, Mr. Speaker, that CSIS cannot give assurance that this 

information can be guaranteed to be secure, what makes the 

Sask Party think anybody‟s going to trust their opinion on it? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s my understanding 

from information provided by Mr. Watson, that in the past 

when services were provided in the United States, and there was 

some concern about where it was located, that in fact in 2004, 

after the passing of what is referred to as the PATRIOT Act, 

when it was implemented, SaskTel has directed and moved all 

service into Canada. 

 

Mr. Watson has indicated that there is no threat to privacy 

because whoever will be providing these services will be 

required to do it in Saskatchewan. That‟s his comment; that‟s 

his answer. So if the member opposite has the problem with Mr. 

Watson‟s direction and with SaskTel‟s board of direction, then I 

think he should be asking, by way of letter to SaskTel, whether 

or not that is . . . There‟s some fear that he has that suddenly 

Mr. Watson‟s answer must not be true. Is that the allegation that 

the member opposite is making, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, this is an interesting debate 

because the position of the government seems to be changing 

on the fly in question period. Now I hear the Deputy Premier 

saying that if there is any outsourcing of the email service, that 

it must be outsourced to a location in Saskatchewan. Now is 

that what he‟s saying? That it is now a requirement of this 

outsourcing proposal that the successful company must relocate 

to Saskatchewan? Would he clarify that position please, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, as I understand from the 

communications provided by Mr. Watson is that the control and 

the storage of information would be based out of Saskatchewan. 

That is my understanding as of yesterday. And if that is not in 

fact correct, Mr. Watson would clarify that, Mr. Speaker. But 

that is my understanding that in fact this would be a request. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, the process hasn‟t even been 

completed. The process hasn‟t even been completed. The 

process hasn‟t even been completed and therefore the member 

opposite . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, SaskTel is actively 

involved in a request for proposal. They have not completed it. 

They have not even finished, in fact, doing the complete set of 

interviews. 

 

My understanding is there are more than one companies that 

have been short listed, Mr. Speaker. So for the provision of 

those services, the questions will be answered by Mr. Watson. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, some of us have seen a 

little commercial on television. It talks about clarity. We need a 

little clarity from this government on what they are doing, never 

mind just with email services in Tel but with all of our Crowns. 

But let‟s just focus on this email question. 

 

Now the people of Saskatchewan, who I again repeat are the 

shareholders of SaskTel, deserve to have clarity in the answers. 

Will this outsourcing result in a circumstance that perhaps a 

foreign-based company will relocate to Saskatchewan to 

provide those services? The debate again would be simpler if 

we knew the list of companies being invited. 

 

Now again in this question period, I believe I heard the Deputy 

Premier say that SaskTel would be more than willing to post on 

their website the list of those, of those companies who are being 

requested. Is that true? Will he repeat that? And will it happen 

today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I will repeat what I 

believe I said a few minutes ago, that, that . . . Well the member 

opposite seems to, seems to not want to hear, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I said that the president of SaskTel says that there are thousands 

of RFPs that are required throughout the course of operation 

and that it has not been the practice of posting RFPs through the 

website online. Mr. Watson has indicated very clearly that if 

that‟s a desire of the Leader of the Opposition, he would be 

willing to post all RFPs online so that the member opposite can 

see every one of them. That‟s what I said, and that‟s what I‟ve 



March 5, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2161 

repeated. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Then I take it now what the Deputy Premier is 

telling us, they will produce on the website the RFPs, but they 

will not disclose to whom these RFPs are being sent, who‟s on 

the invitation list. Is that clear? 

 

Well then, Mr. Speaker, I go back to my earlier point. I go back 

to my earlier point. Mr. Speaker, how is it that we have one 

Crown corporation called SaskPower who is more than willing 

to produce for the public, for their shareholder of 

Saskatchewan, who they are inviting to do business with when 

another of our Crown corporations is not? Now maybe the 

Minister of CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan] should have a meeting with himself, figure this 

out, and get a consistent plan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, Crowns operate 

differently. We know that SaskTel is controlled by CRTC 

[Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications 

Commission]. There are different rules that SaskTel must 

follow versus what SaskPower must follow. 

 

The business practice of SaskTel, Mr. Speaker, the business 

practice of SaskTel, as determined by the board of directors of 

that company, is that they will not disclose names of companies 

with which they do business, Mr. Speaker, and which they try 

. . . 

 

As I indicated before, the RFP proposal was an invitational 

proposal, Mr. Speaker. There were 17 companies that were sent 

an RFP. There were five of those companies that we know were 

from the province of Saskatchewan. None of the five companies 

that were asked, by way of an invite through an RFP proposal, 

they did not submit a proposal. All five that were contacted in 

the province of Saskatchewan did not submit a proposal. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I make it again clear: the business policy of 

SaskTel is that names are not disclosed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[10:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, before the time of the question 

period runs out, I have another area and another question that I 

want to address to the Deputy Premier. Will the Deputy Premier 

confirm that this is not the first, this is not the first outsourcing 

of a service of SaskTel, a significant component of SaskTel by 

their government? Will he confirm to this House today that this 

government has in fact also outsourced conference calling? Will 

he confirm that? And will he identify to the people of 

Saskatchewan — the shareholder of Tel, the taxpayer — will he 

identify to whom the conference calling function was 

outsourced to, the name of the company? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — You know, Mr. Speaker, as I indicated 

at the very start of my response today, is that the questions are a 

bit ridiculous and obviously very hypocritical. When that 

government, as an NDP government in 2004, was outsourcing, 

they were outsourcing to companies outside of Saskatchewan in 

2004. In 2005 the NDP . . . 

 

The Speaker: — It‟s obvious there are many people who 

would like to answer the question, but there‟s only been one 

person‟s been recognized. I ask that you allow the Deputy 

Premier to respond to the question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

as I . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — As I said, Mr. Speaker, the NDP 

outsourced in 2004. They outsourced in 2005. And there is an 

RFP to look at provision of services for this, a current aspect 

facing SaskTel. The president of SaskTel indicated yesterday 

current costs about 1.5 million. It is desirable to try to move that 

cost maybe down to 600,000 — a tremendous amount of money 

for the province of Saskatchewan without any job losses. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think today‟s questions have become very . . . 

[inaudible] . . . It‟s no wonder, it‟s no wonder that the NDP are 

trying to outsource a new leader outside of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Members will come to order. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Government Investment in Transportation Projects 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m pleased to rise today to 

inform the House about this government‟s investment of over 

$17 million in six transportation projects, along with another 

98.5 million cash investment from the province for the Circle 

Drive South project in Saskatoon. Both of these investments 

will improve our province‟s transportation system and support 

the growth and expansion in several of our cities. 

 

The advancement of these monies now allows for the timely 

completion of design work so that construction can begin on 

these important projects in the upcoming season. Of the 17 

million which was announced as part of a $500 million stimulus 

package last month, 10 million will go to the city of Regina to 

support development of the global transportation hub. This 

project is a partnership between our government, the 

Government of Canada, the city of Regina, CP [Canadian 



2162 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2009 

Pacific] Rail, and the rural municipality of Sherwood. 

 

The global transportation hub includes a new Canadian Pacific 

intermodal transportation facility, a related road infrastructure, 

and a new Loblaws distribution warehouse. The balance of the 

$17 million will be distributed to the following projects. Six 

million dollars will go toward the Highways 1 and 4 

interchange in the city of Swift Current. The city of 

Lloydminster will receive a contribution of $750,000 through 

the urban highway connector program. Improvements will be 

made to the Highway 39 service road in the city of Weyburn 

with $450,000 allocated for that particular project. The city of 

Melfort will receive $300,000 for improvements to Highway 6, 

and the city of Humboldt will receive $150,000 for 

improvements to the Highway 20 intersection. 

 

Now improving these important urban roadway connections to 

the provincial highway system ensures corridor continuity to, 

from, and through urban centres. Nearly 70 per cent of our 

economy is driven by exports, and that is why projects of this 

nature are needed in Saskatchewan. Not only will they create 

jobs, but these investments will make Saskatchewan a more 

competitive and attractive place to do business. These 

investments will also enhance safety, alleviate congestion, and 

support the growth of cities. 

 

The $98.5 million cash injection from the province to the city of 

Saskatoon is to kick-start one of the largest transportation 

infrastructure projects in the province — the Circle Drive South 

project. This roadway will include the construction of a new 

bridge and roads to complete Circle Drive on the south side of 

Saskatoon, as well as interchanges at Lorne Avenue and Circle 

Drive South and at Idylwyld Freeway and Circle Drive South 

for a total cost of $98.5 million. 

 

The federal government has committed funding of 86.5 million 

toward the bridge, and the city of Saskatoon has committed $92 

million as its share toward the cost of the Circle Drive South 

project. The total cost is estimated to be $297 million in today‟s 

funds. 

 

These infrastructure initiatives are good news in our present 

circumstances and for our future aspirations. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I want 

to start out by thanking the minister for providing me a copy of 

his announcement earlier this day, giving me ample time to go 

through it before the House convened. 

 

I will agree with the minister that this is truly a good news 

announcement. I think any time that we can inject extra 

investments into our infrastructure certainly is good news. I 

think it‟s fair to say that if we want to have a strong economy 

and maintain a strong economy, we must maintain the 

infrastructure that provides the route of commerce. And this 

certainly will go a distance in providing that route. 

 

It is truly a good news announcement, Mr. Speaker. There are 

some questions it does raise though. It does raise the questions 

of capacity within our industry. Does our industry have the 

capacity to take on the extra work that will result from this 

investment?  

 

I would hope that it would not create a situation where we have 

a competition, perhaps an unfair competition, between the 

provincial work to be done and the continuous and continuum 

work of our RMs [rural municipality] of building their 

infrastructure, their grid road systems, and so on. I hope we 

don‟t find ourselves in a competitive situation where the RMs 

are competing against the province for the same contractors and 

for that same work. I hope the same would apply to the cities 

that have an ongoing need to maintain their infrastructure, that 

they don‟t find themselves in a competitive situation with 

contractors to be able to attract those contractors to do the work 

within our cities. 

 

I would hope that this would not result, Mr. Speaker, in a 

situation where we have increased costs, not necessarily 

increased kilometres of road being built or projects completed, 

but simply the increase in costs of those projects simply 

because we have a pool of money that the contractors simply 

can‟t maximize within a reasonable time frame so that they 

simply drive up the costs of projects. 

 

This is truly a good news announcement, Mr. Speaker, but it 

ignores a very vital part of our province, the northern part of our 

province in particular. We‟re seeing the northern highways have 

not been mentioned at all in this announcement, and nor do we 

see much mention of the northern highway situation even in the 

minister‟s five-year plan. It falls short. And I find that strange 

because if there‟s an area of our province that needs the 

stimulus, needs the extra work, needs the extra jobs, it would 

certainly be in northern Saskatchewan. But that has obviously 

been missed in this announcement. 

 

Northern Saskatchewan is a unique situation when it comes to 

this highway system, unlike the rest of us in southern 

Saskatchewan who enjoy, as residents, pretty well enjoy more 

than one exit from wherever we happen to be. Whether it be in a 

small town in Saskatchewan or on a farm in our great province 

or even our cities, there‟s various ways that we can get in and 

out to, you know, other parts of the province. 

 

That isn‟t the case in northern Saskatchewan. Communities in 

northern Saskatchewan have one road — one road that you 

travel in on and one road that you travel out on. That is their 

only artery and yet it has been ignored in this announcement. 

And certainly I find that strange because our greatest resource 

in this province, our greatest resource in this province is the 

people of Saskatchewan. The people in those northern 

communities are our greatest resource. And yet they‟re being 

ignored and not any futuristic hope of having improved arteries 

for them to travel in and out on for their own personal use or for 

the commerce and expansion of opportunities in the North. 

 

We see that in particular in some recent . . . The previous 

government had announced some projects in northern 

Saskatchewan — I think one of them Pelican Narrows, for 

example — that has now been . . . the community‟s been 

informed by the government that that particular project‟s been 



March 5, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2163 

postponed. And there‟s several others, Mr. Speaker, but we‟ll 

have the opportunity to discuss these particular projects further 

in estimates when that opportunity arises. Thank you. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Federal-Provincial Relations 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the close of my 

remarks, I will be moving the following motion: 

 

That this Assembly condemn the federal government for 

their lack of attention to the needs of Saskatchewan in this 

year‟s federal budget, particularly the needs of cattle 

producers and forestry workers, and furthermore notes 

that the provincial government has failed miserably to 

obtain fair treatment for the people of Saskatchewan by 

Stephen Harper‟s government. 

 

I‟ll move that motion, Mr. Speaker, at the end of my remarks. 

 

As you can see there are two components to this motion, both 

related to the federal budget: one component of the motion 

directed very specifically to the Conservative government in 

Ottawa, and the second component of the motion directed more 

generally to the Sask Party conservative government in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

On the first component of . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh the 

members opposite said that I can‟t say the Sask Party 

conservative Government of Saskatchewan. I think I just said it, 

and I think I‟ll say it again. This is a very conservative group of 

people we have over here, Mr. Speaker, a very conservative 

group of people. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, on the first component of this 

whole motion . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I would ask members to come to order 

and allow the Leader . . . 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the members of the opposition 

seem to take some umbrage as being described as conservative 

people. They are very conservative people, and . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I believe in the past, 

Speakers have given a rule that parties should be recognized by 

their specific designations, not what may be, what someone else 

may think they might be. And we currently have two parties in 

this Assembly, so I bring that to members attention. I recognize 

the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Well, see but I‟d be proud of it if I were they, 

but never mind. Well, Mr. Speaker, let me . . . back to the 

motion. There is a component of this motion that addresses the 

federal government, the first component. And it‟s actually, Mr. 

Speaker, a component of the motion that I would expect every 

member of this House to be able to support. I would expect the 

first component of this motion, which identifies that the federal 

government‟s budget, most recent, fails the needs of 

Saskatchewan. I can‟t imagine how any member in this House 

could stand in this debate and not support that statement, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[11:00] 

 

I can expect every member, I‟m sure, to support it. Why? 

Because this motion, Mr. Speaker, is actually no different, no 

different in its content, this first component, than what the 

Premier said the day after the federal budget. The Premier, we‟ll 

all recall, the day after the federal budget, gave this federal 

budget the grade of D. He gave it a grade of D which is exactly 

what this motion seeks to do. 

 

Why did the Premier give the budget a grade of D? Well he 

gave it a grade of D, as he described it that day, because this 

budget was disappointing. This was a disappointing budget for 

the people of Saskatchewan and particular — and the Premier 

identified it that day — particularly in its lack of response to 

our livestock sector in Saskatchewan. So the Premier 

condemned this budget, gave it a grade of D, said it was 

disappointing. Why did he say it was disappointing? Because it 

simply did not address the needs of this very significant 

component of our economy and our province, the livestock 

sector. 

 

Now to be fair, since the federal budget, the province has acted. 

The province has acted to provide some support. They‟ve acted 

after a significant call from the industry itself. They‟ve reacted 

after pressure from the opposition. They have reacted, I assume, 

from pressure even from some of their own private members 

who represent many of our producers in this province. To be 

fair, this government has acted. That does not change the 

reality, does not change the reality that our national government 

has simply not reacted to the need of the livestock sector in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And so when the Premier of our province, the day after the 

federal budget in this rotunda with the journalists, said to the 

people of Saskatchewan, the people of Canada, this budget rates 

nothing more than a D, he had our support, and I‟m sure he had 

the support of many, many, many Saskatchewan people. So our 

government has recognized the need to help the livestock 

sector. But even since the federal budget, has that federal 

government done so? No, it has not. No, it has not. The 

Minister of Agriculture knows it; he‟s said it. They have not 

responded even to date. 

 

But even worse, Mr. Speaker, instead of responding to the 

needs of the sector as they should have done through the budget 

— as they could have done since the budget — no, what do we 

get from the federal government around this issue is sort of the 

back of the hand. They tell our government, just go home, just 

go home. You‟re making a mistake by supporting the industry. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the Premier‟s assessment of the federal 

budget, the day after that budget was delivered, we believe was 

the right assessment. It is that same assessment that is reflected 

in the first component of the motion that‟s now before the 

House. And that is why I can‟t imagine why any member in this 

House would stand this morning and speak against this 

component of the motion. 



2164 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2009 

And you know what is incredible here, Mr. Speaker, when you 

think about this, what is incredible is that we have a federal 

budget delivered, that by the Premier‟s description, is a D 

grade. It‟s disappointing because it does not address the needs 

of the livestock sector in our province. 

 

What is incredible, Mr. Speaker, is that this budget was formed 

by 13 out of 14 seats held from this province by Conservative 

Party members in Ottawa, and even more incomprehensible 

when you think that our federal Minister of Agriculture is from 

Saskatchewan. It is almost incomprehensible to many of us that 

such a viable and important sector of our economy is so 

neglected by the federal budget. 

 

And so for that reason alone, Mr. Speaker, for that reason alone, 

this motion, I think, is an appropriate opportunity for this 

legislature, unanimously, to send a very clear message to the 

nation‟s capital, to the Government of Canada, that this budget 

that they have recently delivered fails the needs of 

Saskatchewan people. And I‟ve not even spoken to the issue of 

the forest. 

 

On the basis of this lack of support for our livestock sector — 

which now the government has recognized needs to be there — 

on that alone this budget fails the people of Saskatchewan and 

this motion therefore deserves the support of every member in 

this House. If they do not, if members opposite don‟t stand and 

give support to this component at least, of the motion, then I 

would argue they‟re getting like their colleagues in Ottawa — 

getting too much like their colleagues in Ottawa, willing to take 

instruction from Ottawa as opposed to taking instruction from 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now on the second component of this motion, Mr. Speaker, on 

the second component of this motion, I don‟t particularly expect 

that the member from Moose Jaw North is going to get up and 

support it. I don‟t realistically expect that — although I‟d argue 

that any objective observer would find themselves completely 

in agreement with what the motion describes — but I don‟t 

realistically expect members to hop up and support the second 

component of this motion. Because, Mr. Speaker, as you can 

see, the second component of this motion notes that the 

provincial government — our provincial government, the Sask 

Party provincial government — has failed “miserably to obtain 

fair treatment for the people of Saskatchewan by Steven 

Harper‟s government.” 

 

Now I don‟t expect the members opposite to get up and support 

that in their comments. I would believe that if there were a fair 

and objective observer over there, in fact they would support it. 

They would, but now I don‟t particularly expect that. 

 

Now you‟ll recall, Mr. Speaker, as I do, that when the Sask 

Party sat in opposition in this House and when the Liberals 

were in government in Ottawa, that party, now government, 

was very quick to stand with us, shoulder to shoulder, in 

demanding fairness from the federal government. They stood 

should to shoulder with us; they said publicly that the 

equalization formula in Canada was not fair to Saskatchewan 

people. They made no bones about that. And we stood shoulder 

to shoulder. But something changed, Mr. Speaker. Something 

seems to have changed when their friends were elected to 

government in Ottawa. 

When Mr. Harper and the Conservatives were elected to 

government in Ottawa, something changed in the Sask Party. 

And suddenly they were not quite as anxious to raise this 

question of fairness, Mr. Speaker. Somehow their position 

changed, and they gave up, Mr. Speaker. They gave up on 

battling for a fair return for Saskatchewan‟s non-renewable 

resources, which by the way, Mr. Speaker, by all conservative 

estimates, indicated a value of at least $800 million a year 

owing to the people of Saskatchewan as a result of the 

unfairness of the equalization program in this country. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, if time allows, a quick review of history 

here is important. It was Professor Tom Courchene who wrote 

what is widely acknowledged as the definitive piece of 

academic research on the specific question of the application of 

the equalization formula in Canada and how it has affected 

Saskatchewan. Widely recognized.  

 

And Tom Courchene in that paper, he described the entire paper 

simply by the title that he gave to the paper. He called that 

paper “Confiscatory Equalization.” Confiscatory equalization, 

which in plain language means that for every dollar that we 

were earning from our non-renewable natural resources, we 

were being robbed of a dollar and a quarter by a succession of 

federal governments. And it went on for years. 

 

We were losing, for every development dollar we were 

achieving for our non-renewables, we were losing 25 cents in 

terms of our fair share of federal resources. Tom Courchene 

published that paper. And then, in government, with the support 

of the opposition Sask Party at the time, we began to do battle 

to right that wrong. 

 

We battled first the Liberal government of Paul Martin. And, 

Mr. Speaker, progress was earned. Progress was earned. We 

were able to negotiate a $300 million payment from that Liberal 

government in Ottawa to compensate for some of the loss that 

we‟d taken under this confiscatory equalization — a $300 

million contribution to the people of Saskatchewan and only to 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was about that time that that same federal 

Liberal government, same federal Liberal government signed 

what is now known as the Atlantic accord, when in fact they 

made right the circumstance around equalization and 

non-renewable resource revenues for the provinces of Nova 

Scotia, the province of Newfoundland and Labrador. They 

made it right through the Atlantic accord. That left 

Saskatchewan of course alone in Confederation, having not 

received the fair and similar treatment as every other province 

in Canada. 

 

And so again we raised the battle. We raised the battle. I mean 

the minister of Finance in our government went to Ottawa. I 

attended to the House of Commons committee, the Senate 

committee. I went to see the Prime Minister. 

 

Mr. Speaker, then along came the Conservative Party 

candidates in Saskatchewan and their leader, Stephen Harper, 

and they made a promise. They made a promise to the people of 

Saskatchewan that if they were elected to the Government of 

Canada, they would make this right. That they would make it 

right by simply excluding non-renewable resource revenues 



March 5, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2165 

from the calculation to form equalization. 

 

At that moment, Mr. Speaker, many of us rejoiced. Now I could 

never find myself voting Conservative, but that‟s about as close 

as I ever came. Because I thought at last we have a westerner 

who understands resource revenues, who understands how this 

equalization program has hurt Saskatchewan, and who has 

promised us, promised us that he would make it right. 

 

Well we elected them. We elected them all right. We elected 

them on that promise, and what did they do? They broke the 

promise, Mr. Speaker. By everybody‟s agreement, they broke 

the promise. And you can read the journalists, Randy Burton, in 

The StarPhoenix — we may hear more about it later — how 

that‟s been described by journalists, by academics, by the 

citizens. It can‟t not be described but as a broken promise. 

 

So we began the challenge again. We began the challenge 

again. Again I appeared in Ottawa. Again I met the Prime 

Minister. Now, Mr. Speaker, now, Mr. Speaker, we were again 

promised, I was promised as the Premier of the province, and so 

were my colleagues as premiers, in a letter from Stephen Harper 

saying, no, don‟t worry. We‟re going to review the equalization 

program and we‟re going to make it right. We‟re going to pull 

out non-renewable natural resources. 

 

And again our hopes went up that we were going to get a fair 

deal — I remind you, worth $800 million a year, 800 million 

for the people of Saskatchewan. Again our hopes were given 

up. And what did these Conservatives in Ottawa do? Oh they 

reformed equalization all right. And you know what they did? 

They actually pulled out non-renewable resource revenues from 

the calculation. And, Mr. Speaker, you know what they did 

then? They put a cap on it. They put a cap on it which only 

affects the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now along comes the Sask Party government and we expect 

them to keep the same position they had in opposition. But no, 

no. They‟ve seemed to have changed their position, and they no 

longer stand up for the rightness of this, Mr. Speaker. They‟ve 

dropped the legal challenge. They‟ve given up getting a fair 

return for the people of Saskatchewan. It‟s not, Mr. Speaker, 

that they‟ve failed; they haven‟t even tried. 

 

And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I believe that this Assembly should 

be unanimous in support of the following motion. I move: 

 

That this Assembly condemns the federal government for 

their lack of attention to the needs of Saskatchewan in this 

year‟s federal budget, particularly the needs of cattle 

producers and forestry workers, and furthermore notes 

that the provincial government has failed miserably to 

obtain fair treatment for the people of Saskatchewan by 

Stephen Harper‟s government. 

 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Will the members take the motion as read? 

The next speaker will be recognized. I recognize the member 

from Biggar. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m very grateful to 

be able to speak to this motion. This motion . . . I‟ll read just the 

first part of it, Mr. Speaker: 

 

That this Assembly condemns the federal government for 

their lack of attention to the needs of Saskatchewan . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, the whole motion is hypocritical on the NDP side. 

It‟s obvious that the NDP opposition hasn‟t changed how they 

deal with other governments in the way they dealt with the 

federal government when they were in power, Mr. Speaker. The 

Saskatchewan Party government works with whoever is in 

power in Ottawa in a pragmatic, professional manner. We work 

premier to prime minister, minister to minister, government to 

government, and we don‟t go around insulting the federal 

government; we don‟t go around condemning them. 

 

Do we have differences? Well we certainly do, and in my 

speech I‟m going to go through some of the differences that we 

have with the federal government. It‟s only natural to have 

some differences as you never get everything that you want in 

life. And no, Saskatchewan doesn‟t get everything we want 

from the federal government. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the NDP opposition is so hypocritical. Let‟s 

look at what they did in 16 years in government. 

 

[11:15] 

 

First of all, it was obvious they didn‟t work co-operatively with 

the federal government of any stripe, quite frankly. When you 

come to fully funding CFIP [Canadian farm income program] 

and then CAIS [Canadian agricultural income stabilization 

program] and AgriStability, what did the NDP do? Well they 

didn‟t fully fund the risk management programs that they had 

negotiated with the other provinces and territories and the 

federal government. They reneged on their agreement. At the 

end of the day, after much delay, they did put money in to a 

certain extent. 

 

I believe one year in CFIP they never did put their share of the 

money in. And this is money that farmers were counting on to 

operate for the next season, and the farmers of Saskatchewan 

could not count on the NDP government to uphold their end of 

the bargain. 

 

We go back to 1995 when the then NDP government cancelled 

GRIP [gross revenue insurance program]. That was something 

that really set agriculture back in this province and, you know, 

we‟ve seen since then that there is thousands of farmers left the 

farm and left the industry totally. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have seen also, on an individual basis, the then 

Agriculture minister, Mr. Wartman, personally soured a deal for 

a packing plant to come to Saskatchewan and possibly come to 

the constituency of Biggar. It was incredible what we heard 

about what that minister did at that time. How he actually, 

actually soured the deal when after BSE [bovine spongiform 

encephalopathy] and the whole situation that was going on 

there. And there was a move on to have more slaughtering 

capacity in Saskatchewan and that minister, well, ended up 

putting up roadblocks. And of course we never did see a 

packing plant come to Saskatchewan. 



2166 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2009 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about in comparison to what 

the NDP did in 16 years of government, I‟d like to compare 

what Saskatchewan has done with working co-operatively with 

the federal government. I‟m just going to list a few. Talking 

about the Prime Minister was in Saskatoon and made an 

announcement — $62 million to complete the twinning of 

Highway 11 — then moved up the project from 2016 to 2012. 

I‟d say that‟s working very co-operatively. I think things are, 

things are working quite well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The carbon capture file — $240 million from the federal 

government to develop one of the world‟s first and largest 

commercial-scale carbon capture storage demonstration project. 

And the list goes on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Circle Drive South announcement, Saskatoon — $86 million 

for the federal Gateways and Border Crossing Fund for the 

Saskatoon Circle Drive South project. 

 

The global transportation hub — 27 million from the federal 

government for the development of Regina‟s global 

transportation hub. 

 

Building Canada fund. The federal government and 

Saskatchewan government committed to $31 million towards 

projects in the community of 100,000 people or less. I‟d say 

again that‟s working very co-operatively with the federal 

government and getting results, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I was going to say, but good things have 

happened working with the federal government. And there is 

some irritants. As everyone knows, as our Premier said, that we 

wouldn‟t ask the federal government to do something that we 

wouldn‟t do ourselves. So what did we do, Mr. Speaker? We 

committed $71 million to producers from Saskatchewan hog 

and cattle support program, $71 million. That‟s 40 per cent of 

what was being asked for by the livestock associations, and we 

do have a problem with the federal government‟s response. 

There‟s no doubt that we expect the federal government to 

come in with their 60 per cent of that program. As we know, 

these programs are almost always 60/40 between the federal 

government and the provinces. 

 

We recognize, our Agriculture minister recognized that there 

was a need for support for our livestock industry, and our 

government came through. And there‟s one glaring example. 

We have an issue with the federal government and the federal 

Minister of Agriculture‟s reply. Just the other day though, the 

federal Minister of Agriculture, Ritz, was in Biggar actually and 

held meetings in the community to talk to livestock producers 

about the situation in the livestock economy and well, we‟re 

hopeful. 

 

We‟re hopeful that he will and the federal government will see 

the light and come to the aid of the livestock producers as 

Saskatchewan government did, giving $40 per head for all 

breeding cows and bred heifers and $20 per market hog and 

also $10 per head for iso-weanlings. It was a very welcomed 

announcement. And I just would like to quote Dave Marit, the 

president of SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities]: 

 

SARM would like to thank the province for recognizing 

the livestock crisis and for demonstrating its commitment 

to the industry through today‟s announcement. 

 

Also quoting Sask Pork: 

 

The Saskatchewan pork industry expresses its gratitude to 

the Government of Saskatchewan for recognizing the 

urgent need for producer support for the hog sector. 

 

This is tangible results. This is tangible investment in the 

livestock industry, and we‟re certainly there as a provincial 

government to help the livestock sector. 

 

But what else have we done, Mr. Speaker, for the agricultural 

sector in the province? Well we recently announced $12.6 

million to agriculture research projects in the province. We‟ve 

also provided increased extension services throughout rural 

Saskatchewan for farmers and ranchers — opened up new 

offices in Watrous, Kindersley, Moose Jaw. 

 

Now AgriStability, that‟s certainly, that is really the flagship of 

the risk management programs in this province. And we 

recognized that AgriStability being administered out of 

Winnipeg was not a good thing. There was the horror stories of 

many producers — I‟m one of them — having files sit on a 

desk for four or five years when this money was so desperately 

needed, and so we . . . And the cost, quite frankly, of the 

administration that the province had to pay for AgriStability 

being administered, CAIS, its forerunner, being administered 

out of Winnipeg. 

 

So what did we do? What did our Agriculture minister 

announce? Well we‟re going to move it to Saskatchewan, and 

that‟s going to happen. And we see a number of advantages out 

of that. First of all, we‟re going to have employees being paid, 

paying taxes, working in Saskatchewan and administer the 

program. And, Mr. Speaker, we also put the priority on having 

these files get dealt with on a very timely basis because having 

files that sit for four or five years is just totally unacceptable 

and especially when agricultural producers so desperately need 

funding from the risk management programs. 

 

We can go on and on, Mr. Speaker. Farm and ranch water 

program, $6 million was announced in the 2008-2009 budget. I 

just have a few seconds left, so I certainly will not be 

supporting this motion for the reasons I just laid out. 

 

But it‟s interesting, if provincial NDP do not speak about their 

federal NDP counterparts. All we heard from them was, the 

federal NDP, Jack Layton, all he wanted to do was get a cabinet 

position and make a deal with the Bloc separatists so that, and 

with Stéphane Dion, in order to get a cabinet position. We never 

heard of any promises coming out of the federal NDP; what 

they were going to do for Saskatchewan. Did we hear anything 

from them? They had no plans to help Western Canada or 

Saskatchewan, and their leader certainly is hypocritical in that 

type of an arrangement with a separatist party. So, as I said 

before, Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting this . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The member‟s time has elapsed. I recognize 

the member from Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to speak in 



March 5, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2167 

support of this motion, and I know that all of us are very 

pleased when we can agree on that side of the House and this 

side of the House or previously when we were there and the 

members opposite were here that there was agreement on what 

was happening for our province and for our country. 

 

And so about four years ago — March 2005 — one of our 

members said this, and I think it accurately reflected what was 

happening in Saskatchewan at that time. “I think all sides in this 

legislature can agree on one thing today. The federal 

equalization formula does not treat Saskatchewan fairly.” That 

was a comment made by the member from Swift Current. 

 

Now the next year when the new government was elected in 

Ottawa and we ended up with a Conservative government in 

Ottawa, there was a very clear statement from the members of 

the Sask Party that the new equalization formula must exclude 

all provincial resource revenue. So that was 2006. 

 

Then in 2007, there was a federal budget and there was a 

discussion of what should happen with that federal budget, and 

the members I think were once again unanimous in this 

legislature and once again one of our members was very clear. 

He says: 

 

“I‟m upset and I think the people of the province will be 

as well. Today the issue is did the Conservatives keep a 

promise that they made? A pretty clear promise without a 

cap. The answer is no.” 

 

Once again a comment that reflected the feelings of all of us 

made by the member from Swift Current. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think that what ends up happening is that 

last month we had a reflection by the Premier on the federal 

budget, and I think he summed it up for the people of the 

province that it was a D. And I don‟t think there‟s been 

anything that‟s really happened since then to cause anybody to 

change that assessment. 

 

Now what‟s extremely unfortunate for those of us who live in 

Saskatchewan, that this seems to be a fairly consistent response 

to the people of Saskatchewan, whether the party opposite is in 

government or whether our party has been in government. And 

I think that‟s one of the fundamental issues that was addressed 

by Mr. Courchene in his work, but also was an item that was 

addressed in many of the initiatives that we took when we were 

in government. 

 

Now I think the frustration for the people of Saskatchewan is 

that there are many of these issues that now seem to be pushed 

under the rug or set aside. I think that it‟s quite interesting. And 

I want to make a little bit of a quotation here; it‟s not too long, 

but I think it‟s an important one. This is one from the summer 

of 2007: 

 

Prime Minister Stephen Harper‟s caucus members in 

Saskatchewan have a problem that just won‟t go away. 

There‟s a big dead albatross hanging from their necks, and 

it‟s stinking to high heaven. Yet whenever someone 

mentions the rotting carcass, they gaze wide-eyed around 

the room and say „Albatross? What albatross?‟ This would 

be the infamous campaign promise guaranteed to 

Saskatchewan that its non-renewable resources would be 

exempt from equalization calculations. The promise was 

made repeatedly in many different places by all 

Conservative candidates. It was promised to Premier 

Lorne Calvert in writing by Harper, who rode it to 12 

Saskatchewan seats. Now that the promise has been 

broken by inclusion of a cap in the formula, Tory MPs are 

trying to deflect attention from that fact in any way they 

can. 

 

This is a quotation from The StarPhoenix, written by Randy 

Burton. We now have 13 Conservatives in the federal 

parliament, and I think over the last 20 months or 18 months 

there hasn‟t been any change in the perception of what‟s 

happened. 

 

Now what‟s also going to be fairly interesting is that the person 

who wrote this very clear statement about the feelings of 

Saskatchewan people is now working, I think, very hard to 

make sure that the communications around the provincial 

budget on March 18 will have the same clarity. And we look 

forward to those particular words. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when one works in this whole area of 

federal-provincial relationships, you end up having to develop 

relationships that are workable from both sides. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we know that, unfortunately for Saskatchewan, our 

place in Confederation has been replaced with one of fairly 

strong sense of our position vis-à-vis either the federal Liberals 

or the federal Conservatives by what appears more to be a 

position of compromise or allowing for the big brother to 

dominate the little brother. I know one of our Regina columnists 

described that as the big brother stealing the allowance from the 

little brother and basically telling him to forget it. And 

Saskatchewan then sits in this position of being treated like 

somebody with no power, with no influence in what goes on. 

And I think that that‟s the part that frustrates many 

Saskatchewan people when they see the government in this 

situation that we‟re in now. 

 

[11:30] 

 

And I think the motion today actually gets at the fact that when 

the government drops the lawsuit that was started — as many 

ways a last resort, having been part of the decision to go ahead 

with that — what they do is even further weaken a position of 

the Saskatchewan people. Now I thought it was quite curious, 

given all our reference to animals in Saskatchewan over the last 

number of days, that the Justice minister talked about that 

lawsuit as the elephant in the room and it was something that 

was always there. Well that was clearly the whole purpose of 

having the lawsuit, which was to remind the federal government 

that they had not treated Saskatchewan fairly. 

 

It‟s a sad case when we as a province, and especially the 

Government of Saskatchewan, have us as sort of the lapdog of 

Confederation. The federal government says something and we 

bark in unison or we do whatever is necessary to support the 

federal government.  

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that ends up being a situation where you end 

up having to deal with some of the old traditional words of this 

legislature and of our predecessor legislatures, especially in 



2168 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2009 

Great Britain where they talked about the Whigs and the Tories 

— or I think as some people have talked about, the Whigs and 

the Whags. And, Mr. Speaker, I think that we‟re sick and tired 

in Saskatchewan of being the Whags — the wagging tails of 

Confederation. And we want us to be in a position where we 

will stand up for Saskatchewan people, and unfortunately, the 

record of the government opposite has been such that they have 

not done that over the last while. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we will continue to push this particular issue 

because we do not think that Saskatchewan people are being 

treated fairly. And we expect those people who temporarily 

have the responsibility of making our case, that they will do this 

in a forceful manner. So I speak in favour of the motion, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 

pleased to have the opportunity to stand in the Assembly today 

to speak to this motion. And I for one am not in favour of this 

motion.  

 

As many members in this House know, I‟m from the 

constituency of Rosthern-Shellbrook and in that constituency, 

it‟s basically agriculture. And there are a lot of cattle producers 

in that constituency. In fact in Rosthern-Shellbrook 

constituency, the biggest numbers of cattle are from that 

constituency. So I hear it every day as what‟s happening with 

the federal government and the provincial government in 

regarding the problems that the cattle producers are having, plus 

the hog producers are having, because in my constituency there 

are hog producers. Not many, but there‟s hog producers. 

 

And, you know, when I look at this motion and it states that we 

should condemn the federal government, well this is typically, 

Mr. Speaker, what the NDP would do. This would be kind of a 

socialist attitude to condemn somebody. Instead of working 

with them, they want to condemn them. And that‟s why rural 

Saskatchewan, the farmers, the cattle producers in rural 

Saskatchewan, have got very little from the previous 

administration. For 16 years they‟ve had to put up with the 

NDP administration that would sooner condemn than actually 

work with the federal government to bring out programs that 

would help and benefit them. 

 

It‟s ironic with this motion that we have, the opposite side of 

the House, members of the NDP, who are all from urban 

Saskatchewan. And as the former premier, the Opposition 

Leader stated, it‟s been due to them that our government came 

forth with the $40 per cow. Isn‟t that ironic? The urban farmers 

of Saskatchewan have come out now and stated they‟ll take 

credit for this. Well it wasn‟t them that did it. I can understand 

that the Ag critic probably got some phone calls; I got lots of 

them. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, Kevin Hursh is an ag commentary 

person who knows ag really well. He was up in my 

constituency in the town of Spiritwood, here just probably a 

month ago. And there were a lot of people there. In his talks 

there, he was talking about the problems in ag. And it‟s been 

going on for some years under the watchful eye — the watchful 

eye — of the NDP, who could care less about rural 

Saskatchewan. And one of the people that was there stood up 

and said, you know, after 16 years of NDP rule, we in 

Saskatchewan under the new government — the government 

I‟m proud to represent with — we finally have an Ag minister 

that stands up for rural Saskatchewan, first and foremost 

because he‟s from rural Saskatchewan. He understands rural 

Saskatchewan. He grew up on the farm. 

 

One of the things I told the member, I said . . . And that is true. 

After how many years of NDP rule, we get an Ag minister who 

understands rural Saskatchewan and livestock problems and ag 

problems. And I said the reason he is the best — the best — Ag 

minister we‟ve had in a long, long time, is because when he 

speaks, he doesn‟t speak from a piece of paper handed in front 

of him. He speaks from the heart. And that‟s what an 

Agriculture minister should do, but you‟ve got to know 

something about ag before you can get up there and stand. Our 

Ag minister does that, and that‟s why he‟s doing a wonderful 

job. 

 

Yes, you can condemn the federal government for not coming 

forth with their share of the money, but there‟s an old saying — 

either lead, follow or get out of the road. Well I guarantee you, 

M. Speaker, our Ag minister and our government decided to 

lead. Instead of waiting for the federal government to come out 

with their share of the formula of 60/40 split, our Ag minister 

came forth and said, we‟re going to lead. Because this is what 

this government is about, leading this province into prosperity, 

not like our counterparts on the opposite side, the NDP, who all 

they seem to think about is being second-class province where 

we have to wait for help from the federal government. This Ag 

minister and our government is going to lead forward. And in 

ag that‟s why we‟ve taken out and spent just over $70 million to 

help the cattle producers. 

 

And because I have lots of cattle producers in my constituency 

— in fact, in fact, Mr. Speaker, four of my brothers are also ag 

producers, as I am. And when I go home on the weekends I hear 

first-hand about the ag problems. But they‟ll be the first to say, 

we finally have a government that understands ag, and we 

finally have a Ag minister that understands ag. And we will do 

a heck of a lot better with this government in power, rather than 

what we had for the last 16 years under the socialist government 

of the NDP. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to read a quote. I 

just want to read a quote from Kevin Hursh. And in the Regina 

paper . . . or Saskatoon paper, pardon me, Mr. Speaker, I want 

to quote from that. And it says: 

 

Natural advantage for beef . . . [producers] squandered. 

 

Western Canada in general and Saskatchewan in 

particular should be home to a vibrant cattle industry. 

Instead, cattle producers are under attack from all sides 

and the future appears bleak. 



March 5, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2169 

That is true. It also goes on to quote: 

 

Unfortunately, the cattle herd is shrinking and will 

continue to do so as producers leave the industry . . . [This 

simply is economics.] Eventually people get tired of 

working for little or no return. 

 

The Saskatchewan government‟s new support package for 

the livestock industry is the first positive news in a long 

[long] time. 

 

This is from Kevin Hursh, the agriculture commentary: 

 

To its credit, the province has decided to go ahead even 

though the feds have refused to cost-share. 

 

The provincial payment of $40 per cow or bred heifer will 

mean $4,000 for a producer running 100 head. It would be 

considerably more useful if the feds would contribute $60 

per head in the traditional 60-40 funding split for farm . . . 

[support]. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if this motion has any relevance to what the feds 

are not doing, it‟s the feds have not come to the table with their 

$60 per head. But it‟s based on $100, but that‟s what the 

industry have asked for when they were coming to the Ag 

minister and saying, we would like $100 per cow. That‟s what 

our provincial government has done. We have come to the table 

with $40 because that‟s our share. But to have a motion on the 

floor from the NDP condemning the federal government on 

everything is not the way to do business. It is not. 

 

If you want to work with the federal government, then you have 

to have meetings and stuff and bring out the issues. And that‟s 

what needs to be done. Not condemning them is going to go or 

do anything. 

 

I‟d also like to also talk about what the federal government has 

done since we took power a year ago. And the list is extensive. 

The federal funding brought in twinning of Highway 11. And it 

also, by funding the highway twinning from Saskatoon to 

Prince Albert, the funding will increase the production and have 

that highway done by 2012 rather than 2016. Something else 

the new provincial government has done. 

 

The federal funding has also done in areas like carbon capture, 

Circle Drive South, the global transportation hub right here in 

Regina. That comes from the federal government. And how is 

that going to benefit Saskatchewan? It‟s going to benefit 

immensely. 

 

But the reason these projects are coming forthwith is because 

we, this government, have sat down with the federal 

government and asked them. They‟ve worked with them. We 

don‟t go out and condemn them and then come back with their 

hands out and say we need, we need, we need. That‟s 

something that the NDP would do. And the NDP have done that 

for 16 years and that‟s why we‟re in the same position we have 

been for many years. 

 

To honour this new government, I can guarantee you we will go 

forward to make this province a better place. And I can 

guarantee you that rural Saskatchewan will foster more benefits 

under this government with this Ag minister than ever before. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting this motion. I believe 

that this motion does nothing to help foster the relationship 

between the federal government and our government in 

transferring dollars and things that this province needs, 

especially in rural Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m 

pleased today to speak in the debate on this motion, the motion 

that was put forward by the leader of the New Democratic Party 

a short while ago, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And just for the record, for my constituents who are watching 

this right now and for those who may be reading the debate in 

Hansard, Mr. Speaker, I‟ll put on the record again the motion: 

 

That this Assembly condemns the federal government for 

their lack of attention to the needs of Saskatchewan in this 

year‟s federal budget, particularly the needs of cattle 

producers and forestry workers, and furthermore notes that 

the provincial government has failed miserably to obtain 

fair treatment for the people of Saskatchewan by Stephen 

Harper‟s government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this motion comes forward today for a number of 

reasons, not the least of which, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that the 

people of Saskatchewan are concerned about the lack of 

attention in the federal budget just released and comments made 

by Saskatchewan MPs, Mr. Speaker, with regards to what was 

not in that budget and what the province of Saskatchewan is 

doing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[11:45] 

 

Our constituents are concerned, number one, about the lack of 

attention by the federal government because it affects them in 

their pocketbook, Mr. Speaker, and their ability to work within 

their communities to support their families. And, Mr. Speaker, 

they are concerned because not only are there 13 Conservative 

Party MPs in this province, Mr. Speaker, but there‟s a 

government in this province that says that they are the friends of 

those 13 MPs, Mr. Speaker, and that they have some influence 

over those MPs. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, just the other day we learned the Minister of 

Agriculture himself says he has so much influence over those 

MPs, Mr. Speaker, that they shake in their boots when we come 

— we, that means the government — comes to Ottawa to talk to 

them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan know that the federal 

government is letting us down. The Premier of Saskatchewan 

has acknowledged the federal government has let us down. 

And, Mr. Speaker, therefore, those who are arguing closest to 

the ear of the federal government, Mr. Speaker, are failing to 

communicate our message. 

 

It‟s a simple matter, Mr. Speaker, that anybody that‟s been in a 



2170 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2009 

debate class in school, at high school or university, for anybody 

that‟s been involved in actually debates around the kitchen table 

at home or within their local organization, Mr. Speaker, when 

you make a good argument and you lose the good argument, 

you understand and you can explain, Mr. Speaker, not only to 

yourself but to others as to why you lost that argument. But, Mr. 

Speaker, you have to have made a good argument to begin with. 

 

It‟s clear, Mr. Speaker, that the good argument has fallen on 

deaf ears in Ottawa, Mr. Speaker. And that‟s a failure of those 

who are communicating the message within the provincial 

government and, Mr. Speaker, within the debate that‟s brought 

forward by our own 13 Conservative Party MPs, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In my part of the country now . . . I represent part of northwest 

Saskatchewan that I share with a number of members opposite, 

Mr. Speaker. In my part of the country, Mr. Speaker, people are 

starting to refer in coffee row to our members of parliament as 

our 13 useless MPs, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the worst part about this, Mr. Speaker, the very worst part 

about this is that our own Member of Parliament, Mr. Gerry 

Ritz, the Agriculture minister, has not only failed to understand 

the needs of his own constituency, Mr. Speaker, but he has also 

retaliated against actions taken by the province, as if the work 

that we do here in this Assembly — whether it‟s by government 

or opposition combined, Mr. Speaker — is not in tune with 

what he‟s hearing on the doorstep. 

 

In fact while the Saskatchewan government has put 40 of $100 

needed in the livestock sector on the table, Mr. Speaker, and the 

expectation is that Mr. Ritz, who understands this problem as 

well, the fact that Mr. Ritz is called upon to put on $60 of that 

$100 need, Mr. Speaker . . . We‟ve now got Mr. Ritz calling 

what the province has done a scheme. Just a scheme, Mr. 

Speaker. Well it‟s not a scheme; it recognizes some of the needs 

in the livestock sector. But there‟s so much more, Mr. Speaker, 

that the federal government has responsibility for. 

 

And if the work of the provincial government were as closely 

tied as they say it is, Mr. Speaker, then of course the federal 

government would be there, as they are in the auto sector, Mr. 

Speaker, to top up the work that‟s going on here in the 

province. And Mr. Ritz, our MP — my MP, Mr. Speaker — and 

Saskatchewan‟s Agriculture minister should be working with 

his constituents and those who represent the stakeholders within 

his constituencies, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I‟m not the only one in this House that has the ability at 

election time, Mr. Speaker, to vote for our Agriculture minister. 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, that federal constituency of The 

Battlefords-Lloydminster touches on the MLA from 

Lloydminster. It touches on the MLA from Biggar. It touches 

on the MLA from Cut Knife-Turtleford. It touches on the MLA 

from Rosthern-Shellbrook who spoke in this debate. And, Mr. 

Speaker, it touches on the constituency of Meadow Lake. In 

fact, Mr. Speaker, I think that our Agriculture minister actually 

lives in the constituency of Meadow Lake and probably voted 

for the member from Meadow Lake. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, with all of these people who have the ability 

to influence not only a Saskatchewan MP who‟s the Minister of  

 

Agriculture, but in fact their own MP, Mr. Speaker, surely to 

goodness we should be able to understand that not only do they 

speak to him as a representative of the province of 

Saskatchewan, but they‟ve actually phoned him and talked to 

him as their own MP, Mr. Speaker. And I‟d be interested to 

know what the results of those conversations have been, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The member from Biggar says Mr. Ritz was in Biggar just a 

week ago, Mr. Speaker. And did the member from Biggar 

attend that meeting with his constituents? Did the member from 

Biggar actually ask the MP for the area representing livestock 

producers to step up and put the 60 bucks on the table that his 

Minister of Agriculture, that he praises, has spoken so highly 

about . . . The need exists. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the livestock producers in this province and, 

Mr. Speaker, forestry workers in forest communities also in our 

northwest constituencies, Mr. Speaker, have also communicated 

that that need for those individuals and our people has not been 

recognized or represented. Our arguments from the province of 

Saskatchewan — and more importantly from those closest to 

the Conservative MPs, Mr. Speaker — that argument doesn‟t 

seem to be getting through. If Mr. Ritz and the other 12 MPs in 

Saskatchewan don‟t speak to their constituents and don‟t 

understand the needs here, then it‟s incumbent upon those 

others who are elected within our communities, including 

MLAs opposite, to speak to him, Mr. Speaker, to speak to them 

and ensure that they understand the needs of this province. 

 

The essence of this motion, Mr. Speaker, is number one, on 

behalf of our constituents, to recognize that the federal 

government has failed us and there‟s no doubt about it. That‟s 

universal across the province. Even the Premier gave the 

budget, and the response to our needs, a D grade, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And on top of that, Mr. Speaker, the motion from our 

constituencies, from our constituents, says to the Government 

of Saskatchewan, if you say you‟re close to these guys in 

Ottawa, that you can influence them with a good, quiet, 

peaceful argument, then by golly just go out and do it — do it 

— and show us by your actions and by the results of those 

actions, Mr. Speaker, that in fact you are able to carry the day 

with a good argument. And, Mr. Speaker, let‟s see a response, 

not only from our Minister of Agriculture who indeed has failed 

us but, Mr. Speaker, by all Saskatchewan Conservative Party 

MPs, Mr. Speaker, who rather would tell us what we need and 

what we think than actually respond to what we say is our need. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I haven‟t had a chance to specifically talk 

about the equalization and the way our MPs talk to us about 

what we should want and what we should need and what we 

should get out of equalization. Mr. Speaker, we‟ve 

communicated that message unanimously from this legislature. 

They in fact have responded to us by saying no, no, no, we 

might have promised it, but no, no, no, we‟re not going to 

address the needs of resource revenues in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a motion I think that all members of this 

legislature can support, and I‟m certainly supporting the 

motion. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 



March 5, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2171 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m glad to rise in 

the House today to speak against this motion. You know, we 

can be a little confrontational in our House, but this has gotten 

to the point of being too confrontational. 

 

I have quite a few things . . . And we‟ve had some good things. 

We‟ve had some good things come from the federal 

government. And like, I mean let‟s face it. They can‟t do 

everything the same as what we can‟t do everything, even 

though we do a far better job than the members opposite. 

 

I wanted to talk a little bit about the forestry end of it. As most 

of you people know, coming from the greatest constituency in 

Saskatchewan, the Carrot River Valley, we actually have the 

forest industry up there, in both Hudson Bay and Carrot River. 

And I was very happy to see the federal government step up to 

the plate with the Community Development Trust Fund, and 

especially me being from Carrot River. You know, that put in 

$1.16 million into the Carrot River‟s economy, of which they 

plan on building a road for the peat moss, to continue to keep 

our peat moss industry going. Even though we have our forest 

industry down right now at the present time, our peat moss 

plant will continue to run. This initiative was handled by, also 

taken from the federal government and was given to our 

Enterprise and Innovation who worked very hard with the 

communities in our area to get this through. 

 

Hudson Bay was another one that happens to be in the Carrot 

River Valley constituency. Hudson Bay is receiving $3.26 

million out of this fund. They‟re going to use that for a 

improved water supply for a proposed ethanol plant there. 

They‟re also going to use some of that money to rebuild a 

warehouse there that they desperately need. And this 

warehouse, this is looking for the future of the forestry industry. 

We know that the forestry industry is suffering at the present 

time. But it‟s a worldwide problem; it‟s not just a Saskatchewan 

problem. 

 

And I would like to remind our members opposite that there 

were six mills closed down back when they were in power, and 

I don‟t think that they did a heck of a lot and didn‟t really get 

any money out of the federal government to help them at that 

time. The only thing they did do, mind you, on the forest end of 

it is just before the last election they came up and said that they 

were willing to give $100 million to Domtar without even 

letting the mayor of Prince Albert know until it was just about 

to happen. I think he was down in the States somewhere. They 

didn‟t let Domtar know; they had to fly their person in. You 

know, that was just . . . All that was was political ploy. And it 

would have cost the province $100 million — $100 million that 

we wouldn‟t have been able to spend on the infrastructure, on 

the roads, the hospitals, the schools, that we are now doing and 

carrying forward, due to 16 years of neglect of infrastructure, I 

might say. 

 

There are quite a few things on this, like . . . And here‟s the 

other thing. When you go out and you take that they had in . . . 

The government of the day just about fell due to a coalition, due 

to a coalition. What did their great leader, what did their great 

leader, the NDP leader, Jack Layton, come up with? They were 

going to do, they were going to do a cap and trade; that was 

their whole idea. They were going to do a cap and trade. It was 

going to break this province. It was physically going to break 

this province. We would not be able to move forward, doing all 

the good things in this province that we are doing at the present 

time. 

 

You know, they sit there and they condemn us. They condemn 

us for all these things and saying, well you know we won‟t vote 

for this, so we‟re back. They wouldn‟t even vote for our 

historically great income tax cuts. You know, give us a break. 

Give us a break here. We‟re working hard. We‟re working hard 

with the federal government. It‟s much easier to talk and be . . . 

Try and get along, try and get along with the federal 

government rather than sit there and criticize, criticize, criticize 

all the time. 

 

Am I happy we‟re not getting as much as we want from the 

federal government? Absolutely not. Is this party happy we‟re 

not getting everything from the federal government that we 

want? Absolutely not. But I can tell you we‟re getting a heck of 

a lot more out of the federal government than that side ever did 

in 16 years. We are getting . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . You 

know, you just, okay, you just said name it. Let‟s go back. 

 

We just had a historic announcement the other day on twinning 

of Highway 11 — $62 million which is going to speed that up, 

which when we do get our forest industry back and rolling is 

going to help, is going to help because we‟re going to be able to 

have some of our transportation problems fixed up because of 

16 years of neglect. Circle Drive South — $86 million. These 

things are helping. These things are helping. 

 

[12:00] 

 

We have this . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . That‟s right. We 

have the Building Canada fund which is partnering with us; at 

least we‟re going to pick up our share of it. We‟re going to pick 

up $31 million, along with the feds, on $31 million on our 

Building Canada fund which is going to communities, going to 

communities of 100,000 or less. This is great. 

 

Now think back, if you want to think back, to what was 

proposed by the other side here just a matter of a couple of 

years ago. They came out with a fund that basically none of the 

smaller communities could even apply for because you had to 

have a $100,000 project just to be able to apply for any money 

from the government. 

 

We and the federal governments have to try and work together. 

We have to try and work together and move forward. I just find 

it amazing . . . The other thing is we brought out our five-year 

rolling plan, our five-year rolling plan which is going in to our 

highway infrastructure. It‟s going to increase. It‟s going to 

increase our transportation 65 per cent more for a category 1 

highway, I guess you would call it, which will help for the 

transportation within this province to move this province 

forward. 

 

I do not think that the other side can sit there and say, well you 

have to condemn them. It doesn‟t fit. It just doesn‟t fit. 



2172 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2009 

Crop insurance. Crop insurance, I think the federal government 

has been quite accommodating on our crop insurance. 

Remember that our Ag minister has said we actually, as a party, 

will now go and fund our share of the . . . [inaudible] . . . 

program — something that the other side went before and said 

they would fund it, and then when it got around to it, just flat 

out didn‟t do it. 

 

We‟re going to be moving. We‟ve made an agreement with the 

government to be able to move our ag stability back into 

Saskatchewan. So we have it back here which Saskatchewan 

farmers, could deal with Saskatchewan . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Time has run out for debate on the motion 

before the Assembly. It‟s now, we now have time, a 10-minute 

question-answer period. I recognize the member from The 

Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

appreciate the opportunity to ask a question in this debate. The 

member from Biggar made reference in his speech earlier this 

afternoon to a meeting that took place in the town of Biggar. 

Mr. Speaker, our federal Agriculture minister was in Biggar. 

The news media subsequently said that Mr. Ritz recognized that 

some people in the audience there in Biggar wanted a cheque in 

the mail, but others were concerned about the countervail. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to ask the member from Biggar if he 

attended that meeting; if he is in agreement with some of his 

constituents that Mr. Ritz has indicated, believed, that the 

provincial program might be countervailable and certainly that a 

federal one would be. Does the member from Biggar agree with 

those statements? And finally, has the member from Biggar, 

Mr. Speaker, talked directly to the federal Agriculture minister 

with regards to this, and has he indicated that the people of 

Saskatchewan want — want, Mr. Speaker — $60 a head from 

the federal government? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m glad to rise and 

answer that question from the member opposite. Well the 

member opposite should realize that I was in the House that day 

so no, I did not attend the meeting in Biggar. But I am very glad 

that the federal Minister of Agriculture was in Biggar asking the 

agriculture producers of Saskatchewan their opinion on the 

livestock crisis that‟s in the province. 

 

The obvious point of disagreement between the Saskatchewan 

government and the federal government — we believe the 

federal government should ante up their 60 per cent. We put in 

our 40 per cent on the livestock assistance program, and we are 

asking the federal government to do that. 

 

I did not speak to the Minister of Agriculture directly. But I‟ve 

certainly spoken to my MP, and I have relayed that information 

to her on a number of occasions. And I understand that the 

people from Biggar that attended the meeting asked the minister 

for the federal government to contribute their 60 per cent . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Member‟s time has elapsed. Next question. I 

recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, part of the motion that we‟re debating today talks 

about failing miserably to obtain fair treatment for the people of 

Saskatchewan, and that‟s something that the NDP in opposition 

should know very well because they had 16 years of failing 

miserably. 

 

I just want to give a little bit of their track record in my 

question, Mr. Speaker. The NDP eliminated the GRIP program 

for farmers in this province. That was part of their record. They 

wouldn‟t fully fund the CAIS programs upfront. From 2001 to 

2006, the crop insurance premiums, the premiums went up and 

the coverage went down. That‟s their track record. They also 

cut spot loss hail from crop insurance, closed 22 rural extension 

offices, closed 31 rural offices across the province, closed many 

hospitals, school closures, crumbling highways. Their saviour 

was going to be SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility 

Development Company]. They invested $30 million into 

SPUDCO. And guess what? Along with a bunch of other 

ventures and millions of dollars, lost that, and potato producers 

across the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in my question to the member for The Battlefords: 

what makes producers in this province believe that the NDP 

government would have put $90 million into a cattle and hog 

loan in the first year of being in . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The member‟s time has elapsed. I recognize 

the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I know 

that the member opposite had a question in there somewhere. 

He was trying to get to it, and I realize that, with the time 

expired. But, Mr. Speaker, with the little amount of time that I 

have, Mr. Speaker, number one, let‟s set the record straight. 

Every year in CAIS was fully funded by the New Democratic 

Party government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Simple record, Mr. Speaker, you can go into 

Public Accounts and check it. Every year was fully funded. Mr. 

Speaker, but let‟s quote the Leader-Post from July 2008: 

 

Simply put, [and it‟s a quote, Mr. Speaker] Wall and his 

government have allowed themselves to be bullied by 

Harper. 

 

. . . And Wall‟s determination to keep big brother happy 

instead of looking out for Saskatchewan people‟s interests 

is deplorable on several counts. 

 

Regina Leader-Post, July 2008. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — . . . Leader-Post article from July 23, 2008, “11 

MLAs linked to [the] Tories.” The tight connection . . . And this 

is a quote: “The tight connection between the Saskatchewan 

Party and the federal Conservatives is illustrated by documents 



March 5, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2173 

filed with the legislative assembly.” He talks about five cabinet 

ministers who are card-carrying members who are Tories. They 

are six, and I‟ll quote this statement: “Backbench MLAs who 

are Conservative Party members are Michael Chisholm, Greg 

Ottenbreit, Jim Reiter, Laura Ross, Randy Weekes and Jeremy 

Harrison.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to know if the member from Biggar will 

stand in solidarity with the Premier who condemned the federal 

budget by giving it a D. Will he today make a commitment to 

rip up his federal Conservative membership card? Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you for the 

question. Well certainly, my decision to be a member of a 

federal political party is my personal decision and the Premier 

has made it clear that‟s up to us as individuals. And I am proud 

to be a member of the federal Conservative Party. I certainly 

have no problem with that. 

 

As far as the federal budget, the Premier was clear that he 

graded the federal budget as a D. But after consultation and 

discussion, our Premier and our cabinet has worked with the 

federal government to clarify a number of the things that were 

in the budget. And as we mentioned in our speeches here in the 

75-minute debate, we have got a lot more flesh out of the 

budget and information and money coming to the province, and 

we‟re becoming more and more happy with the budget. 

 

But obviously we have one glaring problem with the federal 

Conservative government, is their lack of commitment to the 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: — The member‟s time has elapsed. Next 

question. I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, my question‟s for the member for Regina Lakeview. 

And I just wonder. I would compare our record any day of the 

week in the one year that we‟ve been in power, 15 months, 

compared to the 16 years. 

 

The budget for Agriculture when they left office was $300 

million. In 2008 it‟s up to 444 million and climbing, Mr. 

Speaker — $71 million cattle and hog support program, 

improving crop insurance, AgriStability administration to 

Saskatchewan, expanding extension services, increasing 

education tax rebate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why would the member opposite believe that after 

16 years of neglect for rural Saskatchewan and cattle and hog 

producers in the province, that they would come anywheres 

close from doing a $90 million loan and then on top of that put 

in $71 million for the cattle and hog industry and support for 

rural Saskatchewan and for rural producers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, some of us members around this 

House have been here a long time but we‟ve also been a long 

time within the business community of Saskatchewan. And I 

think the member opposite would acknowledge that his whole, 

big plan that he announced for the cattle industry is basically a 

direct copy of the beef industry assistance plan put forward by 

Mr. Blakeney and the NDP government in 1977, because it was 

exactly the same kind of loans. You even look at the 

documents; I‟m sure that‟s where they are. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the real question in this House is: what kind of 

support does this government provide to the people of 

Saskatchewan in making sure that we as Saskatchewan people 

get a fair deal? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

I have a question for the member from Rosthern-Shellbrook, 

who spoke shortly a few minutes ago, Mr. Speaker. The 

member from Rosthern-Shellbrook said very clearly that when 

he goes home, he gets lots of phone calls. He says, and I quote, 

I‟m the first to hear about the trouble in agriculture. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, Kevin Hursh writing in the Leader-Post also 

says what‟s been happening out there is “. . . not what cattle 

producers have been saying.” When the federal government 

says that the livestock producers can count on them for their 

support, they‟re not getting it from Ottawa. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the farm groups have indicated they need $100 per 

head. The province has put up $40 per head, Mr. Speaker. What 

is the member from Rosthern-Shellbrook telling his constituents 

when they say, where‟s the rest of the money coming from? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, thanks for the question. I believe that I said, when I go 

home the people phone me. Well that‟s what they‟re supposed 

to do. I‟m their MLA. I‟m with the government. So my job is to 

take their concerns and I bring it to our government, which 

happened to be the Ag minister. 

 

But in your comments regarding Kevin Hursh, this is what 

Kevin Hursh has to say in an agricultural commentary, and I 

quote: 

 

Hooray for the Saskatchewan‟s government‟s support for 

the livestock industry. The province has decided to go 

ahead even though the feds have refused to cost share. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question for 

the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

The Speaker: — Time has elapsed. 



2174 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2009 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

Motion No. 1 — Saskatchewan’s Uranium Industry 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by Mr. Harrison.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood River. 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m very 

pleased today to rise and continue with the debate on the motion 

put forward by my colleague. 

 

On December 4, Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity to present 

some opening remarks on this very topical subject, and I would 

like to today continue with my remarks. And in order to do that, 

I would like to refresh the memories of people by reading the 

motion into the record again. And the motion reads: 

 

That the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan supports 

the consideration of further value-added development of 

Saskatchewan‟s uranium industry including nuclear power 

generation and recognizes the potential benefits to the 

growth and prosperity of the people of our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can assure everyone in this Assembly that I am 

very, very supportive of this motion. We do realize and our 

government supports adding value to our raw uranium 

resources here in Saskatchewan will support the long-term 

prosperity of our province and our people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the federal government in its last year‟s budget 

had reported . . . or there‟s language in it that signalled that 

there was a desire to pursue the next generation of Canadian 

reactor technology. And we, on this side of the House, believe 

that we should be at the forefront of that technology, leading the 

way. We have companies here in the province — uranium 

companies, such as AREVA and Cameco — who have by way 

of experience and hands-on involvement in the value chain in 

other jurisdictions where they operate. So why would we not go 

ahead and have the value added in this province also? 

 

[12:15] 

 

We have this natural advantage for us, and we should be 

leading in this regard. It‟s obviously our vision, as a 

government, that we would look at the value chain in refining 

and enrichment and potentially the power side of the nuclear 

industry. Since Canada is the world‟s largest producer of 

natural uranium and the world moves to reduce greenhouse gas 

emissions, many countries, including Canadians, are looking to 

nuclear power as a source of clean, reliable electricity. And our 

government wants to develop nuclear power to help grow the 

Saskatchewan economy and help with the GHGs or greenhouse 

gas emissions. 

 

Also, and I will expand on this a little further, but nuclear 

power will generate billions of dollars in economic activity in 

this province, and I will go further on that. The development of 

nuclear power would contribute to the economic 

competitiveness of our province. The new nuclear revival 

around the world will see increased employment in the design, 

construction, operation, and maintenance of nuclear reactors, as 

well as uranium mining, processing, reprocessing, and 

enrichment. The only way that Saskatchewan would be able to 

participate is if we became part of the nuclear industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if we do not have a presence in the nuclear 

industry, we‟ll be left outside looking in. All we have to do is 

look at what happened in the past. We have countries now that 

are promoting nuclear enhancement — the US, Russia, China, 

France, India. Other countries are developing new technologies 

and new reactor technology. And once again, if we do not get to 

the forefront of this, Saskatchewan, like when the NDP were in 

power, will be left behind. We will not and cannot accept that. 

 

While we‟re looking forward, we see people across the way that 

are stuck in the past and looking to the past. And I would just 

like to emphasize some of this with some quotes. And these are 

not my words. They actually come from members opposite. 

And I would like to put them to the record, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And here is one from March 22, 1990. And this is how 

far back the dialogue on the nuclear industry has gone — back 

into the ‟80s when members opposite actually marched against 

a plant being put forward in Saskatchewan for the processing of 

uranium. 

 

And the march on the plant, the Leader of the Opposition was a 

member of that who was totally, totally opposed to any 

enrichment, enhancement of the uranium product in the 

province of Saskatchewan. In other words, what you have to 

look at is the mentality of the NDP socialist government that 

they say, we can mine it, but then we won‟t look at doing 

anything more. We can sell this product and get it out of our 

hair. We‟ll let somebody else reap the profits of processing, 

reap the proceeds of all of the other processing items. And also 

that chased our technology away from the province. 

 

But I‟d like to put some quotes on the record. And this is from 

Peter Prebble: “The Government of Saskatchewan should phase 

out uranium mining in the province . . .” 

 

And I‟d like to put that into context, and I will really get at 

some figures here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But they wanted to 

phase out uranium mining in the province. Look at what this 

industry brings into this province, the billions of dollars it 

brings in, and the potential that it could have brought in had‟ve 

we had a then government that was a little bit forward-looking 

and not ideologically bound against the nuclear industry. 

 

Peter Prebble also stated, “. . . as long as I am in this legislature, 

I will continue to oppose that practice [of uranium mining] . . .” 

That must be fun sitting in that caucus with people that are just 

totally opposed to it. And I‟ll get further on this because there 

are one or two maybe that go along with the concept. 

 

And Peter Prebble also said: 

 

We don‟t need a nuclear reactor in the province . . . 

 

. . . uranium mining in the province of Saskatchewan 

should be phased out until such time as there are proper 



March 5, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2175 

international safeguards in place to prevent uranium being 

diverted for military purposes. 

 

The narrow-minded mentality of some of the people thinking 

that uranium mining was only for military purpose is such a 

small, small mind that it should be embarrassing for members 

opposite that one of their members would even stand up and say 

that. 

 

Now we fast-forward a few years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and this 

is very important because I have two quotes here from the now 

Leader of the Opposition, and they‟re two quotes. And if you 

listen very carefully and see that there‟s not even a subtle 

difference, there‟s a huge difference in these quotes. And I 

would like members to take note of the dates on these also. The 

first one is from the Leader-Post of November 2, 2005, 

November 2. And as reported: 

 

Calvert said the province would consider any business 

case to establish a reactor or nuclear waste storage facility 

in the province . . .  

 

[Further] . . . as a province that mines and benefits 

economically from uranium, it is our responsibility “as 

citizens of the globe” to share in the burden of dealing 

with all the byproducts of its use. 

 

Now I would like that to be registered in individuals‟ minds 

because that was as of November 2. Now on November 3 the 

same year, 24 hours later, in the Leader-Post, and this is what 

the Leader of the Opposition said: 

 

“Let me say today . . . [definitely], the answer is no. 

Under my leadership in this province there will not be in 

Saskatchewan a nuclear waste disposal facility” . . .  

 

“They could come, I would consider it and I would say 

no” . . . 

 

Now just to refresh your memory, we‟ll go back the previous 24 

hours where the leader said “. . . any business case to establish a 

reactor or nuclear waste storage facility in the province . . .” he 

would consider. Does that remind anybody of things you wear 

on your feet called flip-flops? And I don‟t know how many 

members on the other side are on the fence on this issue. 

They‟ll flip on one side and they‟ll flop on the other. I don‟t 

know if they, even as a caucus, have any idea where they are 

going on this very, very important item. 

 

Now we go a day later where I‟ll repeat what he said a day 

later: the answer is no, that he would not consider it. I don‟t 

know how one can shave in the morning after actually saying 

the opposite things day after day. 

 

Now we have other members of the caucus at that time, and this 

is a quote from Eric Cline: “If you benefit from the mining of 

uranium or the use of uranium in your nuclear reactors — you 

can‟t then wash your hands of all the other issues.” So in other 

words, one member of caucus was very much in favour of all of 

the cycle of uranium. 

 

Now we fast-forward to October 2005 with one of the 

leadership hopefuls, Mr. Lingenfelter, and he said — members 

should like this across the way — „“If Tommy . . . were here, it 

would be exactly what he would be doing‟ . . .” I wonder how 

many over there agree that Tommy would be actually doing 

that. 

 

He also stated: 

 

“The opportunity is big. The only question is can we reach 

out and grab it?” . . . “It‟s got to do with what‟s best for 

the economy and the environment at this moment” . . . 

 

So here we have, here we have what I would consider, on that 

side of the House, a House divided. We have one member of 

caucus saying, absolutely no, and another former member of 

caucus, a former deputy premier that‟s saying, we have to go 

this way. It‟s the only way that we can go in the province to 

help our economic situation. 

 

Now I would like to continue with a few quotes because I think 

this is necessary to establish the flip-flop position of the 

members opposite. And this is from the Leader of the 

Opposition in 2003, and he quoted a little quote: 

 

“The notion that you could build a reactor that‟s economic 

is a very, very questionable assumption. And this isn‟t a 

clean source of power. It‟s probably the dirtiest, given 

what comes out the tailpipe . . .” 

 

Here we have the then premier, now the Leader of the 

Opposition, saying nuclear power is the dirtiest form of energy. 

The dirtiest form of energy. I wonder if his eyes are opened yet 

to reality. And I do have some reality checks that I would like 

to read in later. 

 

This is a quote from 2005, and I quote, “In the ‟80s the NDP 

platform called for the phase out of uranium mining.” Well I 

mentioned that, but that‟s an NDP platform to phase out 

uranium mining. How can we look at growing the province and 

expanding our natural resources base when we have people in 

government that want to phase out mining? That‟s almost as 

bad as them saying now that we should phase out oil because 

somebody in the United States is saying we‟ve got dirty oil. I 

wonder if they should say we should phase out oil exploration. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, here‟s another quote from The StarPhoenix, 

and it says that “„We all agree that the demand for uranium is 

increasing as fossil fuels run out and that there may be greater 

economic opportunities in the future‟. . .” And this is from the 

Leader of the Opposition. Again I think, I think for individuals 

to understand where the NDP government is coming from — 

and this is their leader that‟s saying these things — he‟s all over 

the map. I don‟t believe we have a map big enough to record 

where he is on this issue. He‟s all over the place, from no to yes 

to maybe to we‟ll see. Or tomorrow I‟ll decide different. Or 

yesterday I said that. But although you understand what I said, 

what I said is not what I meant in the first place. Who knows 

where they‟re at. 

 

There‟s one here that I‟d really like to talk about also, and this 

is from 2004. And it‟s a quote from The StarPhoenix. And I‟ll 

quote: 

 

Asked recently about the notion of building a nuclear 



2176 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2009 

reactor in northern Saskatchewan to power Alberta‟s oil 

sands development, Premier Lorne Calvert called it a 

“horrendous” proposal. 

 

Now that might go unnoticed to a few. But you have to really 

look up what horrendous means. And horrendous in the 

dictionary says it‟s horrifying. So here we have the then premier 

of the province saying that a nuclear reactor would be 

horrifying. 

 

Does this remind members on our side a little bit about the fear? 

The fear that is perpetuated by the NDP. Whether it‟s an 

election or no matter what, they want to get their agenda 

forward or try to get their agenda forward, is through fear? Not 

through common sense. Not through practical means. It‟s 

through fear and fear alone. And here we have the then premier 

using the word horrendous which is horrifying. So it‟s a 

horrifying notion to want to build a nuclear reactor. 

 

Now again you have to kind of follow me on this map that‟s all 

over the place, and I can‟t pinpoint where he is on the whole 

nuclear file. But I do know where he was around June 27, 2006, 

and I‟ll quote: “Premier Lorne Calvert is in France to promote 

greater Saskatchewan development of the uranium industry . . .” 

 

Well this horrifying, this horrifying industry we‟re now trying 

to promote. So one day again, is it a little bit of a flip or a little 

bit of a flop? We‟re not sure. But one day, one day it‟s 

horrifying, and the next day he‟s in France trying to promote 

the development of the uranium industry in this province. 

 

And this is from The StarPhoenix. And I should read it because 

I thought it was kind of cute. And I quote. It says: 

 

Calvert should be lauded for his European vacation. After 

decades of destructive fence-sitting — allowing primary 

nuclear development but acting as if the product is 

morally tainted when it comes to milling, refining, using it 

to make energy and ultimately disposing of its waste back 

from where it came — the NDP government seems to 

finally be recognizing that Saskatchewan has a role to 

play in cleaning up energy production. 

 

[12:30] 

 

Now that is a quote from The StarPhoenix, but there‟s an awful 

lot of tidbits in there that relate back to, I wonder where the 

caucus sits on these issues. Because here you‟ve got a look at a 

premier that‟s over in France trying to sell and promote greater 

Saskatchewan development in the uranium industry, but here is 

the party that is saying that it‟s morally tainted, morally tainted 

when it comes to the milling, refining, using it to make energy. 

So where do people actually sit on the issue? We do not know 

where the NDP caucus sits on that issue. 

 

Now there‟s some of these that I think are very much worth 

repeating. One moment we have considering a nuclear waste 

facility, the next day not doing it, saying absolutely no. So, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, we even had the leader, the potential leader, 

the outsourced candidate for the NDP, that even congratulated 

one of our members for stepping up and making positive 

statements about the industry. 

 

And the outsourced potential leader of the NDP is very strong, 

committed to the nuclear industry, and I would like to know 

where the other potential leadership hopefuls stand on the issue. 

We know where the current Leader of the Opposition stands —

that‟s all over the map. There‟s no doubt about it. He‟s all over 

the map. We know where Mr. Lingenfelter is on this very, very 

important topic. He‟s very pro-nuclear enhancement industries 

in this province. 

 

We don‟t know where two of the other members sit. But there is 

one, one of the leadership candidates from Saskatoon, and I‟m 

going to come back with this one because this is very, very 

important, not only for the nuclear industry, but for other 

aspects of NDP policy within the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And this is from the website of the NDP leadership hopeful 

from Saskatoon. On his website, his policy principles say, 

“Policy has no sacred cows.” I think that‟s something that we 

all should think about. Here‟s an NDP leadership hopeful that 

has no sacred cows. So to the nuclear industry, he‟s in favour of 

every aspect of the nuclear industry. You can read into it that he 

is fair with all of that. Although very, very leftist, he still thinks 

— obviously because there‟s no sacred cows — that this 

industry could go forward. 

 

But here‟s the other one I‟d really like to address, and I can do 

it at this moment. There are no sacred cows, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, therefore he wants to privatize SaskTel. He wants to 

privatize SaskPower. He wants to privatize SaskEnergy. He 

wants to privatize STC [Saskatchewan Transportation 

Company]. So there are no sacred cows. So now we have a 

leader — potential — of the NDP that wants to privatize all the 

Crown corporations because he says right on his website that 

there are no sacred cows. So he is willing, he is willing to take 

his leadership hopeful to the membership of the socialist 

organization and say, I wish to privatize all of the Crowns. 

 

I wonder if that‟ll fly in the face of some of the members 

opposite. I would suggest . . . no, maybe they‟ll be behind him. 

I‟m not too sure, but maybe they‟ll be behind him. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have a number of more quotes here, 

but here‟s one I suppose I should put on record. It‟s another 

Lingenfelter quote and this is from 2005, and I quote and it 

says, “Former NDP deputy premier Dwain Lingenfelter not 

only champions building nuclear power plants in Saskatchewan, 

but also embraces locating a nuclear waste facility in the 

province — two ideas his former colleagues have refused to 

entertain [refused to entertain].” 

 

Well that‟s depending if it was on November 2 or November 3. 

Well on the second, I think, some would have entertained it. On 

November 3, no way we‟ll entertain it, absolutely not. So I 

think one could determine from this that, on this issue, they 

could be considered a house divided. Now, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I would like to get into a few more reasons why an 

enhancement of the nuclear industry in this province is very, 

very important. And why there‟s reasons why the NDP are 

against it. 

 

You know, it‟s kind of ironic. It‟s kind of ironic. We have . . . 

and there was discussion about a federal issue here in our 

debate earlier, but here we have an NDP caucus that is beholden 



March 5, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2177 

to their federal leader. And they are so beholden to him that 

they back him hook, line, and sinker. And here we have a 

debate on the nuclear industry in this province that is extremely, 

extremely important for this province. And we have, as I 

mentioned, a house divided over there. Well maybe yes; well 

maybe no; well I don‟t know; I‟ll sit on the fence — who knows 

where they sit. 

 

But they weren‟t divided, they were not divided when they were 

willing to have open discussions with their leader in Ottawa, 

having open discussions to find ways to divide this country. All 

we have to do is go back to what happened last fall. They were 

supportive where we had the leader of the NDP and the leader 

of the separatists — the Jack and Gilles show — that was going 

to combine with the Liberals to form a coalition government. So 

here we have members opposite that they‟re supporting their 

federal leader that wanted to divide the country. 

 

They wanted to break up the country. And they supported it. 

They supported it through their membership and ideology that, 

oh yes, we got to support Jack. And so they‟re in favour of 

splitting up the country, but they‟re not in favour of having an 

open debate on the nuclear industry in this province. Well they 

might have a debate. Some would be maybe yes; some would 

be maybe no; some would be I‟ll think about it. Some would sit 

on the fence until they see how one of their seatmates went, and 

then they‟d fall in that direction possibly. Who knows. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to talk about a few 

reasons why we should develop nuclear power in 

Saskatchewan. And there are many. And I think people on this 

side of the House know why we should develop the nuclear 

cycle and have nuclear power in this province. 

 

It‟s amazing, isn‟t it? We had out-migration in this province for 

years under a socialist government. People wanted to migrate 

away. And we‟ll get excuses from the other side of the House. 

We‟ll hear things like the economy. 

 

Well, who created that atmosphere? And they‟ll blame 

somebody from the ‟80s or the ‟20s or back in the start of . . . 

Maybe it was Palliser that they wanted to blame because he is 

the one that said nobody should live here in the first place. 

They‟ll find . . . They‟re living in the past. They‟ll blame 

somebody from the past. 

 

But we, but we want to look forward. We want to look forward. 

So now we can. We can look at . . . While they were chasing 

jobs away, today we‟re bringing people back because of what 

we believe in, and having a business-friendly province. 

 

But how about if we have the nuclear industry up and running 

in this province like it should have been back when members 

opposite were campaigning solidly against any enhancement of 

the nuclear industry? What would have happened then if we 

would have had an expanded nuclear industry 20 or 15 or how 

many years ago? 

 

It doesn‟t matter. Today, today we know that if we expand the 

nuclear industry, it can create thousands, thousands of new jobs 

and high paying jobs in this province. And I‟m going to repeat, 

thousands of jobs. 

 

Now you have to put it into context of what we lived with for 

16 years. Chasing people out of the province; why would 

anybody want to do that? Why would anybody develop policies 

that people would actually leave our great province? Well you 

know that‟s a very, very interesting thought, is why they would 

do it. 

 

Well they kept their base, and as mentioned by one of their 

members back then, the more people leave the province, the 

more is left for the rest of us here. And that was Eldon 

Lautermilch that said that, and I don‟t buy that. They can sit and 

they can . . . Maybe they believe that quote, but ladies and 

gentlemen, I do not believe that if people leave this province, 

there is more left for the rest of us that are here. That is absurd. 

That is totally absurd. And that fits right with the statement 

made by the then premier, now the Leader of the Opposition: 

we are a wee province. We will always be a wee province. 

 

How do you attract business into this province? How do you 

expand a nuclear industry in this province with a mentality such 

as that? That we are a wee province; we will never be anything 

but a wee province; there‟s more left for the rest of us if 

everybody leaves. How do you attract businesses? Well there‟s 

another way that it was difficult to attract business also, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. If you have a Bill on the legislative books that 

says the government of the day can take over any industry in 

this province à la what was used in the potash industry takeover 

back in the . . . What was that, what was the Premier‟s name in 

those days? Anyway it was a Premier back in . . . Not that many 

people care, I guess. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Allan something. 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Allan, whatever it was, he brought this 

Bill in to take over the potash industry. And that was still on the 

books until we formed government. So if you‟re doing due 

diligence in your business, and you look at the Saskatchewan 

website and look at what the climate is in Saskatchewan, and 

you see that the government can take over any business due to 

this Bill, you‟d probably have second thoughts of wanting to 

invest in this province. That probably fit right into the socialist 

ideology, but it sure doesn‟t fit in with our ideology 

whatsoever. 

 

But then, then again if you had a business, whether it be in the 

nuclear business or not, that did a little bit further due diligence, 

and you called up the NDP website, and one of the first things 

on there was the Regina Manifesto, would you really, really 

want to come into this province and start a business when 

basically in the Regina Manifesto says that they‟re — to 

paraphrase — they‟re anti-business. They will not rest until free 

enterprise in this province is done with. And if you‟re doing due 

diligence and you see that, why on earth would any, any 

company — I don‟t care what company it is — want to come to 

this province? And yet they sit and say well, it was the 

economic times of the day. We lost people. 

 

Well it was pretty obvious to me and those of us on this side of 

the House that if you have that kind of a policy, how are you 

going to attract business? And we know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

that — what is it? — 60 to 70 per cent of all jobs are created by 

small business. But even if you had a small business, would you 

want to set up here with that kind of a mentality from the then 



2178 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2009 

government? I would think not. 

 

Now to the nuclear industry, just how the jobs can be created, 

it‟s estimated that to properly operate a reactor, it will create 

150 highly trained nuclear engineers, scientists, and physicists. 

So these aren‟t just small jobs, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They‟re 

very, very high-paying jobs. They‟d require a minimum of a 

university degree in the nuclear field, in some cases a 

post-graduate degree. And further there‟d be requirements for 

720 reactor operators, mechanical and electrical maintenance 

workers, chemists and chemical technicians, physics and 

radiation technicians, and other managers. Many of these 

positions require a couple or three years of specialized training, 

and so they would be very high-paying jobs also. 

 

[12:45] 

 

This, Mr. Deputy Speaker, would generate billions of dollars — 

billions of dollars in this province. That would definitely 

broaden our tax base which would allow us to do the things that 

we have already started to do in this province — allow us to 

keep our taxes low and pay for other initiatives that we have 

brought forward. 

 

And I think it‟s probably appropriate right now, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, to talk of some of those initiatives. You have to again 

realize with all of this money that could be generated from the 

nuclear industry, what would we do with this money? Well I 

could suggest, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we might reinstate the 

Saskatchewan mineral exploration tax credit to encourage 

ongoing sustainable development of Saskatchewan‟s mineral 

resources. Would we do that? Oh no. 

 

By the way, we did that. In the 2008-2009 budget, we reinstated 

the 10 per cent Saskatchewan mineral exploration tax credit. So 

if we had the additional money from the nuclear industry, just it 

opens a myriad of ideas what we could do with the money. 

 

But I‟d like to go ahead with a few more. We would ensure that 

Saskatchewan is a member of North American international 

energy and economic organizations. We would ensure that. Oh 

sorry, we already did that. We kept that promise. That was a 

promise that we made, and that‟s a promise that we kept. We‟ve 

joined The Energy Council, the Interstate Oil and Gas Compact 

Commission, and PNWER [Pacific NorthWest Economic 

Region]. Now if we have resources from something like the 

nuclear industry, allows us to do that. It allows us the extra 

dollars to do that. 

 

Now I‟d like to comment on the membership in The Energy 

Council just for a moment because again, we think forward; 

we‟re not stuck in the past. And I‟d like to just comment on 

what was said prior. 

 

The then minister, Eric Cline, talked about why would we want 

to join The Energy Council when we can attend for nothing. So, 

as has been eloquently stated by our leader, now the Premier, he 

said, here was the NDP wanted to go to The Energy Council 

and not pay their dues but stand at the back and swipe muffins 

during the coffee break. And also at The Energy Council, even 

if there was a representative from the then government at The 

Energy Council, at coffee break they would have somebody to 

talk to because Venezuela was a member. They could go talk 

their socialist ideas over in the corner with the leader from 

Venezuela. 

 

So that was a promise that we kept. But with money — and 

again thinking into the future — money generated from the 

nuclear industry, what more could we do and what more have 

we done? And I‟d like to again talk about a couple of promises 

that we have made. 

 

We made the promise that we‟d double the green initiatives 

fund by providing an additional $40 million over four years. 

That was a promise kept. The 2008-09 budget commits $10 

million increase for green initiatives. So the point that I‟m 

getting at here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is if we expand our nuclear 

industry, it provides us with resources and we can go ahead and 

do a lot more for this province. 

 

In this last year, we have kept over 80 promises that we made 

during the election campaign — over 80. We were able to do 

that in one year. Now with an expanded tax base, with an 

enhancement of the nuclear industry and the billions of dollars 

that it would create, just think where this province could go. It 

could be a leader in all aspects of, you name it. And we are very 

much on this side of the House in favour of that. Members 

opposite, some of them have their head in the sand yet. That‟s 

the old ostrich theory. If you put your head in the sand, you 

know not what goes around about you. 

 

Now Bruce Power, their feasibility study, it‟s worth noting, and 

I‟m going to quote you some numbers here in the next few 

minutes. 

 

The construction and 60 year operation of a nuclear 

facility in Saskatchewan would have a significant and 

stabilizing impact on the province‟s economy for decades 

to come. 

 

A 60-year operation. 

 

Bruce Power has conducted an assessment to determine 

economic impacts . . . [in the province of] Saskatchewan 

of a two unit nuclear plant build assuming operation in 

2018. 

 

Now the construction impact. 

 

During site preparation and construction the project would 

contribute about $4 billion to the provincial economy 

including $1.4 billion in labour income. 

 

Now how could we even have members opposite think anything 

against this 1.4 billion in labour income? Now, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, you have to ask yourself, would the member from 

Cumberland vote against this for enhancement of the nuclear 

industry? Look at the jobs that that can create in the North; the 

opportunities to be created in the North. Would the member 

from Cumberland vote against this? How about the member 

from Athabasca? 

 

Look at the hundreds and maybe thousands of jobs that could be 

created in the North. You think the member from Athabasca 

could stand in his place and justify voting against enhancement 

of the nuclear industry in this province? The billions of dollars, 



March 5, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2179 

and yet you look around the caucus there, and how many of 

those people will vote against it? How can they possibly in their 

own conscience vote against it? And I would ask the member 

from Cumberland and the member from Athabasca who 

represent the North, can they in good conscience vote against 

something like this that would add thousands of jobs to the 

North? It would add millions and millions of dollars to the 

economy of the North. 

 

And while I‟m on that topic, I would just like to tell a little bit 

of insight when I was up at the nuclear mine and visiting the 

mine. After a tour of the mine we stopped and had coffee. And 

the person that was touring us around the mine, I‟d made a 

comment about the goodies or the snacks that they had and he 

said, oh he said, this is a company that we have. And I said, 

really — and this should be very important for the member 

from Cumberland and from Athabasca — I said boy, it was 

very, very good snacks that they had put forward. And he said 

yes, it‟s a company. 

 

He said, these two ladies were working for us and really doing 

good work. So he said, I approached the two ladies and I said, 

why do you not form a company and provide all the food 

service for us at this mine? And their immediate reaction was 

oh, we don‟t know that much about business; we don‟t think we 

could do that. And they said, well why don‟t you give it a try? 

We will give you some assistance. 

 

Now these two ladies have a very, very profitable and 

prosperous company to provide food services in the North. Can 

the members opposite stand up and vote against something like 

that? Can they vote against young entrepreneurs that want to do 

some good in the North? How can these people even think 

about getting up and voting against something like that? 

 

Now also, also, the construction impact. The project would 

generate a total of 20,000 direct and indirect jobs — 20,000 

jobs. And I‟m wondering, I‟m wondering again if anybody on 

that side would vote against 20,000 jobs in this province. 

 

“During the peak year of construction the project will directly 

and indirectly contribute approximately 2.2 per cent of 

provincial GDP and 48 per cent of the GDP in the host region.” 

Forty-eight per cent in the host region. Very, very attractive to 

the province of Saskatchewan and extremely attractive to the 

host region. This project alone could just boost the economy of 

Saskatchewan like no other project has. 

 

Now I‟d like to talk a little bit about the operating impacts, now 

20,000 jobs during the period of construction. And the 

implementation project, about 1,000 full-time jobs and about 

900 indirect jobs. So about 1,900 full-time and indirect jobs to 

the plan. This would contribute about $240 million to the 

provincial economy. In fact the construction of a nuclear power 

station in Saskatchewan would be the largest single 

infrastructure project ever undertaken in our province. 

 

Now we wonder what kind of revenue that would bring to 

Saskatchewan, and I‟ve mentioned some of it. But throughout 

the construction phase of the project, total tax revenues 

generated would be about $1.8 billion — 1.8 billion. During the 

60 years of operation, the project would contribute over $10 

billion in government revenues — 10 billion. 

And you know, what is quite ironic, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

want to talk a little bit about greenhouse gases before my time 

runs out today. I‟m just about finished my introductory remarks 

now. I‟ll get into my speech at the next session. 

 

But greenhouse gases, now we‟ve had a former premier say this 

is the dirtiest form of energy. Well I think even members 

opposite would disagree with him now. I‟m sure that they 

would say, no, no, the greenhouse gas emissions, this is a clean 

energy source because greenhouse gas emissions are greatly 

reduced. Look at what that would do. It would help out our 

non-renewable resources, spread them out farther, albeit nuclear 

might be considered a non-renewable resource, but there‟s a 

long ways to go on that. And as we know, we only use about 10 

per cent of the energy from the rods right now. With technology 

coming in the future, that could easily be expanded. It is now, 

but it‟s not economically viable to use more than the 10 per cent 

of the rods. 

 

But the greenhouse gas emissions, and here on one hand we talk 

about we want to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, but we 

close our eyes to nuclear. We close our eyes. They do, not us. 

And here if you looked at the one-point-some-million tonne per 

year of GHGs that would be reduced if we had a nuclear 

generating facility — 1.9 million tonne a year. And yet we will 

see . . . But how many people over there will vote against it? 

How many will stand up and vote against the reduction of 

GHGs because we have a nuclear facility? 

 

As I‟ve already mentioned, the mining. We create an industry in 

this province, and I have to state, Mr. Speaker, that it‟s not just 

us that‟s looking at expanding the nuclear industry. As I 

mentioned earlier, other countries are looking at expanding the 

technology base, but also the incorporation of nuclear reactors. 

You know, we have countries right now that are looking at 

nuclear reactors because of pollution. They realize that the 

nuclear reactor with its no greenhouse or limited greenhouse 

gas emissions is far better than coal until we get clean coal 

technology developed. So other counties are going to nuclear. 

Places like France, it‟s about 70 per cent of their power is 

generated nuclear. 

 

So this all adds up that when we produce about 23 per cent or 

plus of uranium, that if there‟s more demand in the world, it‟s 

going to mean more demand for our resources in Saskatchewan, 

which is going to mean more jobs for people in the North. 

Again I look to our members from Cumberland and Athabasca. 

This is creating jobs in the North. This would create really 

good-paying jobs in the North for our citizens of the northern 

part of this province. How could anybody stand up and vote 

against an enhancement of jobs in the province, in the northern 

part of the province, Mr. Deputy Speaker? They deserve good 

jobs, they deserve high-paying jobs. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Time of adjournment having been 

reached, this House now stands adjourned until 1:30 on 

Monday afternoon. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 13:00.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2153 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2153 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2153 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2153 

  LeClerc .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2154 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2154 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2154 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2154 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2154 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2154 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2155 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 33rd Kinsmen Telemiracle 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2155 

 Annual Award to Trade Unionists 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2155 

 International Adult Learning Week 

  LeClerc .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2155 

 Juniper Manor Opening 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2156 

 International Women’s Day 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2156 

 Donations to Heart of the City Piano Program  

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2156 

 Saskatchewan Takes Centre Stage 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2157 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Provision of SaskTel Services 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2157 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2157 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2158 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Government Investment in Transportation Projects 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2161 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2162 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Federal-Provincial Relations 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2163 

  Weekes ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2165, 2172 

  Nilson ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2166, 2173 

  Allchurch ....................................................................................................................................................................... 2168, 2173 

  Taylor ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2169, 2172 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2171 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2172 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2172 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 Motion No. 1 — Saskatchewan’s Uranium Industry 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2174 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 


