




















































Hansard: May 06, 2009


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 59A  WEDNESDAY, MAY 6, 2009, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2961 

 May 6, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

Clerk: — Members, I wish to advise you that Mr. Speaker is 

not present today to open today’s sitting. 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Prince Albert Carlton. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And to 

you and through you to all members of this Legislative 

Assembly, I have the privilege this afternoon of introducing 

seven guests sitting in your gallery, Mr. Deputy Speaker, from 

Prince Albert. If you could just give a wave when I mention 

your name, please. Fern Fernie who is the chairperson of the 

elder abuse prevention committee in Prince Albert; Sandy 

Pitzel, the coordinator of the elder abuse prevention committee 

and also she is with the Community Against Family Violence. 

 

We have Sandy’s children today with us: Leon, Julianna, and 

Judson. And I might add Judson was in my wife’s class last 

year in Prince Albert; so he’s a very smart student, I’ll have you 

know that. And we have with us today Gail Kentzel-Taylor who 

is the manager of housing services for the Prince Albert 

Housing Authority. And last but not least, Julie Pitzel, Sandy’s 

mom, who is the Aboriginal resource officer for the Prince 

Albert Police Service victim services section, who I had the 

privilege of working with for the last eight years of my life as a 

member of the police service. 

 

And today I’d like to tell you that they’re here in Regina 

attending the United Against Elder Abuse seminar. So I’d like 

to have all members please welcome them to the Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — I’d like to also welcome our guests to the 

legislature. I attended this seminar yesterday and heard your 

presentation and I really learned a lot. And I appreciate the 

work that you do and wanted to also say congratulations and 

good work on behalf of the opposition. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Wood River. 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, in the west gallery we have 25 grade 8 

students from the fine community of Wymark that I would like 

to introduce and welcome to their legislature this afternoon. 

They’re accompanied by teachers Amy Satre, Garnet Dyck; 

chaperones Brent Nelson and Ed Wiebe. I stopped earlier to see 

the folks. I didn’t have a chance to talk to them, but Brad 

Gasper is one that usually shows up with the Wymark School, 

and unfortunately he’s not well today and couldn’t make the 

trip. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ll be meeting right after question 

period with this group for a short period of time, and I would 

ask all members of the Assembly to please welcome them to 

their Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Regina Douglas Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

my pleasure to introduce to you a group from Douglas Park 

School from the constituency of — well you guessed it — 

Regina Douglas Park. Now I know that members always talk 

about bright, inquisitive students, even though they haven’t met 

with them. 

 

But I met with this particular group and I can tell you this is a 

group of very bright, inquisitive students, and it was a delight to 

meet with them. They’re grade 3 and 4 students at Regina 

Douglas Park School, and they’re accompanied by their teacher, 

Joanne Patron, and also two chaperones, Sandy Schick and 

Leasa Gibbons. Leasa might be known to the members of the 

Assembly as she was a Page here at one time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask all the members to please join me in 

extending a very warm welcome to this group of students and 

their chaperones. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thanks, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

want to join with the member for Wood River in welcoming 

this group from Wymark School. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe 

there’s a few there who reside in the Swift Current constituency 

and some I know well. And I’ll take this opportunity to 

embarrass Amy Funk who’s in the back row there. And I want 

to just join with the member from Wood River in welcoming 

them to their Legislative Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Kelvington-Wadena. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am really 

delighted today to introduce two members of the Thunderchild 

First Nation. We have with us today councillor Albert Meetoos. 

Councillor Meetoos’s portfolio includes Thunder Employment 

and Field Services as well as specific claims. And we also have 

Darryle Weekusk. He’s the director of economic development 

and general manager of Thunder Employment and Field 

Services. 

 



2962 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2009 

I am delighted to work in co-operation with the Minister of 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour to help provide 

skills and training support at Thunderchild. I ask everyone to 

please help me in welcoming two gentlemen to their Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Regina Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 

official opposition, I’d like to join with the Minister of First 

Nations and Métis Relations and welcome councillor Albert 

Meetoos and general manager Darryle Weekusk from the 

Thunderchild First Nation. I want to say Ta wow; welcome to 

your Legislative Assembly on behalf of the official opposition. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to present 

a petition in support of indexing of minimum wage. And, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, we all understand that the increases in 

minimum wage help low-income wage earners be able to 

maintain the level of earning that they require as the cost of 

living increases. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to indexing Saskatchewan 

minimum wage to ensure that the standard of living of 

minimum wage earners is maintained in the face of cost of 

living increases. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the petition is signed by residents of Saskatoon and 

Regina, and I so submit. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

rise today to present a petition calling for wage equity for CBO 

[community-based organization] workers. And we know, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that many of the workers who work for 

community-based organizations in Saskatchewan have 

traditionally been underpaid, and many continue to earn 

poverty-level wages. I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the development and 

implementation of a multi-year funding plan to ensure that 

CBO workers achieve wage equity with employees who 

perform work of equal value in government departments. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, these folks come from Saskatoon, 

Martensville, Vanscoy, and Estevan. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Regina Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

a petition on behalf of rural residents of Saskatchewan who 

question why the Sask Party government is leaving them behind 

with respect to providing safe and affordable water. And the 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to financially assist the town of Duck Lake 

residents for the good of their health and safety due to the 

exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency, and that this government fulfills its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good 

residents of Duck Lake, Rosthern, and Saskatoon. I so present. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition in support of fairness for students here in 

Saskatchewan through the necessary expansion of the graduate 

retention program. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately expand the graduate retention 

program to include master’s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are a 

number of health care professionals working here in the 

province, many who have graduate degrees. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

to pave Highway No. 135 that runs through Pelican Narrows, 

Saskatchewan. This petition is signed by the leadership and 

community members of Pelican Narrows First Nation, the 

village of Pelican Narrows and area. Their prayer reads as 

follows: 

 



May 6, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2963 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to pave the 7 kilometres of Highway 135 

through the community of Pelican Narrows, as committed 

on August 24, 2007. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by the good citizens of Pelican Narrows. I so 

present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

National Hospice Palliative Care Week 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, May 3 to 9 is National Hospice 

Palliative Care Week. The vision of the Canadian Hospice 

Palliative Association is that all Canadians would have access 

to quality end-of-life care. This type of care focuses on the 

whole person and aims to relieve suffering and improve the 

quality of living and dying. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a variety of health professionals are involved in 

palliative care, including but not limited to physicians, nurses, 

social workers, spiritual advises, occupational therapists, 

physiotherapists, music therapists, and pharmacists. Through a 

collaborative approach, these care providers are able to care for 

the whole person during the final stages of life. 

 

Any person who has experienced having a loved one spend time 

in palliative care is able to speak first-hand of the competence 

and compassion displayed by the professionals working in this 

field. For these individuals, their work is not simply a job, but a 

calling. I know this is the case for my wife who, I’m proud to 

say, works in the palliative care unit at St. Paul’s Hospital. 

 

Mr. Speaker, here at home, palliative caregivers are members of 

the Saskatchewan Hospice Palliative Care Association, a 

member organization of the national association. At the end of 

May, the provincial association will be gathering for its annual 

conference with this year’s theme, The Light of Possibility. Mr. 

Speaker, I would ask all members to join me in thanking the 

many professionals who work in the field of palliative care and 

wish them all the best at their upcoming conference. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Carrot River Valley. 

 

Leadership Campaign Issues 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, this morning Deb McDonald 

of the NDP [New Democratic Party] did an interview on the 

Dwain Lingenfelter phony membership scandal. She said a 

couple of pretty troubling things. 

 

First of all, she said, and I quote, “Mr. Lingenfelter indicates 

that he has many volunteers. So many volunteers means many 

eyes would have looked at these things . . . Which also means it 

wouldn’t have been one set of eyes looking at these.” That 

seems to directly contradict Dwain Lingenfelter’s story that this 

was all the work of one overexuberant volunteer. 

 

Secondly, she was asked if she would commit to make Robert 

Hale’s report on this scandal public. Nay, nay, nay. She said, 

and I quote, “Actually no, we can’t.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, throughout this session we have heard a lot of 

sanctimony from the NDP about openness and transparency. 

But now that the shoe is on the other foot, it’s a different story, 

Mr. Speaker. The NDP is facing a huge scandal that calls into 

question the very credibility of their leadership race. Mr. 

Speaker, today we are calling on the NDP to clear the air and 

release Mr. Hale’s report on the Lingenfelter phony-baloney 

membership scandal. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Mother’s Day 

 

Ms. Junor: — . . . Deputy Speaker. My first public speaking 

contest came when I was in grade 5. The topic of my speech 

was, “What my mother means to me.” It was a tear-jerker from 

a 10-year-old. 

 

Today my gratitude and appreciation of my mother, who is 83 

years old, has not diminished one bit. In fact my mother is a 

treasured friend as well as a great mother. She’s a source of 

strength and inspiration and a formidable political campaigner. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know all of my colleagues in this 

legislature want to acknowledge their mothers this upcoming 

Mother’s Day, May 10. 

 

For those of us who still have our mothers with us, we are the 

lucky ones. Mr. Deputy Speaker, for those whose mothers are 

no longer with them, I hope that years of happy memories still 

make Mother’s Day a special day of remembrance. For those of 

us who are mothers ourselves, I hope we get to spend some time 

with our children. For those of us who are grandmothers — 

isn’t it wonderful? 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, Happy Mother’s Day to all mothers out 

there and thank you for all that you do every day, every year, 

for our children. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Wood River. 

 

Leadership Campaign Issues 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, in today’s Leader-Post there’s a stunning 

quote from an NDP insider about the Dwain Lingenfelter phony 

membership scandal: 



2964 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2009 

“The thing that surprises [me] isn’t that there was 

(questionable activities). The thing that surprises me is 

how ineptly these . . . were done.” 

 

That tells you everything you need to know about the NDP. 

 

The NDP are okay with corruption. In fact, they expect it. They 

just don’t like getting caught. Just think about the last few years 

for the NDP — there’s SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility 

Development Company], Murdoch Carriere, the NDP caucus 

fraud scandal. The real problem for the NDP wasn’t that they 

did these things; the real problem was they got caught. So 

clearly they’re looking for a leader who is better at getting away 

with stuff, and they thought they’d found one until now. 

 

And that’s the problem. The Dwain Lingenfelter phony 

membership scandal really is amateur hour. The whole plan 

never made any sense in the first place. And now that he got 

caught, his explanation doesn’t make any sense either. I hope 

Dwain Lingenfelter does become NDP leader because 

apparently he’s just as bad at getting away with stuff as the rest 

of the NDP. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Athabasca. 

 

Rising Hockey Star 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. About hockey, his 

stepfather told him, “to break into the league you need to be 10 

times better than your opponent — since you’re native.” And 

his mother worried that hockey was too violent. But Craig 

McCallum of Canoe Lake was determined. 

 

Talent and a willingness to learn helped Craig to rise above his 

stepfather’s concerns. Craig slept with his hockey stick and 

played with anyone, even with the younger boys on the street in 

front of his house. With his passion for hockey, Craig rose 

above his mother’s concern. 

 

So at 11 years old, Craig moved to Meadow Lake to live with 

the family of D.J. King of the St. Louis Blues. Later Craig 

played for Beardy’s Blackhawks, and with Beardy’s Craig 

became an all-star and won the league’s Most Valuable Player 

Award as a top scorer. Today in his second year with the team, 

Craig has helped the Edmonton Oil Kings make their first-ever 

playoff berth. 

 

Of course Craig dreams of being drafted by an NHL [National 

Hockey League] team; however, Craig has also completed a 

year of university and he’s a member of the FSIN [Federation 

of Saskatchewan Indian Nations] circle of honour. 

 

I would like to state that for me Craig’s stepfather need not 

worry about Craig’s success outside of the First Nations 

community. Craig helps us recognize that we can rise above the 

fears which divide us. This man is a leader in both worlds and 

he, along with those like him, will lead us together into a 

unified, stronger Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I congratulate 

Craig and his family — well done. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Weyburn-Big Muddy. 

 

Leadership Campaign Issues 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, now Dwain Lingenfelter has gone into hiding. That’s 

because there’s one big problem with his phony membership 

story. It just doesn’t make any sense. 

 

According to Lingenfelter, this entire membership scandal is the 

doing of one mystery volunteer. This one mystery volunteer 

single-handedly signed up nearly 20 per cent of all 

memberships the Lingenfelter campaign sold in the entire 

province. This one mystery volunteer then paid for these 

memberships by spending 20 per cent of all of the donations the 

Lingenfelter campaign has collected. And this one mystery 

volunteer did all this without anyone else in the entire campaign 

knowing it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, even the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow is 

questioning the story. She said, and I quote: 

 

I know personally, that if I had a thousand memberships 

come in in a block and there was an expenditure by my 

campaign to cover the costs of those memberships, then I 

would for sure know about it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Dwain Lingenfelter’s story just doesn’t pass the 

smell test. It didn’t make any sense when Dwain Lingenfelter 

said it on Monday and that’s why he went into hiding on 

Tuesday. Mr. Speaker, both Dwain Lingenfelter and his 

mystery volunteer need to come out of the witness protection 

program and start answering some questions. Thank you, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Regina Douglas Park. 

 

Saskatchewan Literacy Awards of Merit 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, recently I was privileged 

to attend with several legislative colleagues the 2009 

Saskatchewan Literacy Awards of Merit hosted by His Honour, 

the Lieutenant Governor, Dr. Gordon L. Barnhart. The occasion 

recognized the contributions made by organizations and 

individuals to encourage literacy and also recognize an 

outstanding learner. 

 

The Affinity Credit Union received the Corporate Award for its 

financial support of READ Saskatoon. The recipient of the year 

award for a literacy program or project was the Saskatoon 

Literacy Coalition for its work in promoting literacy. 

 

Pauline Daku of Kipling was recognized for decades of 

teaching literacy and received the award for literacy 

professional. 



May 6, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2965 

Receiving the Cameco Literacy Learner Award and bursary was 

Mohammed Midhi Abdullah, a young man who comes to us 

from Afghanistan. His is a remarkable story of personal 

hardship, perseverance, and determination to succeed in his new 

country. He is a role model and inspiration to all immigrants 

who struggle with transition and literacy barriers. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, I was delighted to see my constituent, Dr. 

Stephen Moore, who teaches English at the University of 

Regina, be recognized as Literacy Volunteer of the Year for 

working with a couple over the past five years, helping them to 

improve their English skills and to attain a level of employment 

worthy of their credentials. 

 

Please join me in recognizing these deserving and remarkable 

individuals and organizations. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Public-Private Partnerships 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, many Saskatchewan communities are 

struggling to provide safe, clean, and affordable drinking water 

for their citizens. Families in Duck Lake are already paying 167 

a month for water and there have already been at least 25 

disconnections of service. Families in Hepburn face the 

prospect of monthly water bills of more than $100, plus over 

$10,000 in one-time construction and connection fees for their 

new system. 

 

But we also know that the Sask Party is studying and promoting 

P3s [public-private partnership]. Is the Sask Party considering 

P3s for the municipal projects like water and sewage treatment? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

Minister of Government Services. 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the P3 secretariat is looking at various projects. We’re 

still actually in the formative stage for P3s, in that we’re taking 

this very slowly to make sure that we get it right. 

 

But in talking about municipal projects, I believe it was in 2004 

when the member from Saskatoon Nutana, along with the 

member from Saskatoon Meewasin and the member from 

Regina Douglas Park, were involved in a P3 projects through 

CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan], that 

they were suggesting that municipal water projects could be one 

of the avenues for P3s in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So it was under the NDP, Mr. Speaker, that P3s were being 

looked at for water projects. You know, when you look at the 

missing parts of this, Mr. Speaker, it’s sort of like the missing 

Dwain Lingenfelter, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, we know that the Sask 

Party is looking at changing the mandate of SaskWater, and 

when they are also looking at P3s, it raises many concerns. The 

Minister of Government Services has claimed that the benefits 

of P3s is that governments can transfer risk to the private sector, 

and he appears to believe that governments can just sign on to a 

P3 contract and wash their hands of any responsibility for 

protecting the public. 

 

But elsewhere, experience with P3s shows that it simply doesn’t 

work that way. For example, he can look back at the city of 

Hamilton experience with a P3 for its water and sewage 

treatment.  

 

So to the minister: is he aware of the Hamilton experience? And 

if he is aware, why is he still promoting the idea of P3s? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

Minister of Government Services. 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, there are many examples across the world of P3s. 

Over 60 countries are using P3s to finance government projects, 

Mr. Speaker, a large number of them in Great Britain, Mr. 

Speaker, under Tony Blair and the Labour Party. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, even in Saskatchewan there have been a 

number of proposals under the NDP, Mr. Speaker. I have a 

document here from September 5, 2007 that were talking about 

P3s. And here is what CIC and the members I mentioned earlier 

had, potential projects, Mr. Speaker: electricity, build up to a 

300-megawatt grid as a potential P3; sewer and water deficit at 

the municipal level as a P3 project; hospitals required, one in 

Regina, one in Saskatoon. 

 

I didn’t know we needed a new hospital in Regina, but those 

were potential P3s, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’d appreciate if the 

minister would table the document that he was reading from, 

just to give a little more information. But, Mr. Speaker, he 

didn’t answer the question at all. 

 

The Hamilton experience with P3s was an unmitigated disaster. 

There was sewage spillage into Lake Ontario and the city of 

Hamilton was forced to take full responsibility for cleaning it 

up. And there were many other issues as well. Ultimately 

Hamilton kept the service in public hands after it became clear 

that continuing with P3s would cost three times the expense of 

providing the service publicly. 

 



2966 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2009 

To the minister: given Hamilton’s experience with P3s, will the 

minister admit that it is not so easy for governments to transfer 

responsibility or the risk to the private sector? And will he 

move away from promoting P3s? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

Minister of Government Services. 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, in British Columbia, who is one of the leading 

proponents of P3s in Saskatchewan, there have been many 

successful projects. Mr. Speaker, across Canada, the federal 

government uses P3 projects. Ontario uses P3 projects. Quebec 

uses P3 projects, Mr. Speaker. And yes, Alberta uses P3 

projects. 

 

So when you talk about tabling documents, Mr. Speaker, 

perhaps we can get a commitment from potentially the future 

leader of the NDP Party that she will support tabling the Hale 

report when it is done on the Lingenfelter membership scandal, 

Mr. Speaker. I think that’s a document that the people of 

Saskatchewan are very interested to see, Mr. Speaker, to 

determine just what kind of cover-ups have been going on with 

the NDP. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Federation of Canadian 

Municipalities has made it clear that their members don’t want 

to be forced into P3s. And in their policy statement on 

municipal infrastructure stated, and I quote, “Imposing P3s as a 

pre-condition for funding may hurt results by distorting local 

decision-making and accountability, and by adding unnecessary 

red tape and administrative costs.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, this has already been a problem with the federal 

government, which has a pot of money under the Building 

Canada fund tied directly to P3s. 

 

And to the minister: will the Sask Party make a commitment 

here today that they will not tie provincial funds for municipal 

infrastructure to participation in P3s? And will they quit 

promoting P3s? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

Minister of Government Services. 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, can we count on a commitment from that member to 

ensure that the Lingenfelter membership scandal document 

from Mr. Hale, the lawyer, is tabled as well, Mr. Speaker, is 

made public to the media? 

 

Mr. Speaker, if P3s are so wrong, Mr. Speaker, why in the 2004 

CIC annual report, describing, Mr. Speaker, some of the 

divisions of CIC, it reports: 

President’s office and general council responsible for the 

overall direction of CIC. It includes the President’s Office 

and General Counsel & Corporate Secretary functions, as 

well as the Communications, Human Resources, 

Government Relations, and public-private partnership 

units. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is in the CIC document from 2004. What’s 

happened, Mr. Speaker, to the NDP? Have they lost their . . . 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — The member’s time 

has elapsed. I would like to remind members . . . Order. Order. I 

would like to remind members that if the tone gets loud enough 

I’m having difficulty hearing a question or a minister, that is 

where I will draw the line. 

 

I recognize the member for Regina Coronation Park. 

 

Carbon Sequestration Project 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday I asked the 

Premier about the Montana-Saskatchewan carbon sequestration 

project that jumped 58 per cent, from initially in January this 

year 170 million, to in March 250, and then now $270 million is 

the cost. 

 

The Premier had no answer for us in the Chamber. But shortly 

after, when he was outside doing the media spin, he said the 

project is bigger because senior governments are now 

interested. To the Premier: other than Saskatchewan taxpayers, 

who has committed one thin dime to this 

Saskatchewan-Montana project? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

Minister of Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s always with great pleasure that we talk about 

carbon capture and sequestration in this Legislative Assembly. 

Saskatchewan is certainly leading the way in this technology. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we were the first to give the 

members opposite credit when back in 2000 they embarked on 

a project, the Weyburn-Midale project with North Dakota. It 

was one of the first projects in North America. When we were 

on the other side of the House we said, good job. Keep going; 

do more. Make Saskatchewan lead the way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, indeed again it’s time to do that. The 

Weyburn-Midale project into North Dakota sequesters some 

9000 tonnes a day, Mr. Speaker. What we’re going to do is 

build on that technology, take it to the next step, and negotiate 

with the Montana government as well as the province of 

Saskatchewan, the federal government, and yes, the US [United 

States] Department of Energy. We will do that and we will 

ensure that the project is . . . 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — The member’s time 

has elapsed. I recognize the member for Regina Coronation 

Park. 

 



May 6, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2967 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I must have been 

absent that day, when the Sask Party were giving us praise. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: — The Premier, Mr. Speaker, the Premier has said 

in the past that the province’s share of the project will remain at 

$60 million, despite the fact that the project costs have jumped 

by 58 per cent. The Premier says he’s optimistic that the Obama 

administration in the United States and the Canadian 

government are both going to kick in $100 million each. Yet he 

has no guarantee of either government putting in any money. 

 

My question to the Premier is will he guarantee today that if his 

federal cousins in Ottawa and the US feds fail to come up with 

$100 million each, will he guarantee that the Saskatchewan 

taxpayers are not on the hook for more than the $60 million that 

you’ve talked about? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

Minister of Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. Well certainly going forward we’re in a position here, 

we’re in a position here to invest in the future technology to 

ensure that Saskatchewan residents benefit from the lowest 

possible rates going forward, to be on the leading edge of this 

technology. We will do that by making an investment. We will 

do that by leading the way, by encouraging other partners. 

 

When the Obama administration says that they have $3 billion 

to invest in carbon capture and sequestration, we will say, yes, 

there’s no other place to invest it than right here in 

Saskatchewan, Canada today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Regina Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well there’s a troubling 

lack of specificity in any attempted answer. Mr. Speaker, Brady 

Wiseman, who’s a representative of the Montana state 

legislature, stated earlier today on CBC [Canadian Broadcasting 

Corporation] that, “Talk of cost for this project is entirely 

premature. They’re just making it up. They don’t know what 

it’s going to cost,” Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Premier has announced he’s going to go to Swift Current 

and sign an MOU [memorandum of understanding] with the 

governor of Montana tomorrow. Is it the Premier’s position that 

he doesn’t know the terms of this MOU? That he doesn’t know 

what the price tag’s going to be for Saskatchewan taxpayers? 

That’s incredulous. 

 

To the Premier: will he come clean and make the MOU public? 

Who are the partners, and who’s on the hook for how much? 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

Minister of Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member 

opposite says his memory was failing here or possibly he was 

missing in action that day. We have another politician or 

prospective wannabe politician that’s missing in action today, 

Mr. Speaker. I can tell you, I can tell you as minister in charge 

of SaskTel that all cell towers are working in the Shaunavon 

area and communication’s . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Communication is a two-way 

thing. Calls can be received, calls can be made from that area to 

Regina. And we encourage that because we don’t want any 

politicians to be missing in action in our great province. 

 

More specifically to the question that the member asked, right 

now we’re looking at a $270 million project: $100 million from 

the federal government in the United States, from the Obama 

administration — we’re asking them for that, approximately 

equivalent of $120 million Canadian, 150 north of the border — 

100 from our federal government . . . 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — The member’s time 

has elapsed. I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s Loyal 

Opposition. 

 

Awarding of Government Contracts 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, about 

10 days ago, I asked the Premier a very simple written question. 

That question was, quote, how many contracts has the company 

Garven & Associates received since November 2007? 

 

Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, the government provided the answer to 

my question. That answer, Mr. Speaker, indicates that Garven 

& Associates have received a total of five contracts from this 

government in the amount of something significantly over 

$500,000. 

 

My question is to the Premier. Will he confirm today to the 

House the answer that he provided to me yesterday, that Garven 

& Associates only received five contracts from his government? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we utilized the services of Mr. 

Garven, obviously in a very formal role, in addition to some of 

the work that the hon. member’s referring to. He served this 

province very well and will have served this province very well 

until June 1 as the deputy minister to the Executive Council. He 

helped put in place this new Saskatchewan Party government, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, and we’re grateful for the work he’s done. 

 

We’re also very much looking forward to working with the new 

deputy minister to the Executive Council, the former deputy 



2968 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2009 

minister of Justice, Doug Moen. We’re welcoming the 

opportunity to work with him as well to continue to move this 

province forward, to continue to provide good government to 

the people of the province of Saskatchewan — a government 

that keeps its promises, Mr. Deputy Speaker; a government 

that’s overseeing the fastest growing economy in the Dominion 

of Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, my question, the written question 

I submitted 10 days ago, and the answer I received from the 

Premier yesterday does not refer to Mr. Garnet Garven, the 

current and soon-to-be former deputy minister to the Premier. It 

is in reference to Garven & Associates and contracts given to 

that firm, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Yesterday the Premier indicated that for an amount significantly 

over $500,000, five contracts had been awarded. My question 

was, is this the total? Is this the total number of contracts? Is 

this the total number of dollars? That’s what the Premier said to 

me yesterday. 

 

Now today I find in another answer that the Premier provided to 

me some weeks ago that in fact Garven & Associates had 

received another contract worth $74,000 or thereabouts. My 

question to the Premier is why was it, that in the information 

provided to me in this House yesterday, that contract was not 

included? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

Minister of Advanced Education, Labour and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, thank you very much for the 

opportunity to highlight that Garven & Associates has been 

doing work for the Government of Saskatchewan since 2001, 

Mr. Speaker. It has expertise, Mr. Speaker, in regional planning 

and program evaluations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some of these contracts have included the 

development and delivery of a two-day forum for service 

providers to support program development and the coordination 

and mobilization of volunteers. Mr. Speaker, another one, the 

research and development of a needs assessment template as 

well as training officers to utilize these tools, Mr. Speaker; to 

identify English language training and employment needs 

regarding overcoming barriers, Mr. Speaker. These are just a 

few of the types of contracts that this firm has been doing 

within the Ministry of Advanced Education, Employment and 

Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, from the Premier’s own 

responses to my questions, we’re aware that Garven & 

Associates have received six contracts at least worth in total 

$640,000. Now the minister of advanced employment and 

labour just indicated some of those contracts were with his 

department. 

 

My question is again to the Premier: is the Premier aware that 

Garven & Associates were awarded a contract for $320,000 to 

facilitate meetings for Enterprise Saskatchewan? Will the 

Premier confirm that figure and that contract? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — This firm has been doing work for the 

Government of Saskatchewan since 2001, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But regarding questions of accountability, Mr. Speaker, 

regarding questions of accountability, perhaps it’s useful to 

make reference to Mr. Yens Pedersen’s comment. He said, in 

my view the NDP Lingenfelter membership scandal, “. . . this 

has always been a party of integrity and morality. And in my 

view, for the party to maintain its reputation . . . then I think for 

the good of the party he should step down.” 

 

It’s for the members opposite to deal with these basic, 

fundamental questions. The rest of us, we’re just asking more 

simple questions like where is Mr. Lingenfelter and will the 

members opposite make all the information public, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I’d like to remind 

the House that the level is rising above my tolerance level, and I 

would ask all members to respect the answers and the questions. 

I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The taxpayers in 

Saskatchewan deserve answers from the Premier, from the 

ministers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, my question again is to the 

Premier. Will he confirm that a contract with Garven & 

Associates was let for $320,000 to facilitate meetings for 

Enterprise Saskatchewan? And while he’s on his feet answering 

that question, will he confirm that one of those contracts signed 

with the minister who was just on his feet, a $33,000 contract, 

was for a two-day forum, Mr. Speaker? A two-day forum, that’s 

$16,000 a day. Will the Premier confirm these numbers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

Minister of Advanced Education and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to confirm that 

for over $33,000 for development and delivery of a two-day 

forum for service providers, as I’ve just said, to support 

program development and coordination and mobilization of 



May 6, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2969 

volunteers, obviously the preparatory work extended well in 

front of those two days, Mr. Speaker, as did the follow-up work, 

Mr. Speaker. So the answer is yes indeed; happy to confirm 

that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I just hope the members opposite are willing to help to identify 

where is Mr. Lingenfelter. Will they make public all the 

information that they have on the scandal, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite might 

want to consider themselves more with what’s going in their 

own government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier. 

We are aware from answers that he has provided to me, Mr. 

Speaker, that $640,000 of contracts have been offered to 

Garven & Associates — one of them for $320,000, and others 

to Advanced Education and Employment. My question, Mr. 

Speaker, is to the Premier — to the Premier, and no one else, I 

believe, can answer this question. Mr. Speaker — my question 

to the Premier is this: were these contracts all tendered? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

Minister for Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I thank you, and I thank 

the member for that question. You know, Mr. Speaker, Garven 

& Associates have been contracted through Enterprise and 

Innovation to do some work for SRC [Saskatchewan Research 

Council] and more recently a contract to facilitate the public 

hearings for the UDP [Uranium Development Partnership] 

process. 

 

A process that no member of this House is more conflicted on 

than that one, that member who was a leader, a leader, Mr. 

Speaker, of the interchurch anti-uranium group in the 1970s and 

’80s — a radical anti-nuclear group not the least bit interested 

in the facts of the issue — who protested and marched and said 

no to any form of nuclear investment. And now in November 

2005, he’s reported in the Leader-Post, Mr. Speaker, as saying 

these words: “Calvert . . . 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — The member’s time 

has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I remind the Premier the question 

was, have these contracts been tendered or not? But listening to 

the answer now delivered by the minister leads to a separate, 

yet separate question. I believe I heard him say to this House 

that in fact Garven & Associates have been contracted to do 

further work or other work around the UDP. Mr. Speaker, that 

was not included on the list provided by the Premier to me 

yesterday. 

 

So it’s now a twofold question: is there further contracts that we 

are not aware of? Are there further contracts we are not aware 

of? And again the question: were these contracts tendered or 

not? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

Minister of Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to finish the 

previous answer that I ran out of time on. After protesting 

against nuclear development, that member — that very 

conflicted member, most conflicted of all those conflicted 

members, Mr. Speaker — said these words to the Leader-Post: 

“Calvert said the province would consider any business case to 

establish a reactor or nuclear waste storage facility in the 

province . . .” 

 

And in a specific answer to that question, Mr. Speaker, Garnet 

Garven and associates are being used in the facilitation process 

around the public consultations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The government 

obviously does not want to answer this question. I can report to 

the House that all of our research, through all of our research 

we cannot find evidence that these contracts were tended. We 

may be wrong, but we can find no evidence on the public 

website of tendering, that these contracts were ever tendered. 

 

The outstanding question for the Premier today is, were the 

contracts, $640,000 worth — $320,000 for Enterprise 

Saskatchewan; $33,000 for a two-day seminar or forum — were 

these contracts tendered? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

Minister of Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, certainly contracts have 

been tendered in the past. In relation to the public consultations 

around the UDP process, Mr. Speaker, there was not time for a 

public tender process on that piece, but on other ones there 

certainly has been. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you know, we were in opposition too long, 

clearly, but we got very good at it; a lesson that they ought to 

learn over there. You know it’s unbelievable that they, in the 

midst of yet another NDP fraud crisis, would ask us about 

accountability — that makes me laugh, Mr. Speaker. 



2970 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2009 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 94 — The Profits of Criminal Notoriety Act 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

Bill No. 94, The Profits of Criminal Notoriety Act be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — It has been moved 

by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 94, The Profits of 

Criminal Notoriety Act be now introduced and read a first time. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — When shall this Bill 

be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, by leave, immediately. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — The Minister of 

Justice has moved that this Bill be read a second time 

immediately. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Carried. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 94 — The Profits of Criminal Notoriety Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 

second reading of Bill No. 94, The Profits of Criminal Notoriety 

Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the purpose of this Act is to prevent persons 

convicted of or charged with a designated crime from 

financially exploiting the notoriety of their crimes, and also to 

compensate victims of those crimes or their family members 

and also to support victims of crime. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the recent news that Colin Thatcher planned to 

write a book prompted much public discussion. A debate arose 

whether our province should have legislation to prevent 

criminals from profiting from the notoriety of their crimes. We 

appreciate and understand the concerns raised in recent weeks, 

and we are responding with this Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Colin Thatcher was convicted of killing his former 

wife. None of us must ever forget that JoAnn Wilson was a 

daughter, a wife, and a mother. To allow the man convicted of 

her murder to earn money from the crime would disrespect her 

memory and would reflect very poorly on this government. 

Accordingly with the co-operation of the opposition, we will 

pass this Bill next week. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people should be aware that this 

Bill will be supported by all members of this legislature. In 

Canada such legislation exists in Alberta, Manitoba, Ontario, 

and Nova Scotia. The first jurisdiction to pass such a law was 

the state of New York. It was sought to prevent the serial killer, 

David Berkowitz, from reaping the profits from a book about 

his crimes. The laws are frequently referred to as a Son of Sam 

law named after David Berkowitz’s nickname. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I approach this type of law with caution. It is very 

easy to say that criminals should not profit from their crimes. It 

is much more difficult to craft legislation that will stand up to 

challenge and scrutiny. Anybody drafting criminal notoriety 

legislation must balance constitutional issues such as avoiding 

the appearance of adding further punishment on top of the court 

sentence and the effect on free speech, against victims’ 

interests, and legitimate public expectations. 

 

I also recognize that the Bill being introduced today only 

addresses a narrow set of circumstances. As such, we intend to 

continue working towards comprehensive legislation that will 

be capable of seizing revenue from a variety of sources. We 

understand that we may have to amend or add to this Bill in the 

future as a result. That said, I’ve spent time over the last several 

days reviewing this Bill with our legislative drafters. I am 

pleased with their efforts and I thank them for their hard work 

under a very tight time deadline. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill does not prohibit the recounting of a 

crime; rather it provides for a process to prevent the financial 

exploitation of the notoriety from that crime. We are sensitive 

to and supportive of freedom of expression as a cornerstone of 

our society. Accordingly this Bill is carefully focused on 

restricting profit rather than limiting publication. In our view, 

this is a reasonable and proportionate response to the pressing 

need to prevent exploitation of criminal notoriety and also to 

prevent the revictimization that profiting from such crimes 

would surely cause to Saskatchewan victims and their families. 

 

Mr. Speaker, except as allowed by this Bill, no person shall pay 

consideration under a contract for the recounting of a crime. 

That consideration, that money, will paid to the minister 

instead. Similarly no person shall accept consideration under a 

contract for the recounting of a crime. Any money paid or 

payable to that person must be sent or directed to the minister. 

Consideration directed to the minister under this Bill will then 

be provided to victims of that particular crime or alternatively 

to the Victims Fund. 

 

Under this Bill, contract for the recounting of a crime means a 

contract entered into before or after the coming into force of 

this Bill. Under such a contract, a person convicted of or 

charged with a designated crime provides or agrees to provide a 

recounting of the designated crime, either directly or indirectly, 

for compensation. 

 

In turn, recounting is defined to include, first, the recollection 

and retelling of circumstances relating to a designated crime; an 

expression of thoughts or feelings about a designated crime; and 



May 6, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2971 

also a re-enactment of a designated crime. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, designated crime is defined to mean an 

indictable offence pursuant to the Criminal Code, for which a 

maximum penalty is imprisonment for five years or more, and 

that involves the use or attempted use of violence against 

another person; or conduct that endangers or is likely to 

endanger the life or safety of another person; or it inflicts or is 

likely to inflict severe psychological damage on another person. 

It also includes corresponding offences from other jurisdictions, 

as well as a series of specific sexual offences. 

 

As part of the balance we are trying to achieve, the Bill also 

provides for a process whereby a person may apply to the court 

to allow consideration to be paid and kept in accordance with 

the contract. This would be in cases where the court is satisfied 

that the recounting has a value to society despite the importance 

of preventing exploitation of criminal notoriety. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill does not apply to any contract for the 

recounting of a crime that is entered into, firstly, for law 

enforcement purposes; secondly, in support of crime 

prevention; or thirdly, in support of victims services programs. 

In keeping with our commitment to freedom of expression, we 

recognize the value to society of these forms of expression. 

Accordingly the Bill will not apply to these types of contracts. 

 

This Bill will apply if the crime was committed in 

Saskatchewan, or if consideration of the contract is paid or 

payable to or by a resident of Saskatchewan or to a person 

serving a sentence of imprisonment in a penitentiary, 

correctional facility, or other custodial facility located in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I would also note, Mr. Speaker, that the Bill also removes 

profits gained from the sale of memorabilia where that profit is 

increased by the criminal notoriety of an individual. This 

includes autographs, personal objects, and objects related to a 

designated crime. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in passing this legislation we should remember all 

victims of crime and recognize that this Bill is not a 

comprehensive or complete answer. It is however an important 

step in increasing support for victims of crime. Mr. Speaker, I 

move second reading of An Act respecting the Profits of 

Criminal Notoriety. I thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — The question before 

the Assembly is the motion moved by the Minister of Justice 

that Bill 94, The Profits of Criminal Notoriety Act be now read 

a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? I recognize the member for Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise this afternoon 

to speak to Bill No. 94, legislation respecting the profits from 

criminal notoriety. As the minister noted, if there is not 

unanimity in this House, there is a strong consensus in this 

House in support of this legislation, certainly in support of the 

principles and the concept behind this legislation. 

 

But there have been arguments raised, I think, with members 

and certainly by columnists and commentators about this Bill 

that do not support the concept and principles of the legislation 

on balance. Those arguments are not going to be made by any 

proponent of them in this House. But they are arguments that, I 

think, deserve respect and consideration. I’m ultimately not 

persuaded by them. I don’t think they should be dismissed out 

of hand or ignored. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, I believe that the thoughtful majority in 

this House, perhaps the unanimity of this House, should pay 

due respect to the thoughtful minority, that we have listened and 

considered but we do not agree. You may be right. You may be 

proven to be right in the future, but given all the facts and all 

the circumstances, we have to decide, and we decide to proceed. 

 

I think the arguments that need to be addressed and answered, 

with respect, are twofold, Mr. Speaker, one perhaps more 

briefly than the other. The first and I think the most significant 

is — and the minister referred to this in his remarks — that this 

is a limitation upon free speech, that this legislation is a limit on 

free speech and such limits should be few and well considered, 

narrow, and the defence of them should be well argued in this 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker. The second argument I would call the 

David Milgaard argument, Mr. Speaker, and I intend to address 

both these arguments. 

 

It has been said, and I think I may even have said it in 

discussions with the press in a rush, Mr. Speaker, that this is not 

an infringement on freedom of speech, that this type of 

legislation that was then under discussion is indeed a freedom 

to contract, a limitation of the freedom to contract, and a 

justifiable one. But in fact, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that that 

bears much scrutiny. 

 

The legislation and legislation like it across the country, Mr. 

Speaker, is a limitation on free speech. And if I may just briefly 

use a couple of examples. 

 

If we said to newspapers, publishers of newspapers, you may 

publish your newspaper; you may print whatever you want in it; 

but you can’t be paid by subscribers and you can’t be paid by 

advertisers, well the freedom of the press would still be there 

but the economics of the freedom of the press would not be 

there. 

 

If we said to journalists, well investigating and trying to 

uncover the truth and expressing your opinions within these 

newspapers or on radio or on TV or now on the Internet is a 

great hobby but nobody can be paid for it, Mr. Speaker, that 

would obviously be an outrageous infringement on free speech. 

 

The economics of book publishing are somewhat like the 

economics of publishing newspapers, Mr. Speaker, and when 

one says, you cannot profit from a book, even a narrow class of 

books, Mr. Speaker, that is obviously an infringement and a 

limitation on free speech. And any infringement or limitation on 

free speech by this Legislative Assembly must be justified, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The real question is this. The question is: is this a limit that is 

acceptable, an acceptable limit to free speech? We have in this 

country limitations on free speech. They are few in number and 

they are, I believe, largely justifiable. One example would be 



2972 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2009 

the limitation on hate speech in provincial human rights 

legislation and in our Criminal Code. 

 

I think it is arguable that, particularly in the case of our 

Criminal Code, the limitations on speech might be more concise 

and might be narrower. That said, the concept of a limitation on 

speech to incite hatred and particularly violence against an 

identifiable group is clearly a justifiable limitation. And so the 

question for us is: does this legislation in principle and in its 

substance, providing a limit on free speech, provide a justifiable 

limit? And the real question is: does this legislation, in 

providing a limit to free speech, provide a limit that is 

acceptable to this Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker? 

 

For too long — for almost a generation now, for over 20 years 

— politicians, legislators have used the Charter of Rights and 

Freedoms and the courts in our country as alternatively a 

whipping boy, a scapegoat, and an excuse for not doing their 

job. Either we cannot do this because there’ll be a Charter 

challenge, the courts won’t like it, or we don’t have to do this 

because the courts will already protect that right and the 

legislature, the parliament does not have to do so. 

 

[14:30] 

 

The most recent example in this Legislative Assembly is the 

government’s trespass legislation. Supreme Court Justice 

Iacobucci said that the Charter of Rights and Freedoms provides 

a bare minimum of rights. And this government declined, in the 

trespass legislation, to provide the people of Saskatchewan in 

respect to their right to assemble and express their opinions 

freely — nothing more than that bare minimum — arguing that 

the courts will provide that bare minimum right, and that it 

would be wrong for the Government of Saskatchewan to 

provide anything else. 

 

That leads to private citizens who are charged under the trespass 

legislation the responsibility to challenge the legislation, and 

imposes on the court the duty to actually legislate as to what the 

right is. But we know the court will legislate no more than the 

bare minimum. 

 

This Legislative Assembly has, in my view, within its 

jurisdiction for property and civil rights, the responsibility to 

strive and to enlarge our citizens’ rights and to define those 

limits and not pretend that is only the responsibility of the 

courts. Looking into a crystal ball to ask the question what the 

courts may or may not think about a particular legislation or 

prospective legislation is not an appropriate replacement for the 

exercise of consideration and judgment by this Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

Mr. Thatcher may well challenge this legislation. I suspect he 

has both the resources and the will to do so. The court victory 

that eluded him in trust law, family law, and criminal law cases 

may very well finally be his in respect to this legislation. I don’t 

know, Mr. Speaker. But the mere prospect of that does not 

relieve us of our responsibility to speak as legislators as to what 

we think are the rights and freedoms of the citizens of the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, I want to speak to what is called the 

David Milgaard argument. I call it the David Milgaard 

argument because, again, it first occurred to me before I heard it 

made. Imagine someone wrongfully convicted of murder, not 

yet exonerated, but famous before his exoneration. And Mr. 

Milgaard may be the sole example that anybody can think of. 

And this legislation, I think, would deny the ability of such a 

person to raise funds by telling his story, to hire private 

detectives and to hire lawyers to establish that he or she was 

wrongfully convicted. 

 

Ultimately I’m not persuaded by that argument either, Mr. 

Speaker. And this is the reason, not only because there hasn’t 

been such a case — with the possible exception of Mr. 

Milgaard, if he had decided to write his own book — but 

private detectives and even lawyers aren’t the people who have 

been exonerating the wrongfully convicted. It’s been 

journalists. And as long as there’s no restriction on their ability 

to write stories, that likely source of exoneration will not be 

gone. 

 

But secondly, Mr. Speaker, this is not the way to deal with 

wrongful convictions, and I don’t think that anybody in this 

Assembly would argue that it is. The courts here have been far 

more conservative than I believe they should have been. A 

number of royal commissions and inquiries have made good, 

strong recommendations about what type of evidence leads to 

wrongful convictions, and what type of evidence should be 

excluded or treated far differently by our courts. 

 

But the courts, which those commissioners were members of at 

one time in their careers, have been slow to follow any of those 

recommendations, Mr. Speaker. And so some people argue that 

the wrongful convictions that have been discovered are only the 

tip of the iceberg. And perhaps they are, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What this country needs, in my view, is a body independent of 

the federal Minister of Justice which proactively reviews and 

investigates these types of convictions, convictions for serious 

crimes, and seriously reviews the soundness of convictions — 

not just on a legal basis, which can be dealt with by our courts 

of appeal, but on a factual basis as well. A model for these types 

of conviction review commissions exists in England and in 

Scotland. Allowing the rare victim of a wrongful conviction to 

receive the proceeds from their book deal is no alternative to 

serious systemic reform as to how we address the issue of 

wrongful convictions in the country of Canada. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I take the freedom of speech argument 

seriously. I take the wrongful conviction argument seriously. 

But ultimately I am not persuaded by either of those arguments, 

Mr. Speaker. Mr. Thatcher has served his time in prison that our 

parole system in its judgment thinks is appropriate. But the only 

people that have or will ever truly pay for his crimes are JoAnn 

Wilson and the people who loved her. 

 

With respect to those who believe the limitations on free speech 

should be fewer and not include legislation of this type, I 

respectfully disagree. I believe that this legislature should not 

stand silently by while the perpetrators of outrageous crimes 

profit from those outrages. We in Her Majesty’s Loyal 

Opposition support this Bill. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — The question before 

the Assembly is a motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill 



May 6, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2973 

No. 94, The Profits of Criminal Notoriety Act now be read a 

second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — To which committee 

shall this Bill be referred? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I designate that Bill No. 94, The Profits 

of Criminal Notoriety Act, be committed to the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — This Bill stands 

referred to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the Chair 

of the Crown and Central Agencies Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report that it has 

considered certain estimates and to present its seventh report. I 

move: 

 

That the seventh report of the Standing Committee on 

Crown and Central Agencies be now concurred in. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — It has been moved 

by the Chair: 

 

That the seventh report by the Standing Committee on 

Crown and Central Agencies now by concurred in. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Carried. I recognize 

the Chair of the Economy Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on the Economy 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing Committee on 

the Economy to report that it has considered certain estimates 

and to present its sixth report. I move: 

 

That the sixth report of the Standing Committee on the 

Economy be now concurred in. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — It has been moved 

by the Chair: 

That the sixth report by the Standing Committee on the 

Economy be now concurred in. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Carried. I recognize 

the Chair of the Economy Committee. 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am 

instructed by the Standing Committee on the Economy to report 

Bill No. 76, The Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 

2008 (No. 2) without amendment. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — When shall the Bill 

be considered in Committee of the Whole? I recognize the 

Minister of the Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I request leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and 

that the Bill now be read the third time. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — The Minister has 

requested leave to waive consideration of Committee of the 

Whole on Bill No. 76, the wildlife habitat protection Act, 2008, 

and the Bill now be read a third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Carried. The 

minister may proceed with third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 76 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection 

Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) 
 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — I move that this Bill be now read a third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — It has been moved 

by the minister that Bill No. 76 now be passed under its title, 

now be read a third time and passed under its title. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the Chair 

of the Economy Committee. 



2974 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2009 

Standing Committee on the Economy 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am instructed by 

the Standing Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 84, 

The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations 

Amendment Act, 2009 without amendment. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — When shall this Bill 

be considered by Committee of the Whole? I recognize the 

Minister of Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I request leave 

to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill 

and that the Bill now be read the third time. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — The minister has 

requested leave to waive consideration of Committee of the 

Whole on Bill No. 84, The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital 

Corporations Amendment Act, 2009 without amendment and 

that the Bill now be read a third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Carried. The 

minister may proceed to move third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 84 — The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital 

Corporations Amendment Act, 2009 
 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this Bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — It has been moved 

by the minister that Bill No. 84, The Labour-sponsored Venture 

Capital Corporations Amendment Act, 2009 be now read a third 

time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the Chair 

of the Economy Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on the Economy 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am instructed by 

the Standing Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 71, 

The Innovation Saskatchewan Act without amendment. 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — When shall this Bill 

be considered in Committee of the Whole? 

 

I recognize the Minister of Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave 

to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill 

and that the Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — The minister has 

requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole on Bill No. 71, The Innovation Saskatchewan Act and it 

now be read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — The minister may 

proceed with third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 71 — The Innovation Saskatchewan Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this Bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — It has been moved 

by the minister that Bill No. 71, The Innovation Saskatchewan 

Act be read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — On division. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — On division. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I wish to table 

answers to questions 360 through 370. 

 

[14:45] 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 



May 6, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2975 

Bill No. 80 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Norris that Bill No. 80 — The 

Construction Industry Labour Relations Amendment Act, 

2009 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Regina Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s 

a pleasure to continue my comments that I had started on April 

22 on Bill 80. Continuing along with what I’ve spoken of so far, 

Mr. Speaker, I was talking about the fact that the contractors 

themselves craved these regulations to be in place in terms of 

having a stable labour environment around the construction 

industry, and they in fact petitioned for the system originally 

under the Ross Thatcher government. And the construction 

industrial labour relations Act has served the industry well and 

there hasn’t been a construction strike since 1982. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to continue on with the 

submission by Kerry Westcott. He’s from the United 

Brotherhood of Carpenters and Joiners Local 1985 and he’s an 

organizer as well. And he writes, the construction industrial 

labour relations Act had a strong apprenticeship system. 

 

The other important reason for province-wide, craft-based 

collective agreements concerns the apprenticeship system. 

The apprenticeship system in Saskatchewan is driven by 

the trade unions and its joint training committees, 

composed of contractor and trade union representatives. 

The JTCs find the most apprentices, supply the talent on 

the trade advisory boards, and do much of the most critical 

training of our new tradespeople. 

 

The construction industrial labour relations Act was 

repealed by Devine [Tories] in 1983 and [then] reinstated 

[again] in 1992 [by Premier Romanow and the NDP.] 

 

So as you can see, we have the contractors themselves 

petitioning for this system under the Ross Thatcher government. 

We then have the repeal of the legislation in 1983 under the 

Devine Tories, and then again reinstated under the Romanow 

NDP. 

 

What was found through that is that, quote: 

 

During the decade when there was no CILRA or JTCs, the 

apprenticeship system ground to a halt. As a result, today 

we have a serious shortage of journeypersons. 

 

He goes on to say: 

 

The repeal of the construction industrial labour relations 

Act in 1983 was a near death experience for many of the 

trades. The industry went from 70% to 20% unionized in 

just a few years. 

 

So we can see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, how there are some serious 

concerns that have not been addressed because of the fact that 

there was no consultation process with these trades or with any 

of the people that represent the tradespeople prior to the 

introduction of this legislation by the Sask Party government — 

which we are seeing is a typical MO [modus operandi] for the 

Sask Party government that, we’ll put their legislation out there 

first, then maybe we’ll, you know, have some consultative 

process or maybe not. And even if there are some good 

amendments that come forward that can be easily justified, that 

should be seriously looked at or accepted, we’re still going to 

stick with what our agenda was because we have someone to 

please, obviously. 

 

So anyways, as I was saying, I’ll continue on with what Kerry 

Westcott said: 

 

Some construction locals lost three quarters of their 

membership. It was a time of recession and wages fell to 

half of what they had been. 

 

Bill 80 is taking us back to that time. It allows organizing 

by craft, by company or by project by any union. 

 

A “union” other than a building trades union will be able 

to solicit “voluntary recognition” from a project owner or 

his contractor and sign a project collective agreement 

governing the jobsite. It could be five years in duration. 

 

So the owner or construction manager of any project could 

sit down with a “union” or with a representative of an 

“employees association” and they could voluntarily 

recognize one another and ink a project agreement 

covering the entire life of the project [Mr. Deputy 

Speaker]. 

 

It could be a craft-based or industrial agreement. It may, or 

may not, have provisions to facilitate apprenticeship, or 

make pension contributions or other benefits. And it could 

be a done deal before the building trades even know there 

is a project. 

 

Another important change to note is that maintenance 

work will no longer be covered by the construction 

industrial labour relations Act. Maintenance provides over 

half the work of many building trade unions. This is 

devastating for the building trades. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we can see that there are some serious 

concerns with this legislation and certainly many, many 

questions that need to be answered. And unfortunately, because 

none of those discussions took place prior to this legislation 

being tabled and because none of those discussions have taken 

place since then, and that we’re waiting and hoping that this 

consultative process that the government talks about entering 

into will actually bear some fruit in terms of some reasonability 

in terms of what’s being proposed. 

 

But of course, given the history of what the Sask Party 

government has done so far with respect to the legislation that, 

the amendments to The Trade Union Act or the legislation 

regarding essential services and the gaping holes that are 

present in that legislation, we obviously have some serious 

concerns. 

 

Now Kerry Westcott goes on to say: 

 



2976 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2009 

Who asked for Bill 80 and why do we need it? 

 

On March 6th, just a few hours before it was introduced in 

the legislature, the building trades got e-mails from [the] 

labour minister Rob Norris inviting them to a lock-up 

meeting to view bill 80. 

 

There had been no prior consultation with the building 

trades or the unionized contractors’ association. In answer 

to a direct question from Saskatchewan Federation of 

Labour president Larry Hubich, we were told there had 

been no consultation with any [other] labour 

organizations. Only the Christian Labour Association of 

Canada wanted Bill 80. 

 

So he goes on to say: 

 

Do we need a change in how bargaining works for the 

building trades? 

 

Like the essential services act, Bill 80 is a solution to a 

non-existent problem. 

 

Something that the members opposite, the Sask Party 

government, have yet to articulate. We have still not heard what 

the problem was, what needed fixing, what exactly was broken. 

As I said, there are many, many questions that still need to be 

asked. 

 

The organized building trades only do about 20 per cent of 

all [the] construction work. Eighty per cent is already 

non-union or is contested spin off contractor’s work. The 

20 per cent we do perform tends to be the most complex 

work. The building trades have the capacity to do large 

complex jobs and complicated large mill renovations 

under “shut down” time constraints. What is to be gained 

by further marginalizing the building trades? What 

problem is the Sask. Party government trying to fix? 

 

Bill 80 is designed to put the building trades at the far 

margins of our industry. And we will be unable to 

influence wages or conditions in our industry. It will be 

very destabilizing to labour relations and apprenticeships. 

 

He says: 

 

There will be wildcat strikes, jobsite confrontations, 

neglect of the apprenticeship system and way lower wages 

for all construction workers, union or not yet union. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we already see some serious concerns about 

the fact that maintenance work will no longer be covered by the 

construction industrial labour relations Act and that it provides 

over half the work of many building trade unions. So as I said, 

this would be devastating for the building trades and we also 

know that during the decade when there was no construction 

labour relations Act or training committees, the apprenticeship 

system ground to a halt and as a result, today we have a serious 

shortage of journeypersons. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there are some serious concerns when we look 

at the construction industrial labour relations Act with respect to 

some of the comments that have been made. It seems as though 

— and, you know, perceptions go a long way, Mr. Speaker, in 

terms of how one conducts business with stakeholder groups — 

that not only, not only did the Sask Party government not 

consult the people that are most directly affected by this 

legislation on the worker side of the equation, it almost seems 

that they’re willing to rub salt in the wounds of the workers that 

are currently seeing themselves under attack, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And this is something that is becoming quite the pattern for this 

government, Mr. Speaker, whether it’s the introduction of 

essential services legislation or whether it’s the amendments to 

The Trade Union Act, where, as I said, there were no 

consultations done with again the workers that would be most 

directly involved and impacted by those pieces of legislation. 

We’re seeing the same pattern again with this legislation with 

respect to Bill 80. 

 

Now when one looks at the most recent Bill that the Sask Party 

government has introduced and passed, which is Bill 43, the 

trespass amendment Act, one has to wonder where this pattern 

is leading. I mean we already know that the Premier has already 

declared publicly that he is quite willing to go to war with 

working people, on a radio show that I won’t give any credit to 

because I’m not necessarily a fan. So one has to wonder, Mr. 

Speaker, if those words are not now being played out in terms 

of what’s happening. 

 

We’re seeing a blatant, blatant disregard for the input of the 

workers in this province. We’re definitely seeing a blatant 

disregard for improving the lot of workers in this province, 

when you’re attacking these pieces of legislation when it comes 

to that. And that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, pertains to whether it’s 

wages, whether it’s benefits, whether it’s occupational health 

and safety concerns which for me are very, very serious. When 

we see those being diminished in any way, shape, or form, 

that’s something that people should look at very seriously and 

should be very concerned about. And clearly the workers in this 

province are expressing those concerns at this point in time. 

 

Now the assistant deputy minister for the Department of 

Advanced Education, Employment and Learning confirmed in a 

stakeholder briefing that the construction and other unions in 

Saskatchewan did not ask for this legislation respecting Bill 80 

and that none were consulted prior to its introduction. So you 

know, Mr. Speaker, one has to wonder that when legislation 

directly impacts a stakeholder group in such a significant 

manner and when you have such a large stakeholder group that 

would have obviously plenty to say about the issue, whether it’s 

something that, you know, would be fully accepted or partially 

accepted is for the audience to obviously decide. 

 

But the point is, is one must always be interested in what the 

stakeholder groups have to say — whether it’s something one is 

in agreement with or not, whether it’s something that one 

accepts as being consequential to the legislation that’s being 

proposed or not. But moreover one wants to be sure that one has 

all the information possible to be able to make the best 

decisions possible with respect to any changes that should be 

made to any piece of legislation. And it’s quite concerning, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that the Sask Party government isn’t seeing 

that and that the Sask Party government most certainly isn’t 

practising that. 

 



May 6, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2977 

We’re seeing that in so many ways. I mean one only has to 

look, for instance, at the Uranium Development Partnership and 

the absolute contempt, I would have to say, that is being shown 

to the citizens of Saskatchewan who want some serious input on 

a very serious matter. So much so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 

people across the province have now taken it upon themselves 

to hold public information meetings with any individuals that 

they can find with any expertise on the issue so that they can 

further educate themselves. 

 

Or for instance, you know, I read in one of our Saskatchewan 

weeklies where a woman simply wrote in to her local 

newspaper and said, you know, I’m not an expert on the subject 

of nuclear development and issues around uranium mining and 

such. But I am a concerned citizen, and I am concerned about 

the legacy that we are going to be leaving for our future 

generations. So this woman said, I’m going to take it upon 

myself to educate myself further and keep writing comments to 

the weekly, in terms of what she’s learning along the way, 

because she’s hoping that that might provide some assistance to 

other people who don’t have the time or ability perhaps to do 

the research that she’s willing to engage in. 

 

[15:00] 

 

So as I said, with respect to Bill 80, one has to wonder why the 

Sask Party government didn’t feel that it was important enough 

to speak to the stakeholder group, which are the workers that 

would be affected by this legislation. And moreover, I would 

have to say, why they didn’t have the respect to speak to those 

workers who are going to be directly affected by this 

legislation. 

 

It causes a feeling of instability in terms of relations with the 

government as a potential employer, perhaps on some future 

projects. And it really causes a feeling of mistrust. And in some 

cases that might not even need to exist, but because of the fact 

that there is no consultation, it does then carry a nefarious 

feeling to it and does cause then people to wonder what is being 

hidden? Why haven’t they spoken to us? Why isn’t there a 

respectful relationship in wanting to make changes to any type 

of legislation that is being brought forward? 

 

And clearly, we know that there were some consultations done 

with respect to Bill 80. But they were only done with an 

employer group out of Alberta . . . I mean, sorry, a 

representative group out of Alberta called the Christian Labour 

Association of Canada, which has had some serious concerns 

brought forward about how that has affected the labour market 

in Alberta, and especially how that’s affected the representation 

of the workers in Alberta and how that’s affected their wages 

and benefits and protections in their workplaces in Alberta. 

 

So one has to wonder, Mr. Speaker, if this wasn’t simply 

appeasing someone or some people or, you know, a particular 

group, or if this wasn’t just a nasty attack on workers, which 

was what the Premier had said that he was quite willing to 

engage in, and of course the deskilling of the trades. There is no 

question that one has to wonder about that, you know. 

 

And that leads me to another subject, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

when we talk about the deskilling of the trades because I’m now 

getting numerous calls about workers that are being brought 

over from Germany, for instance, or that some employers would 

like to bring over from Germany. And I’m being contacted just 

about language barrier issues and such. 

 

So you know, it’s interesting that we’re quite interested in 

bringing over employees, workers from Germany who have 

amazing skills, training, and amazing protections through that 

apprenticeship training when they are receiving that, and their 

education and such. We’re quite willing to, you know, embrace 

that, Mr. Speaker. And yet the Sask Party government through 

this legislation is quite willing to deskill the trades that we 

currently have in this province, which is quite confusing, Mr. 

Speaker. And again, it leads to many, many questions that we, 

the NDP caucus, and the workers themselves have no responses 

to, let alone answers. 

 

So one has to wonder what the motivation is, Mr. Speaker, 

other than as I explained already, simply to appease a few 

friends that they promised perhaps these changes to . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, as one of my colleagues just 

said, it’s a short-sighted piece of legislation. And I have to 

agree, Mr. Speaker, it’s a very short-sighted piece of legislation. 

 

It’s no different, Mr. Speaker, than what we saw when the 

Devine Tories, as I said, repealed this piece of legislation after 

it was introduced by the Ross Thatcher government, which was 

done so at the behest of the contractors at that time to stabilize 

the environment — the work environment and the construction 

environment. 

 

So at this time of global economic uncertainty, when we 

certainly want to do everything we can to protect the work 

environment here in Saskatchewan, it’s interesting that it’s at 

this particular time in history that the Sask Party government 

would want to have such an acrimonious relationship with the 

workers in this province. It is absolutely unbelievable, not to 

mention confusing, that this is what the government of the day 

— the Sask Party government — would choose to do to the 

workers of this province. This is the time that they want to 

create this acrimony and this destabilization of the work 

environment in Saskatchewan. 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, if we look at what some of the 

repercussions of that can be, you have to wonder even more. As 

we’ve already talked about, it created a shortage of 

apprenticeship trainees, and therefore a shortage of journey 

persons as we see today. 

 

It also leads to wonder if the Sask Party government 

understands that there are some other unintended consequences 

that can come with this as well in terms of, again, the dollars 

that have to be spent in Saskatchewan to encourage these 

projects then may not necessarily stay in Saskatchewan, in 

terms of where they’re spent and how they’re spent, Mr. 

Speaker. So you know, at a time when there is this 

destabilization globally with respect to the economy, this is the 

last time on earth that this should be happening to a 

destabilization of the workers and the working environment of 

this province. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, every province right now, every 

premier, everyone is trying to attract the most people possible to 

their provinces. And in some cases, it’s going to be a very 



2978 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2009 

difficult task to do that because of the fact that we’re seeing 

such a high rate of unemployment in some of the provinces. In 

this province, Mr. Speaker, we have been somewhat buffered 

by that, but clearly we’re not immune to that either. 

 

And we want to make sure that this province stays as attractive 

as possible to people outside of this province to want to come to 

this province. Clearly some of those attractions in the past have 

been the fact that it was the most affordable place to live in the 

entire country, and having that wonderful, wonderful protection 

of the lowest cost utility bundle was definitely part of that 

attractive package, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, since the Sask Party government has come to 

power, we have seen, I mean, obviously a higher cost of living 

in this province. We’ve also seen the eradication of the lowest 

cost utility bundle, which is something that people were very, 

very, very proud of in this province. 

 

And like I said, it was an attractive part of the package for 

people to come to this province, especially for people with 

families, Mr. Speaker. You know, knowing that you’re paying 

the lowest cost utility bundle in the province is certainly 

something that helps when everyone is trying to eke out a living 

and, you know, trying to sock away as much savings as 

possible: you know, trying to maybe perhaps purchase their first 

home; trying to maybe perhaps purchase their first car so that 

there’s, you know, better mobility issues; or for instance 

needing to purchase a larger home if there’s a growing family. 

Or you know, it’s the simplest things, Mr. Speaker, as being 

able to enrol their children in extracurricular programs and 

athletic programs and keeping our children well-rounded in 

terms of their experiences, whether they be cultural or athletic 

or otherwise. 

 

So you know, those were all the attractive things that we had to 

offer in this province and one of those, Mr. Speaker, too was the 

fact that there were really strong protections for . . . I should 

say, quite good protections for the workers in this province in 

terms of occupational health and safety and some other issues. 

 

So you know, Mr. Speaker, when you see the attack by this 

government on the workers of this province with respect to, for 

instance, issues around the Labour Relations Board and how 

those changes were made and like I said, the essential services 

Act that has some serious problems with it, as the Sask Party 

government is now seeing, with respect to some of the 

negotiations that are going on with some of those organizations 

involved. So I’m sure that there will be amendments coming 

forward. 

 

It’s unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, that they didn’t take the advice of 

the NDP caucus and the stakeholder groups at the time that that 

legislation was presented to make the amendments at that time, 

instead of having to go through the added expense that they are 

now incurring on behalf of this province. Because as you know, 

Mr. Speaker, the longer those negotiations have to go on with 

respect to the provision under the essential services Act, the 

more costs are incurred and those costs, Mr. Speaker, are 

incurred on behalf of Saskatchewan taxpayers. And so that 

should be looked at very seriously as well. 

 

Now, you know, it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, that the 

government talks about wanting to make sure that it’s doing the 

best it can for the province, and yet it doesn’t seem to want to 

do the work that needs to be done in order to ensure that that’s 

the case. For instance, like as I spoke of already, not speaking to 

the stakeholder group of workers prior to introducing this 

legislation is absolutely unacceptable, and it should be duly 

noted. 

 

And given that, as I already quoted, the deputy minister for 

advanced education and learning, Mike Carr saying that the 

only stakeholder group . . . that none of the stakeholder groups 

asked for this legislation and none were consulted prior to its 

introduction, is obviously very concerning. And it’s interesting 

also that we see representatives of the one organization that was 

enthusiastic about this legislation coming forward, the Christian 

Labour Association of Canada actually being present in the 

building on the day that it was announced, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, you know, as I said, it’s the same process that they used for 

introductions of essential services and The Trade Union Act. So 

it would be better if the Sask Party government actually talked 

less about transparency and acted more transparently. So, yes, 

did more delivery of transparency instead of just talking about 

transparency, Mr. Speaker, because it’s pretty easy to stand in 

this House every day and talk about being open and accountable 

and talk about being transparent and yet never provide the 

evidence of that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, it’s interesting. We’ve had a number of groups 

attend the legislature recently. One of them being, for instance 

. . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I would ask members — there’s a 

few conversations going on — if they want to take them outside 

or behind the bar. I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So it’s interesting. 

We’ve had some groups in the legislature recently visiting to — 

everything from school groups to other observers and such, and 

as well as the public servants who are here as well — and they 

commented, I had a question. One of the people asked me a 

question, you know, why do you even bother to ask questions in 

question period because you’re not getting the answers it seems 

anyways? 

 

And I said, well clearly what we’re getting in question period 

are responses, they’re not answers. That is correct. But, you 

know, it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, because the government, 

Sask Party government likes to talk about being open and 

accountable and transparent. And yet, like I said, we have very 

little evidence to that to this point. 

 

Again today, you know, we’ve seen that, for instance, the 

tendering process with respect to the questions that the Leader 

of the Opposition was asking today. We see that the questions 

were asked today as to whether or not there was a tendering 

process because unfortunately, through our research and given 

that we have obviously much limited capabilities in terms of 

research than, for instance, the government members do, we 

may not be able to find it. 

 

But given that everything that we can find is something that is 



May 6, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2979 

also something that the public of Saskatchewan can find, leads 

one to question the notion of being open and accountable. If we 

can’t find how they’re being open and accountable, if we can’t 

find how they’re being transparent, how in God’s name can the 

public of Saskatchewan be expected to find how the Sask Party 

government is being open and accountable and transparent? It is 

a giant question mark, Mr. Speaker, that they have yet to 

answer. 

 

And it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, because what we get from the 

Sask Party government is just a continual barrage, I would have 

to say, of secrecy and spin — and I mean a constant barrage of 

secrecy and spin. And even my fellow colleagues across the 

way have to chuckle at that because quite frankly they know 

that that’s the case, and they have become the masters of 

secrecy and spin, quite frankly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:15] 

 

So when one looks at the fact that, like I said, we can’t get any 

answers on the questions that we have, and given that the 

stakeholder groups that are obviously very, very concerned with 

this legislation can’t get any answers . . . And, you know, in 

going back to Bill 43, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Bill 43 prohibits the 

ability for peaceful demonstrations and expression of opinion, 

shall we say. 

 

And there are some pieces of legislation that are somewhat 

similar throughout the rest of Canada. But there is one glaring 

difference, Mr. Speaker, one glaring difference, and that is the 

notion of having to ask for permission to demonstrate prior to 

this action taking place. 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, one has to wonder why the Sask 

Party government is so bent on wanting to restrict peaceful 

demonstration and expression of opinion given that in past 

years it has been supporters of theirs that have also come to the 

city of Regina and expressed, for instance, opinions that were 

different, for instance, from the NDP government and came 

here to express those opinions. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, one wants to be respectful of all opinions. 

And so therefore that was something that they were certainly 

more than entitled to engage in. And we were able to obviously 

get a lot of information from some of those demonstrations as 

well. 

 

Now why is it that the Sask Party government is so nervous, 

perhaps is the word, about those peaceful demonstrations 

continuing on in the fashion that they have in the past? One can 

surmise, I guess — because one cannot get any answers from 

the Sask Party government — one has to surmise that they want 

to limit that because they know, they know, Mr. Speaker, that 

what they’re doing is over the top. 

 

It is certainly out of sync with what the rest of the country is 

doing. It is certainly out of sync, quite frankly, with most 

developed nations are doing in terms of wanting to make sure 

that there is a stable environment, that the economy can once 

again thrive on a global basis versus wanting to destabilize the 

economy, which is what the Sask Party government is intent on 

doing through these pieces of legislation. 

 

So of course we want to attract more companies and workers to 

the province, but we also want to attract more taxpayers. And 

bringing in a company, you know, from elsewhere and sending 

the results of our booster shot money out of province is 

something that, you know, we have some concerns about, Mr. 

Speaker. Now you know, we want a labour regime that covers 

Saskatchewan companies and covers Saskatchewan workers. 

And if there’s investment from outside the province, we want to 

ensure that Saskatchewan residents and not the taxpayers of 

other provinces are the net beneficiary of that investment that is 

being made in this province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, you know, there is many people on the NDP 

caucus, opposition side, that have an interest in this Bill and 

want to speak to this Bill, so unfortunately I’m not able to go on 

to all the other points that I’d like to deliver. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to say that I’ve been a proud union 

member for most of my life, Mr. Speaker. In my union work, I 

came to admire and respect many of the union leaders and their 

trades in the construction industry. This legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, quite frankly should be withdrawn immediately and 

the proper consultative process should be able to take place. 

And the House should be, you know, spending valuable time on 

giving the great people in this province the respect they have 

earned and continue to earn every day they show up at some of 

our most dangerous work sites to make our society better, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We know there is no rush for this law. We know there is no dire 

need for this to happen immediately. And we know that the 

people who actually do this work have never asked for this 

legislation. We know that this legislation has put this 

government at serious odds with these leaders, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

time that this government does the right thing as lawmakers. It’s 

time to show the people of this province that their opinions 

matter, Mr. Speaker, that they’re respected and that they will 

actually be listened to and that they will actually have some 

input. 

 

Confrontation begins when a government chooses to introduce 

legislation that affects the lives of thousands of citizens without 

consulting with them. It continues when a government chooses 

to ignore the expertise of those citizens who do the work that is 

going to be affected. And it reaches levels which could be 

avoided if a government cares about the wages and working 

conditions of its citizens — cares enough to ask them how to 

make their lives and the lives of their children better, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bill 80 is an affront to the hard work, dedication, 

and commitment demonstrated by the construction trades 

unions to make our society be one that it is proud of. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, as always, it’s an 

honour for me to rise in this House and to enter into a debate on 

behalf of the fine people of Regina Northeast. I think you’ve 



2980 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2009 

heard me suggest, Mr. Speaker, in the past that wherever we 

travel in Saskatchewan, we always experience the opportunity 

of meeting fine people. And I can assure you there are no finer 

people in Saskatchewan than the good folks of Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Normally, Mr. Speaker, when we rise in this House to enter into 

debate, particularly a debate on a Bill, there’s always elements 

to that Bill that is positive and that we can find that in some 

small way the passage of that Bill will help improve the lives of 

Saskatchewan people in some way, manner, shape, or form. 

And that’s usually the case. 

 

And of course, the role of opposition, Mr. Speaker, is to 

scrutinize Bills closely and to suggest to government ways and 

means that those Bills could be improved upon. But 

fundamentally most Bills, when we receive them as the 

opposition and we look at them, we find elements within those 

Bills that are positive and we believe, at the end of the day, will 

have a positive effect on Saskatchewan people. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I said most Bills because unfortunately this 

Bill, Bill No. 80, does not fit anywhere into that category. This 

Bill represents regressive legislation. Mr. Speaker, this Bill is 

about changes to the labour relations in this province. And this 

is an opportunity, I suppose, for us to take a few moments and 

just look at the history of labour, not only here in 

Saskatchewan, not only in Canada, but labour right across the 

North American continent. 

 

Now when we take that look at that history of labour, we note 

that it is a history of struggle, of working people, ordinary 

people, the working people of our society. A struggle so that 

they can receive — for their sweat, their toil, their dedication — 

fair remuneration, fair compensation, fair enough that they are 

able to deliver to their families a reasonable, a reasonable 

lifestyle, a reasonable ability to participate in the society in 

which they live. 

 

That’s all working people have ever asked for. That’s all they 

have ever expected is to be given a fair and equitable share of 

the profits, of the proceeds, as a result of their endeavours, as a 

result of their sweat and their toil and their commitment, so that 

they can provide their families with a fair and reasonable and 

quality lifestyle. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, has been and should always be the goal of 

any government — to look at ways and means to ensure that the 

ordinary people, the working people, the people of our society 

who really drive our economy, who really drive our economy, 

are ensured and protected so that they will on an ongoing basis 

receive that fair and reasonable compensation. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this particular Bill takes that away. It takes 

that away. This Bill does nothing to improve the lot of the 

working people. In fact it takes away hard-earned benefits that 

they have received to date. It takes those benefits away that 

have been worked at, have been negotiated by workers in the 

past. It takes that away. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a series of labour legislation that is 

probably the most regressive legislation of anywhere in this 

great country of ours. And I find it starting to reflect in the 

comments I’m hearing from people out there and across this 

great nation. And I had the opportunity last Saturday night to 

have a young gentleman — young compared to me, young. 

He’s a married person with two children. He and his wife do not 

live here in Regina; they live in a small community outside of 

Regina. And he is a non-unionized worker. 

 

To the best of my knowledge — and I’ve known this young 

fellow for a number of years now — but to the best of my 

knowledge, he has never, ever been unionized. He has worked 

in a retail co-operative that I’m aware of. He has worked in 

some other labour-related industries. And then he went back to 

school and got trained as an automotive mechanic and has 

worked in the automotive industry for a number of years. And 

like I said, I’ve known this young fellow since the days that he 

worked in the retail co-operative. 

 

And last Saturday he come up to me, and because we have a 

good, long relationship, he was quite honest with me. He said, 

Ron, I want to tell you something. He said, I really want to 

confess something to you. I said, well you know, I don’t like 

taking confessions but I said, if you feel the need, I’m here to 

listen. 

 

He said, well, he said, as you know, he said, in the past I’ve 

been a New Democratic supporter, a supporter of the New 

Democratic Party. But in the last election, he said, I voted for 

Brad’s boys. And he said, I did that because I thought they had 

some things to offer and he said, I did that with the hopes that 

they would improve the lot of myself as a working person and 

the lot of those who I find sharing the same industry with. 

 

He said, but when I see the labour legislation that this 

government has brought forward and he said, I know that this 

legislation is targeted at unions and I’m not a union member, he 

said, but when it hurts labour, it hurts the unions, it’s hurting 

me. And I can assure you, he said, in the next election I will not 

be voting for the Sask Party. I can assure you that. 

 

Well I find that very telling, Mr. Speaker, because I didn’t 

prompt this. I didn’t urge it. And it comes from an individual 

who I know is genuine, who is not just saying that, who is a 

very thoughtful person and doesn’t make rash decisions but 

makes decisions after a very thorough thought process. And 

based on that, Mr. Speaker, I’m seeing that the true colours of 

the Sask Party, as far as the working people is concerned, is 

starting to be revealed. And it’s starting to support what their 

leader said when he was in opposition some time ago when he 

said that, if they ever formed government in this province, they 

would go to war with the working people. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we’re starting to see that. We’re starting to 

see that. I thought the first piece of legislation, Bills 5 and 6, 

was something that well perhaps they did that to satisfy their 

supporters and their backers and their financiers. But then Bill 

43 comes along and you start to wonder about the commitment 

that the government here has to true democracy and to the right 

of working people, men and women, to be able to express their 

concerns, their satisfactions — or dissatisfactions in this case. 

 

And then, Mr. Speaker, you see this Bill — a Bill that flies in 

the face of not only the unionized worker, Mr. Speaker, but it 

flies in the face of the contractors who first asked for this. This 



May 6, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2981 

legislation came into place not under an NDP government. It 

first came into place under Ross Thatcher, a Liberal 

government. 

 

And it came into place after — after — the contractors in the 

industry came forward to the Thatcher government and said, 

please bring us some legislation that will bring stability to our 

industry because right now we have an industry that’s in 

turmoil. We have an industry that simply doesn’t work because 

we’re spending time fighting ourselves rather than attracting the 

investment and through that investment creating the opportunity 

for people in this province. Mr. Speaker, it was the contractors 

that asked for this legislation, not the union workers. 

 

[15:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the early 1980s, the Saskatchewan construction 

industry was in a state of turmoil. There was unrest, 

dissatisfaction, upheaval, and as a result of that, instability that 

existed within the industry created a number of problems. It 

created the problems of lack of willingness for investments to 

be made; investors simply didn’t want to invest into an industry 

and an atmosphere and an economy that was in turmoil. And 

they wouldn’t know, they had no idea, no security at all of a 

belief that their particular project wouldn’t be hit with that 

turmoil and it would be left standing idle and their investment 

dollar standing there withering away and not being able to 

benefit from that investment because the turmoil that existed 

within the construction industry in Saskatchewan in the 1980s 

was running rampant. 

 

And during that period of time, several representative employer 

organizations were in competition to control the Saskatchewan 

construction industry. Mr. Speaker, that is what happens when 

you don’t have a province-wide collective agreement in place 

where all the players are addressed, where all the stakeholders 

are addressed, where both contractors and the unions have sat 

down and negotiated a collective bargaining agreement. So it 

doesn’t matter whether that project is going on in Estevan or 

Weyburn or Regina or Saskatoon or Lloydminster; it’s all 

covered by one collective bargaining agreement so that there is 

no friction between the various contractors. And there is no 

friction between the various projects as far as compensation to 

workers, as far as benefits being secured. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during the 1980s, when the turmoil was probably 

at its highest in the industry, this fight led to the very long strike 

that virtually brought the construction to a screeching halt in 

this province, a screeching halt in this province. This in return 

had a very negative impact upon the provincial economy. Why? 

People weren’t working. Why? They were on strike. Why? 

Because there was dissatisfaction and turmoil within the 

industry. There was competition between contractors. There 

was a desire by some to try to control the industry, to limit the 

ability of individuals, workers within the industry to be able to 

secure for themselves and for their family a fair and reasonable 

compensation for their toil, for their sweat, for their labour that 

they put into the projects so that they could go home and be 

able to support their families in a fair and reasonable and 

quality lifestyle, Mr. Speaker. That was the problems. 

 

As a result of that, the economy slowed. Why? Because the 

construction industry virtually screeched to a halt. When the 

construction industry screeches to the halt, there’s no wages 

being earned, and those wages are not then being redistributed 

throughout the communities. Contractors are not being able to 

attract new project and attract new investments to the economy. 

Why? Because investors, quite frankly, aren’t going to put their 

money into an economy that is stagnant. They’re simply not 

going to enter into construction projects that may never ever get 

off the ground, or if they do, they will maybe be hijacked 

halfways through. 

 

So those are the reasons, Mr. Speaker, that we had some 

experiences from the 1980s. And the fight between, Mr. 

Speaker, in those days, the fight between the REOs, or the 

representative employer organizations, caused a great deal of 

instability within the industry. Bill 80 will most certainly have 

the same negative effect, and the problems of the 1980s will 

once again become the issue. 

 

And that’s the interesting part, Mr. Speaker. We all as 

individuals have had experiences in the past. We have made 

decisions. Some of those decisions have been very good 

decisions, and they have rewarded us. Some of those decisions 

haven’t been quite so good, and we find them as negative 

decisions, decisions that have perhaps cost us. But, Mr. 

Speaker, most people, most people in their own lives when 

they’re making those types of decisions will learn from them. 

They will learn from their mistakes. They will learn from their 

mistakes of the past and endeavour not to make them again. 

 

It’s often been said that those who don’t learn from their 

mistakes are destined to repeat them. And yet, Mr. Speaker, we 

have a government over here that has been exposed to the 

history of Saskatchewan, that has the ability to look at the 

history of this province, to look at the history of the 

construction industry in this province, and to learn from those 

mistakes — to learn from those mistakes that were made in the 

past and not to go down that same road, Mr. Speaker, not to go 

down that same road that has proven to be the wrong road in the 

past. 

 

And why do we wish to go down that same road today? Mr. 

Speaker, that is the question. The question is, why hasn’t this 

government learned from the mistakes of history? Why hasn’t 

this government said look, let’s not do that? It didn’t work then 

and it won’t work now. Let’s move forward in a collective and 

a positive way so that that’s not the case, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during the turmoil of the 1980s, many 

construction contractors moved their operations to other 

provinces. Many contractors in the 1980s were headquartered 

right here in Saskatchewan. They were Saskatchewan 

contractors headquartered here in Saskatchewan. They did work 

in Saskatchewan. They also did work outside this province. And 

when they do that, when they are headquartered here and they 

do work outside the Saskatchewan borders, that profit, those 

monies, are brought here to Saskatchewan. Their tax is paid in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So the workers are working here that are paying their taxes; 

they’re paying them here in Saskatchewan. But so are the 

contractors, so are the contractors. When they do their income 

tax, they pay that income tax right here in Saskatchewan. They 

purchase many of their goods and services right here in 



2982 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2009 

Saskatchewan. They hire clerical staff, the support staff that 

supports their operation at their head office right here in 

Saskatchewan. I believe Bird Construction was one of those 

contractors, Mr. Speaker, who in the 1980s was headquartered 

right here in Saskatchewan, but because of the turmoil that 

existed during that period of time in the construction industry, 

they moved out. They weren’t alone. There were others, other 

large contractors who left Saskatchewan, but they were the one 

that comes to mind right off the top of my head here. 

 

The construction labour relations Act of 1992 resulted in a very 

stable construction industry. Strikes were a thing of the past. 

And collective agreements with all the construction trades were 

negotiated under a big table scenario, and there was peace in the 

industry. And under Bill 80 in the 1980s could very well have 

repeated through the effects of our provincial economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when there was a collective bargaining agreement 

put into place as a result of the construction labour relations Act 

in 1992, it was done province-wide. All the unions participated. 

All the contractors, the unionized contractors participated. All 

the trades participated. And they reached a province-wide 

collective bargaining agreement so that a project working in 

Estevan, the worker, whether it be the plumber or the carpenter, 

would be paid the same there or if they were working on a 

project in Saskatoon or Lloydminster. 

 

The contractors knew this. There was a level playing field, a 

level playing field that enabled them to bid. What the 

contractors also received out of this was quality workmanship. 

They received a workforce that was professional, a workforce 

that was well trained, well experienced, a workforce that 

delivered the product on time, on budget, and with quality 

work. Mr. Speaker, that was one of the things that certainly was 

promoted within the construction industry during the last 20 or 

25 years, is that not only was it essential that the work be done 

on time, but it was also essential that there be quality work. 

 

And that was something that the unions policed themselves and 

insisted upon and were receiving, and the contractors were 

receiving from the unionized workers, was not only, not only 

were they receiving workers that basically gave a full day’s 

work for a full day’s pay; they got quality. They got quality 

work. The workers showed up and they worked. But they also 

produced a quality product. And as a result of that, the 

contractors would come in on budget and in many cases — and 

some I can think of fairly recently here — that came in actually 

under budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those are the benefits; those were the benefits of 

having a stable construction industry, an industry where 

contractors could rely on receiving quality workers. Investors 

could rely on investing into a project and knowing that 

whatever time frame that project was set to be completed in, it 

would be done on time and that their investment would soon 

start to return profits to them because they knew the length of 

time of that project. They knew the length of time that that 

investment would be there in construction before it was in a 

position to start to return the product that they were looking for. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a unionized construction industry currently 

provides thousands, thousands of good paying jobs to this 

province. How important is that, Mr. Speaker? Well I think it’s 

quite important. I think it’s a benefit to the community. It’s a 

benefit to the province. It’s a benefit to our economy to have 

good quality, good paying jobs. Mr. Speaker, a unionized 

worker, a worker who is receiving — or a non-unionized 

worker — but a worker who is receiving a fair level of 

compensation for his efforts, for his sweat, for his toil, and for 

his dedication to the job benefits the entire economy. 

 

And why is that, Mr. Speaker? Well at the end of the week 

when the worker comes home with his paycheque in his pocket, 

the first thing they will likely do, him and his wife and his 

family, they will sit down and take care of the essential 

businesses, the bills that have to be paid. They’ll pay their 

power bill, and they’ll pay their heat bill and their telephone 

and so on and so forth. Then usually on a Saturday morning 

they’ll head off to the local grocery store, supermarket, and they 

will purchase their week’s supply of groceries. 

 

And then on their way home, if they’ve been receiving fair and 

reasonable compensation for their toil, they’ll have a little 

money left over which they’ll be able to share with the 

community. They do that by perhaps stopping in and buying 

one of their children an MP3 player or a new Blu-ray video 

player or maybe even, Mr. Speaker, a big screen TV. 

 

And what does that do? Well that shares the money with the 

community. That money means that somebody selling that 

product has a job. Why? Because he sold that product. And if 

he has a job, that means he has a paycheque, and he then spends 

it in the community. So it’s sort of like a wheel that continues to 

turn, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So is it an investment in good wages? I think it is. I think the 

economy benefits when you have a construction industry that 

has a good return — a fair return and a good return to its 

employees. 

 

The employer makes money. Don’t kid yourself, Mr. Speaker. I 

have been led to believe and in my conversations with some of 

the contractors — some of them unionized contractors and 

some of them not, Mr. Speaker — that there’s a pretty standard, 

I guess you’d say, a form of bidding when the project comes up. 

And the contractor that I was talking to, Mr. Speaker, the 

example he used was carpenters. 

 

The particular project that he was looking at bidding on, there 

was a pretty intensive amount of work for carpenters, at least at 

the front end of the contract, and he was looking at the number 

of hours, the number of man-hours that would be involved in 

this contract for carpenters. And he was looking at what it 

would cost him to bid on the carpenter per hour, and the number 

was basically $60. That’s what he came up with. He said in his 

bid he would be considering the cost of the labour, of carpenter 

labour at $60 an hour. That’s what he would be bidding it out 

at. 

 

Does that mean, Mr. Speaker, that he’s going to pay the 

carpenter $60 an hour? No, it doesn’t. No, it doesn’t. What it 

means is that $60 an hour will cover their wages. It will also 

cover their benefits, their health programs, and whatever 

benefit, other programs they may have. And he will build into 

that a margin of profit. 

 



May 6, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2983 

What he suggested to me was that the margin of profit he’d be 

looking at for himself out of that $60 an hour was about $15. It 

was about $15. So he would pay $45. That would cover the cost 

of not only the wages, but it’d cover the cost of unemployment 

insurance and workers’ compensation and all the benefits that 

workers receive, plus he would take $15 and put it in his 

pocket. 

 

Well a little later on in a conversation I was having with a 

non-unionized contractor and we were relating to the same 

project, I asked him what he would be looking at as far as 

carpenters was concerned, and as far as the carpenter portion of 

that labour on that contract he was looking at. And he said, well 

he would probably bill that out at about $60 an hour, which 

would be the same number, the same amount as a unionized 

contractor. 

 

[15:45] 

 

I said, well that’s interesting. I said, now would you break that 

$60 an hour down for me? Oh, he said, it’s fairly simple. He 

said, I would take $45 off of that and put it in my pocket and 

use the other $15 to settle my labour costs to my employee. So 

there, Mr. Speaker, is the difference. There, Mr. Speaker, is the 

difference. 

 

You have a non-unionized labourer, non-unionized carpenter, 

who will be forced to work for $15 an hour and simply find 

ways and means to be able to pay his bills, his power bill, his 

heat bill, his telephone bill, and be able to buy groceries, and 

I’m afraid, Mr. Speaker, may not have much disposable income 

left to buy that MP3 player or Blu-ray player or even that big 

screen TV. 

 

Well when he can’t buy those extra things, Mr. Speaker, he 

doesn’t support the local electronics store. That means the 

person working in that electronic store doesn’t get to sell these 

products, and that means that if he doesn’t sell products, he 

soon loses his job. 

 

And then the wheel starts to spin out of control perhaps, Mr. 

Speaker, or it starts to crumble. And what we see then is the 

economy that suffers because there isn’t the economic activity 

within that economy and within that community. So the 

community starts to suffer. So it all starts to back up, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So when we see, Mr. Speaker, that this legislation is legislation 

that is regressive, I wonder why. Why is it that we have a 

government that wants to dampen the economy? Wants to 

dampen the economy by taking money out of it, okay? Oh yes, 

Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that there’ll be a handful of their friends 

that are in the construction industry that are contractors that 

might benefit from it. But these people for the most part don’t 

spend their money at the local grocery store, don’t spend their 

money at the local electronic shop. They spend their money 

outside of this community. They spend their money, in most 

cases, outside of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And that does not 

help our economy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, most construction companies who are signators of 

the CLR [Construction Labour Relations Association of 

Saskatchewan] have established business offices in our 

province. 

 

In addition to paying their taxes here in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, they employ clerical staff, engineers, drafting 

personnel, purchasing agents, truck drivers, management teams, 

safety representatives. These people all, Mr. Speaker, are from 

the community. These people all benefit from having a head 

office operating here, operating here in Saskatchewan — a 

Saskatchewan-based construction company that operates here. 

 

The spin-offs of that create opportunity for the growing of our 

economy by having people who are working, receiving fair and 

reasonable compensation for their work, and are able to take 

those funds and distribute them for goods and services that they 

enjoy throughout our economy and throughout our community. 

 

Where practical, these companies need to purchase their 

supplies from local suppliers plus helping our economy, Mr. 

Speaker, not only because they have employees working here, 

but they also need supplies to operate their offices. They need 

supplies to operate their company. And those supplies are 

bought where? They’re not bought in New York. They’re not 

bought in Seattle or Dallas. They’re purchased right here, right 

here in our local community, right here in our local economy, 

right here in Saskatchewan, supporting, supporting the 

Saskatchewan economy, supporting the people here, supporting 

the business here — in many cases the small businesses here, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

But if you look at the facts and figures, and I think Stats Canada 

will verify this, that if you look at what it is that really drives 

our economy, it’s not the big project. It’s not the big 

corporations, Mr. Speaker. It’s the working people and small 

business. 

 

A few years ago — my numbers could be a little dated here — 

but a few years ago it was determined that 72 per cent of all the 

jobs created in Canada were created in shops that employed less 

than 25 people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So when you have a head office of a construction company here 

that has clerical staff, that has engineers, drafting personnel, 

purchasing agents, truck drivers, management teams, and safety 

representatives, when they need services, when they need 

supplies and services to support their operation, they get it 

locally. When they get it locally, they share the wealth. They 

share the money. They build the economy. We have a strong 

economy because we have people working in it, have people 

receiving a fair and reasonable compensation for their efforts, 

for their toil, for their sweat. It is a win-win situation, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And that’s what exists today, and it exists today because of the 

experiences of the past of those involved in the construction 

industry. Their experiences of the past, of turmoil and upheaval, 

did not work. A destabilized industry did not work. This is why 

they asked the government of the day, the Ross Thatcher 

government of the day, to bring in legislation that would bring 

in stability to the industry so that they would have the ability to 

bid in a fair and level playing field. There’d be the opportunity 

for an assurance of jobs and an assurance of fair compensation 

for those individuals who are working in that industry. 

 



2984 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2009 

But it also created an atmosphere where investors were willing 

to invest. They were willing to invest because they knew the 

industry was stable. They knew they could invest. They knew 

the length of time that that project would take. They could 

amortize their investment so that they would be in a position at 

the end of the project and the project would start to deliver the 

goods they were looking for. They’d be in a position to start to 

have a return on that investment. That, Mr. Speaker, was 

something that was created in this province only through the 

experiences of the past. 

 

And why is it, why is it that we want to turn away from 

something that works and try something that history has shown 

us does not work? Why is it, Mr. Speaker? It is a puzzlement to 

me, Mr. Speaker. But it’s also a puzzlement to many, many 

people in the industry — both unionized and non-unionized. 

 

As I have said a little earlier about my story about the young lad 

who told me that he wouldn’t be supporting the Sask Party 

again because of the labour legislation — it’s a true story, Mr. 

Speaker, it happened to me last Saturday night here, Seven 

Oaks hotel — simply because, simply because, Mr. Speaker, 

whatever destabilizes the labour industry, whatever destabilizes 

the construction industry and destabilizes the labour within that, 

whether it be unionized or non-unionized, it affects everyone. 

 

This legislation though, it targeted unions. This is true. It’s very 

apparent it’s targeted at unions. But the non-union sector is 

going to be caught in the wake also and they’re going to get the 

backlash, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Members of the Saskatchewan construction union, Mr. Speaker, 

live here. They don’t live elsewhere. They live right here in this 

province. Their families live here. Their children attend school 

here. They pay their taxes here. They purchase their household 

supplies here. They purchase their houses here. They purchase 

their cars and their trucks and their vehicles to support their 

families right here in our community — the community of this 

province. And, Mr. Speaker, those are the people that this 

government should be supporting. 

 

But that’s not the case. Through this legislation, Mr. Speaker, 

this is the very people that they’re turning their backs on. And 

they’re saying to them, this government really doesn’t care how 

these folks make a living, how these folks are able to make their 

way in the world, if they are able to enjoy a reasonable and 

quality lifestyle because they’re able to get reasonable and 

quality compensation for their efforts, for their work, for their 

sweat, for their commitment to the job, to the projects, and to 

the contractors, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Bill 80 amounts to nothing more than an organized union 

busting. And there is no benefit in this, Mr. Speaker, no benefit 

in this at all to the provincial economy. It is the provincial 

economy that, at the end of the day, will suffer. It will suffer 

because when you enter into a situation where you want to have 

a race to the bottom for wages, you take away disposable 

income that is spent into our economy, disposable income that’s 

spent in our communities. You take that away. You cause 

businesses no longer to be able to survive because they don’t 

have the income to support the staff and to support the costs of 

running that small business. And all of a sudden, Mr. Speaker, 

you’re in a downward spiral. All of this, Mr. Speaker, because 

we deny the rights of workers to unite to ensure that through a 

common voice they’re able to negotiate a fair and reasonable 

compensation package for their efforts, for their sweat, for their 

toil, their commitment to the projects and the contractors within 

this great province of ours. 

 

Bill 80 does nothing more than supply construction workers 

from other provinces who are willing to work for reduced 

wages. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s what you’re going to see if Bill 

80 comes into effect. You will see unemployed workers from 

other provinces who are, because they’re unemployed, Mr. 

Speaker, coming into this province. And they will undercut, 

they will undercut the wage levels set here in Saskatchewan. 

They will undercut that because contractors from outside will 

be allowed to bid on jobs. That will undercut the bidding 

process. They can bid because they will be able to, as a result of 

Bill 80, be able to pay their workers less money. 

 

And that will simply create a situation where you have 

Saskatchewan workers — those same workers, Mr. Speaker, 

who I earlier said are the ones who live in this province, whose 

families live in this province, whose children attend school here 

in our communities, who pay their taxes here and purchase their 

household goods here, Mr. Speaker — they’re the ones that’ll 

be forced to accept lower wages or no work. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, when you have a situation where you have a 

young family, you have a mortgage on your home, and though 

maybe you have been used to receiving a fair and reasonable 

wage and fair and reasonable compensation for the efforts that 

you put into the projects, you will find yourself now in 

competition with those from outside the province who are 

willing to work for less. And they will have no choice but 

accept that lower wage. 

 

They will have no choice, Mr. Speaker, because they have 

children to feed, a mortgage to make payments on. And when 

that happens it starts to backlash on the economy because it 

starts to dry the economy up, because there aren’t the 

disposable incomes that there were in the past to continue to 

support the industry, to continue to support the community, the 

business sector in the community, the small businesses, and 

they start to go out of business. 

 

So at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, what you see is a 

downward spiral. And when we enter into this competition for 

lower wages, you’re really entering into a race — a race to the 

bottom where nobody wins. Nobody wins except perhaps a 

handful, a handful of contractors. And in some way, Mr. 

Speaker, I would say greedy contractors, because they’re 

willing to take away from the working people their rights and 

their ability to live a reasonable quality of life, not only for 

themselves but for their families. They’re taking that away. 

They’re taking away from the economy the opportunity to cause 

the economy to be strong and prosperous. They’re taking that 

away all to satisfy their own personal greeds by shoving money 

in their pockets. 

 

And many of them, Mr. Speaker, many of them will come from 

outside of Saskatchewan so that they don’t even pay their 

income tax here in this province, Mr. Speaker. They spend very 

little money in this province. Their workers that come here will 

spend very little money in this province. Because where are 



May 6, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2985 

their families? Where are their families? They’re not here in 

Saskatchewan. They’re elsewhere. They’re in some other 

province, perhaps even some other country, Mr. Speaker. But 

they have been imported here simply because they will work for 

less. 

 

They will work for less. Driving the wages down here, driving 

the quality of life in this province down, driving the economy of 

this province down, Mr. Speaker. And that, Mr. Speaker, is 

something that I find unconscionable. 

 

Construction unions provide pensions and health and welfare 

benefits to all their members, Mr. Speaker, to all of their 

members. Everybody is treated equal. Everybody has the 

opportunity to enjoy those benefits. That, Mr. Speaker, is not 

going to be the case with contractors from outside of 

Saskatchewan that are willing to employ workers that will come 

from outside the borders of Saskatchewan — workers who are 

willing to work for less, workers who are willing to participate 

in the great race, the great race to the bottom. 

 

[16:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, the construction unions spend millions of dollars 

annually on training and safety programs. Bill 80 will result in 

an untrained individual working in a safety-sensitive industry. 

And if you, Mr. Speaker — and I know you have, I’m sure — 

paid attention to the Day of Mourning in this great province, 

you will note that year in and year out we unfortunately are 

viewing a list of workers who most of them were in the 

construction industry, finding themselves hurt or killed in the 

industry. And that’s very unfortunate, Mr. Speaker. And that 

despite the fact that there has been, under the union sector, there 

has been a real conscious effort at training, at training people to 

ensure that they are well trained and qualified to do the work, 

but they also do it under a safety umbrella, under safety 

programs that they are encouraged to participate in. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this will no longer be the case. When you 

enter into a situation where you have contractors who are 

underbidding, who are cutting corners to increase their profits, 

doing so at the expense of workers, not supplying the workers 

with the ability to have their time to take the training programs, 

to have the time to upgrade themselves in the training aspects of 

their industry, Mr. Speaker — and that, Mr. Speaker, leads to a 

situation where you have untrained, untrained workers entering 

into a situation that could very well be dangerous to them. I 

think we’ve seen that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But sadly when you have untrained, unqualified workers 

working in your construction industry, these are the people who 

are building the infrastructure for ourselves and our children. 

Will we feel safe for our children to go to schools that are built 

with unqualified workers? Will we feel safe for our children and 

our families to go to libraries that are built with unqualified, 

untrained, and unskilled workers? 

 

Mr. Speaker, will we as individuals using the public services as 

they are, feel safe whether we’re crossing a bridge on the No. 1 

Highway, a bridge that was built by unqualified, inexperienced 

workers who simply are there because they will work for less 

money? Not because they’re qualified, not because they’re 

experienced at the construction of those bridges, but simply 

because they will work for less money. Will we feel safe? 

Question is, will we be safe? 

 

I would hope, Mr. Speaker, that at some point in time in the 

future, we don’t sit down to watch the 6 o’clock news and see 

of an instance where a busload of elementary children had a 

misfortunate accident while crossing a bridge on one of our 

highways that was built by contractors who employed workers 

who were not qualified to do the work. They employed these 

workers not for any other reason than the fact that they would 

work for less and the contractor could enhance his bottom line, 

Mr. Speaker. I would hope that would not be the case. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we look closely, look closely at Bill No. 80. It 

brings up a lot of issues; there’s no question about that. It brings 

up the issue of why there wasn’t any meaningful consultation 

with the stakeholders within the industry. Mr. Speaker, it 

puzzles me why a government introducing legislation that’s 

going to dramatically change the existing legislation and have a 

dramatic effect on the lives of working people, have a dramatic 

effect on the economy of this great province of ours would do 

so, would do so without consulting those on the front line who 

will be most affected. 

 

There was zero consultation with many of the industry’s 

important stakeholders, including the Saskatchewan Provincial 

Building and Construction Trades Council. On Bill 80, as far as 

we know, the only consultation that was done by this 

government was done with their fundamentalist cousins, the 

Christian Labour Association of Canada —not a union, Mr. 

Speaker, not a union by no stretch of the imagination — a 

smokescreen, a false pretence perhaps, to the workers who are 

employed by such companies as Ledcor. 

 

But it is certainly nowhere a union that stands up for the rights 

of their members, that stands up and negotiates a fair and 

reasonable compensation package, but most importantly, Mr. 

Speaker, negotiates the opportunity for training, the opportunity 

for safety, the opportunity to have a quality, skilled workforce. 

Mr. Speaker, what they are more interested in is having a 

workforce that will work for less. Through Bill 80 you will 

certainly create an instability and dramatically shift away from 

the traditional construction unions that have built this great 

province and have built for the workers’ benefits and have built 

the Saskatchewan community as a whole. 

 

On a construction site in Saskatchewan there has not been a 

strike in over one quarter of a century. For over 25 years, Mr. 

Speaker, there has been no strike in Saskatchewan. And why? 

Why is because we enjoyed a stable industry. We enjoyed an 

industry where through negotiations, through collective 

bargaining agreements on a province-wide negotiating table, the 

issues were addressed. The issues were addressed so that we 

had a stable industry here. And that stable industry affected 

who? Not just the workers, not just the contractors, not even 

just the investors, Mr. Speaker. It affected the entire province 

because we had a stable industry that was worth billions of 

dollars in economic activity throughout year in and year out. 

And that could be done, Mr. Speaker, in a stable atmosphere 

simply through sitting down and through negotiations. 

 

And yes, through those negotiations, the labour, the working 

people were able to gain from that fair and reasonable 



2986 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2009 

compensation for their efforts — fair and reasonable 

compensation for their sweat, for their toil, and for their 

dedication to the project, and, Mr. Speaker, for their pride in 

workmanship. Because if you look at the track record of 

unionized contracts and unionized projects in this province, you 

will see, Mr. Speaker, that the vast majority of them came in 

with quality work, came in on time and on budget. And, Mr. 

Speaker, unionized people are very proud of that. In fact I can 

think of one or two projects just now off the top of my head that 

most recently have come in ahead of schedule with the same 

effective and efficient quality workmanship, and they came in 

not only ahead of time but came in under budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the apprenticeship programs, the apprenticeship 

programs that is really the lifeblood of our construction industry 

is one of the victims of Bill 80 — the apprenticeship programs 

which is the heart and the soul of the construction industry. 

Without skilled workers, Mr. Speaker, without skilled workers 

smart money knows that the construction industry is on life 

support. If you haven’t got the skilled workers, the qualified 

workers, the skilled workers to do the jobs, the industry is in 

deep, deep trouble. Like any other workplace, as workers retire 

they need to be replaced. The plain and simple truth is that the 

apprenticeship system and the construction industry unions 

work together to produce that vast majority of skilled workers 

coming into our workforce. 

 

I’m not saying, Mr. Speaker, that all the workers trained stay 

with their unions. That’s not the case at all. Some stay, some 

stay with their unions and some go off to work for non-union 

companies and some go off to work for themselves. But every 

one of them, Mr. Speaker, if you poll them, every one of them 

will be the first to admit that they received their skills training, 

they received their skills training through the unionized sector. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the apprenticeship training and safety is one of the 

many pillars that are the important elements in the relationships 

of the construction unions and organized contracting 

companies. Apprenticeship in an organized environment is 

locked into a system and when times are lean — and those 

times will come back, Mr. Speaker; let us not fool ourselves, 

those times will come back — it is a temptation for some 

companies at that time to cut corners by manipulating the ratios 

and reducing the timely classroom studies and training. 

 

Bill 80 as it stands today will eventually decrease the number of 

people at the top of their skills in this great province of ours. 

Mr. Speaker, it will take away the quality training that our 

workers are enjoying today. 

 

And one of the reasons why Saskatchewan workers are really, 

really in demand worldwide is because we produce quality 

workers. Why? We have an apprenticeship program that gives 

them the opportunity at receiving the training that provides 

them to be top-notch workers that contractors want to employ 

and, quite frankly, that investors want to have on their projects 

and on their job sites because they know they’re going to get 

quality work. They’re going to get that work done in a timely 

fashion. And they’re going to get that work done, in most cases, 

on time — many cases, even ahead of time. 

 

So at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, those people who are 

investing, those investors are looking at those elements that 

they receive from qualified workers. And why do they receive 

that? Because they have that qualification. They have that 

training. They have that ability to produce a product of superior 

quality because they have been trained basically to be able to do 

so. 

 

Am I running out of time here? I see I’m getting the nod, Mr. 

Speaker. My colleague here suggested perhaps I should be 

winding up my remarks so I will certainly bow to his greater 

powers. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it is important that we ensure in this great 

province that we have the ability to continue on with quality 

work within our construction industry. In order to do that, Mr. 

Speaker, we must ensure that we have quality, well-trained, 

skilled people coming into the industry on a regular and 

ongoing basis. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, will not happen — will not happen — if Bill 

80 sees the light of day in its present form. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is probably the fourth piece of regressive 

legislation that has been presented in this legislature by this 

government. It’s regressive labour legislation, and I think, Mr. 

Speaker, it is probably the only legislature in this great province 

that in such a tight, tight time frame has been bombarded with 

such backward legislation. 

 

It’s regressive. It’s taking away from the rights of workers — 

rights that have been earned over decades of negotiations, 

decades of work, decades of doing quality work on behalf of 

contractors; and contractors recognizing that and being willing 

to reward those workers for the quality work being done. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think if you haven’t been able to ascertain it 

by now, I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, that this Bill, Bill No. 

80, will not be receiving my support. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 

very pleased today to enter into debate on Bill No. 80, The 

Construction Industry Labour Relations Act, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

Now this particular piece of legislation is one of the most 

regressive pieces of legislation that I’ve seen in my now nine 

years in the legislature, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

the members opposite obviously like to call from their seats and 

not pay attention to the debate on this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I think that any piece of legislation should start from a 

fundamental position of, what problem are you fixing? Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, before you should put legislation in place, you 

should have a problem that needs fixing. 

 

And what’s being fixed with this particular piece of legislation, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker? That’s the question the people of 

Saskatchewan have. That’s the question that the members on 

this side of the House have, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Deputy 



May 6, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2987 

Speaker, that is definitely the question that the members of the 

building trades in this province have, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

[16:15] 

 

What problem are we trying to fix? Well, Mr. Speaker, when I 

look at this piece of legislation, and I meet with members of the 

building trades and I meet with individuals involved in the 

industry, Mr. Speaker, I don’t see anybody asking for this 

particular piece of legislation. Who asked for this particular 

piece of legislation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and what problem are 

we trying to fix? 

 

I think those are fundamentals that should be answered prior to 

drafting legislation, prior to going down a course of action, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that does nothing but put working men and 

women at a disadvantage, takes away benefits that they fought 

for over the years, Mr. Deputy Speaker — things that they’ve 

earned over a considerable period of time. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, those things are being taken away 

from these members of the building trades without any 

consultation, without any discussion. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

it all goes back to that fundamental question, what problem are 

we fixing? What problem are we fixing with this particular 

regressive labour legislation? 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members can yell from their 

seats over there and show disrespect when individuals want to 

talk and debate reasonably a Bill before this legislature. If the 

members opposite, members of the government don’t want to 

have a reasonable debate in which the people of this province 

can listen and hear about what this piece of legislation is about, 

well then that’s really unfortunate, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s what we’ve seen when we’ve come, when it’s 

come to dealing with labour legislation from this government. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, they’ve not answered the question about 

what fundamental problem are we fixing with this legislation. 

They haven’t even taken the time to consult with people who’d 

be affected by the legislation. They first put legislation in place 

and say, we’ll consult later. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if that 

isn’t a process that’s totally out of appropriate sequence, that 

totally makes no sense in common logic, Mr. Speaker, I don’t 

know what is. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will tell you what we see before us. 

We have a Premier that, when he was the leader of the 

opposition, made it very clear that he’d go to war — go to war 

with the unions, go to war with the working men and women of 

this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And what we see today, and 

what we see today, Mr. Speaker, is this Premier living up to his 

word to go to war with the working men and women of this 

province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And it’s not good enough just to go to war. And it’s in the 

implementation of Bill 5 and 6, one that brings in essential 

services that doesn’t work, that even the technicians in the 

government today say does not work. That the public sees does 

not work. That the unionized member sees does not work. 

 

It’s not good enough to have Bill 6, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Bill 6 

that takes the rights of members to organize, of unions to 

organize new unions, make it more difficult, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. It didn’t end with Bill 43 that could take away the 

rights to peaceful assembly, the right to demonstrate, the right 

to exercise their collective rights to strike by having 

demonstrations, Mr. Deputy Speaker. No, it doesn’t end with 

those three regressive Bills, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Now we have 

Bill 80. 

 

And when’s the last time we’ve seen this type of legislation 

before the Saskatchewan legislature, legislation that takes away 

the fundamental rights of the building trades, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker? We saw that in the 1980s under Grant Devine. We 

saw it during the 1980s by Grant Devine. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Order. I’m finding 

some of the comments are getting fairly loud, and I will also 

mention to members that there will be no discussion if you’re 

not in your seat. I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Now since 1980, since the 1980s, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen a 

consistency in labour legislation application in the province of 

Saskatchewan. From 1991 forward, we’ve seen stability in the 

construction industry, Mr. Speaker, because the previous 

government, the previous government was very, very sincere in 

a desire to have stability, stability in our province so growth 

could occur. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, what creates the greatest problems in our 

province’s instability? Not knowing what is coming, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And what we’ve seen since this new 

government’s come into place is four, now four Bills of 

aggressive labour legislation, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And those 

four Bills have undermined some of the fundamentals in this 

province and have tipped the balance that’s been in place for 

many, many years. 

 

But going back particularly or specifically to Bill No. 80, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, Bill No. 80, The construction labour relations 

Act, Mr. Deputy Speaker, takes away some fundamental rights 

that tradespeople in our province have had for many, many 

years. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite can yell across the 

floor and try to pretend that they know what they’re talking 

about, Mr. Speaker, but if they want to enter into the debate, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, if the members want to enter into debate, 

perhaps they should stand and do so from their seats, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, rather than yell across the floor like, Mr. 

Speaker, I’d like to say like little children you’d see in a 

classroom. If they want to in fact participate in the debate, 

maybe they should stand from their seat and do it appropriately, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Member: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. Yates: — Maybe they should respect, Mr. Speaker, maybe 

they should respect this Assembly and respect the rights of 

individuals to debate, Mr. Speaker, have the right to debate, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is actually 

embarrassing to see members of the government yelling during 



2988 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2009 

a debate about a particular piece of legislation. If they want to 

enter into the debate again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d say they 

should stand when they have the appropriate time when it’s 

their turn and debate this piece of legislation. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to talk again about Bill No. 

80. What does this do? This Bill is a fundamental attack on the 

rights of the building trades unions in our province, the 

employees they represent, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and the 

individuals in our province that are afforded the benefits and 

wages as a result of contracts that have been entered into by 

these respective unions. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, these unions have represented these 

employees based on a craft trade certification for many, many 

years, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They have province-wide collective 

agreements that are respected by the employers. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we have seen, as a result of that, a significant 

improvement in the apprenticeship standards in our province, 

the continued education of apprentices in our province, and the 

development of a skilled labour force that this province very 

much needs. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, any deterioration of any one of those 

things undermines the fabric of our construction industry in this 

province. And that undermining of our construction industry in 

this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is not in the interest of the 

employers. It’s not in the interest of the employees, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And it’s certainly not in the interest of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this particular piece of legislation 

isn’t in the interest of either the employers in the province of 

Saskatchewan or the building trades unions in the province of 

Saskatchewan or the employees. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this 

legislation was put forward without even consulting them. This 

was put forward because an ideological, an ideological position 

of the government in power — a government that is trying to 

undermine the very essence of what those contracts are about, 

the very protections that employees have in this province in the 

construction industry. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, once again there is members there 

saying, oh, this is that; it’s that. Mr. Deputy Speaker, they 

haven’t gone and consulted with the construction industries. 

They haven’t gone and consulted with the unions, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. They talk about this as being choice — giving choice 

to employees, giving choice to employers, allowing new unions 

in, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, who asked for that? I’ll tell you who 

asked for that — unions that operate outside the province of 

Saskatchewan, unions that haven’t represented employees in the 

province of Saskatchewan, unions that are classified within the 

broader context of the labour movement as employer unions, 

unions that come in and sign an agreement with half a dozen 

employees on a work site. And then all employees who come to 

work at that work site have to live by that agreement, and they 

don’t even get a vote on it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

That’s what this is about. This is about giving preference to 

employers to run the industry without having — without having 

— to deal with the rights of those employees in a way that 

provides them with true collective bargaining, the right to vote. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is about taking away rights from 

individuals that they already had. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

that’s what they intended to do. 

 

They have intended to take away rights from working people 

just as they did in Bills 5 and Bill 6. And they can deny it and 

say it’s not true, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But if they want to enter 

into the debate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would ask them to, when 

it’s their turn, stand in their place and talk and explain what 

their position is. Because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they haven’t 

explained their position to anybody in this province because 

they haven’t consulted with anybody. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what this piece of legislation does is 

undermines the fundamentals of the contracts that exist between 

those craft unions across the province, those members of the 

building trades that are represented on various job sites across 

this province and allows for a union to come in that hasn’t 

operated in the province of Saskatchewan — one known as 

CLAC, the Christian Labour Association of Canada — to come 

in, bring four or five employees to a job site with a new 

employer, Mr. Deputy Speaker, come to an agreement on a 

contract with that employer and not even have the employees 

vote on that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and put a contract in place 

that will undermine the wages, undermine the benefits and the 

working conditions of those employees. Not to mention, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, it will be a contract across all trades, and all 

people who work on one job site will be covered by a single 

collective agreement. So it will undermine the apprenticeship of 

those particular trades at that work site, potentially. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I go back to the fundamental of what 

problem are we trying to fix here? Why did we bring forward 

this legislation? Legislation should be problem driven, Mr. 

Speaker. It should be there to fix a problem, an amendment to 

legislation. It should be there to do something that’s 

fundamental, that’s required by the industry, that’s required by 

the employers and employees. 

 

But it should happen after consultation with the employers and 

employees, and that hasn’t happened in this case, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. This is legislation that is brought forward by a 

government for ideological reasons, to support a union that they 

want to support with a base outside the province of 

Saskatchewan called the Christian Labour Association of 

Canada. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is not the reason we should be 

bringing forward legislation. If those employees in this province 

want to have this union, then they should go seek it. We should 

not be passing legislation that allows the union to come in and 

do what this legislation does. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have the assistant deputy minister of Labour 

admitting that the only organization other than the employer 

organization who asked for this law was CLAC — Christian 

Labour Association of Canada. He also acknowledged that he 

excluded the building trades union from the consultation 

process. So you guys decide to put legislation in place without 

consulting with the very people who it’ll affect; the people who 

it will affect have been excluded from any consultation. You 

put legislation in place and say you’ll consult after. You’ll 



May 6, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2989 

consult after. 

 

Well it shouldn’t surprise the members opposite that the 

members of the building trades in this province, the working 

men and women of this province, don’t support this legislation. 

It shouldn’t surprise anybody. And I think the members 

opposite, I think the members opposite should go, they should 

go and do consultations with their unions and their 

representatives prior to introducing legislation. That’s the 

appropriate way to do consultation — not to make an 

ideological decision, implement it and then say, we’ll talk to 

you after we’re doing it, and if you don’t like it, we don’t really 

care. We don’t really care. 

 

Because that’s the message you’re sending to people when you 

do consultation after you’ve already done it. You’re saying, I 

don’t care what your opinion is. I don’t care about your input, 

and I don’t care if it doesn’t work for us. I don’t care if it takes 

something away from you, and I don’t care if it hurts you. 

That’s the message this government is sending to the working 

men and women of the building trades in this province. They 

don’t care about them. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members on this side of the 

House do care. We care about those men and women, and we 

care about the preservation of a strong, well-educated, 

well-trained trades sector in our province. And we care about 

those building trade unions because they provide that training in 

that sector of employment in our province. And they provide 

skilled labour, skilled tradespeople for our construction industry 

in this province. And they go above and beyond the call of their 

own responsibility to ensure that young people have the 

opportunity to get the appropriate training in this province so 

that they undertake their trade in a safe and appropriate manner, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker.  

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s actually shameful that we would have 

legislation like this before the House without having consulted 

those very organizations that in fact work on behalf of these 

men and women in the province of Saskatchewan, without 

consultations of their unions, without consultations of them, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and without consultations with the people of 

the province of Saskatchewan prior to the implementation. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the most important things in 

the construction industry is stability, and there has been stability 

from the early 1990s until now, the year 2009, in the industry. 

And we’ve seen growth in the construction industry. We have 

seen significant growth in our industry in the last number of 

years. We’ve seen many, many projects in the province. We’ve 

seen on-time, properly built projects, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

[16:30] 

 

The members of our construction trades are hard-working, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, hard-working, diligent workers that deliver a 

good product. So why are we trying to change that? Why are we 

trying to undermine the very standards, the very organizations, 

the very craftspeople who have delivered that work to the 

people of this province year after year for more than now 20 

years, for about 20 years, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Why are we 

doing that? 

 

We’re doing it because of the ideology of the government, 

because of an ideological bent to the right that says that 

employers should have more right, more power. And, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, they did this without even consulting all the 

employers. They’re doing this because an outside organization 

has come and said, we want to have the right to undermine 

what’s going on today in Saskatchewan — without doing an 

examination of, it’s in the best interests of the industry, the best 

interest of our tradespeople, the best interest of the province. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that if this opposition is paying 

attention, it’s at this point that many of them are asking 

themselves about whether or not they should withdraw this 

legislation. And if they’re asking themselves if they should 

withdraw this legislation, I want to help them by saying, yes, 

they should. They should withdraw this legislation because it 

doesn’t make sense. This particular piece of legislation does not 

make sense. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if it doesn’t make 

sense, you don’t do it. And one of the things that the people of 

the province of Saskatchewan want us to do, they want us to 

make decisions using common sense. They want us to make 

decisions in the best interests of the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

legislation should make sense to the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan. It should make sense to the industry in which is 

being developed and it should make sense to the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan. When it doesn’t, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, when it doesn’t then you should reconsider what 

you’re doing. 

 

You should take a step back, and you should say, do I need to 

re-examine this? Well the answer is yes, you do. The answer is 

yes, you do because this particular piece of legislation does not 

make sense for the working men and women in our building 

trades in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And what problem is it fixing, Mr. Deputy Speaker? The 

government’s failed to define that. This government’s failed to 

tell the people of Saskatchewan, including the members of this 

legislature, what problem they’re fixing. And legislation should 

be designed to fix a problem, to correct a wrong within our 

society. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we should not be using the power 

of legislation to take rights away from people, to take rights 

away from people without a reason, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members opposite can chirp from their 

seats and show a disrespect for the process of this Assembly, 

and that’s what they’re doing. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

obviously, obviously if they want to speak to this Bill, there’s 

an opportunity for them to speak as well. And if this Bill takes 

three years to pass . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I recognize the member from 

Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much. If all members of this 

Assembly want to speak to this Bill at length, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and this Bill takes three years to pass, I don’t think the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan will care. I don’t think 

the members of the building trades will care. And I don’t think 

the working men and women of this province will care. But I do 



2990 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2009 

think in an appropriate debate, talking and looking and 

examining the fundamentals of this Bill is appropriate. It needs 

to look at why is this Bill coming forward, what it is set about 

to achieve, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and what the end result will be. 

 

And the end result isn’t in the favour of the working men and 

women in the province. It’s certainly not in the favour of having 

strong apprenticeship standards, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in our 

province, having strong apprenticeship practices in our 

province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And as a result I think this has 

some fundamental flaws, this Bill. 

 

And I think it’s important that we have an in-depth examination 

as to the impact of both the various trades that are involved, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, as well as the construction industry in our 

province — what impact it’ll have on the economy as we see 

the gradual deterioration of the wages and benefits paid to 

tradespeople in our province and whether or not those 

tradespeople will continue to work in the province of 

Saskatchewan. Or will they seek employment elsewhere where 

they may be compensated better because the very benefits 

which they have fought for over a number of years may be 

deteriorated or taken away from them? 

 

Now The Construction Industry Labour Relations Act was 

repealed for a period of time under the Devine government and 

we saw a significant reduction in the number of people who 

were involved in the trades in our province. And it took some 

time to get a number, the number of tradespeople back up, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, to the point where we have a very stable 

construction industry today in the province of Saskatchewan, 

where we have one of the best — if not the best, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker — the best industries and representation for the 

employees in the country of Canada. And we should be proud 

of that, not trying to deteriorate that or take away from that, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

During the decade of the 1980s when The Construction Industry 

Labour Relations Act was repealed, there was no construction 

labour relations Act in place, or training committees, and the 

apprenticeship system ground to a halt. We saw deterioration of 

our apprenticeship system in the province. And as a result we 

saw many, many years with a significant shortage of 

journeymen in our province — a problem that we still, to some 

degree, are dealing with today. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to talk about a couple of other 

things that this Bill does before I wrap up my comments in the 

next few minutes. This Bill also takes away a section of the 

responsibility that is outlined in the current Act that the building 

trades in the current construction industry labour relations Act 

responsibilities are, and it deals with the issue of maintenance. 

In the previous Act, the maintenance of a project fell within the 

purview of The Construction Industry Labour Relations Act . It 

fell within the purview of the building trades and the tradesmen 

who worked under those agreements. That’s being removed 

from the Act. And the question is, why? 

 

Again, before you remove something from a piece of legislation 

or you amend a piece of legislation, you should understand the 

problem you’re trying to fix. Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they 

haven’t been able to articulate what they’re trying to fix with 

this amendment or what they’re trying to fix with the changes 

they’re making to this Act. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, if any of the members take the opportunity 

which they will have to speak to this Bill, I hope that they 

would take that opportunity to tell those of us in the province of 

Saskatchewan why they want to remove maintenance from this 

legislation. It’s not good enough to say you want to do 

something. You should be able and willing to justify your 

action. You should be willing and able to say why you’re doing 

it. And we should be able to understand it. 

 

An Hon. Member: — We just think all unions should have the 

right to work in Saskatchewan. We’re not anti-union. 

 

Mr. Yates: — And they say they want to have the right to work 

in Saskatchewan. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they can say 

whatever they want from the chairs, but they haven’t explained 

to the people of Saskatchewan, the members of this legislature, 

the employees of the building trades or the trade unions or for 

that matter the employers, what they’re trying to fix with this 

particular piece of legislation. 

 

And why are they removing maintenance from this legislation? 

To what end? Why? Who requested it? Those are all questions 

that the members should be prepared and willing to answer. We 

haven’t heard them answer any of these questions to date, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. We will have the opportunity, we will have the 

opportunity later on, Mr. Deputy Speaker, perhaps several 

months from now — I hope several months from now. I hope 

that all members on that side want to take the opportunity to 

speak to this Bill. 

 

And if it takes us three years to pass this Bill, I think it’s in the 

best interest of the province of Saskatchewan. Or better yet, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, it would even be better, it would even be better 

if the members opposite looked at this piece of legislation, 

shook their head and say, why did we do this, and withdrew it. 

Why would we put forward, why would we put forward a piece 

of legislation that’s so regressive, that wants to take away the 

rights of men and women in this province, working men and 

women in this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 

 

Now they’ve withdrawn legislation before. They’ve admitted 

they’ve made mistakes, and we’ve accepted that. In fact we 

have applauded them; we have applauded them for noticing and 

understanding when they’ve done something wrong. And, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, they’ve even done that when we have pointed 

this out. We have pointed out on various pieces of legislation 

that they didn’t make sense, and they’ve withdrawn them. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I hope once again that they will 

listen, they will pay attention, they will know that this piece of 

legislation is not appropriate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and they 

will do the honourable thing — they will re-examine this Bill 

and say, no, it’s not good for the working men and women of 

the province; no, it’s not good for the building trades, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And no, it’s not good for the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, they say, no, they’re not going to do that. 

Well I believe they’re highly unlikely that they will take 

another look at this Bill, that they will look at it in a manner that 

would be appropriate and say, this isn’t the right thing to do. 



May 6, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2991 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, why won’t they look at it? Because 

they have made an ideological choice, and that ideological 

choice is to go to war — to go to war with the unions, go to war 

with the working men and women of the province. As the 

Premier has said, as the Premier clearly articulated when he was 

the leader of the opposition, if he formed the government they 

would go to war with working men and women. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they are going to war with working 

people. This piece of legislation continues to confirm it, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. They continue to confirm day after day why 

the working men and women of this province cannot trust them, 

why the working men and women of this province should not 

vote for them, and why the working men and women of this 

province should not believe, should not believe, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that they will do anything to help the ordinary working 

people of our province. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, they respond to special interest groups. 

They respond to unions from outside the province of 

Saskatchewan who like to come in here and push aside unions, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. But did they consult with the people of 

our province? Did they consult with the construction unions in 

our province? No, they didn’t. No, they didn’t, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and nor do they care. They make that pretty obvious. 

They don’t care. 

 

As in with Bill 5 and 6, they have put in place pieces of 

legislation we don’t believe will work, we believe will hurt the 

industry. Will they listen to advice? Will they talk about the 

Bill? Will they debate the Bill? The answer’s no. They’re going 

to implement it for ideological reasons with or without, with or 

without consultations of the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they do not want to 

have an open dialogue on this Bill. They don’t want to have an 

open dialogue before they actually implement the Bill or put the 

Bill into the legislature, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So we’ll have, they’ll have hearings, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on 

this Bill. But those hearings, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are after. 

They’ll start consulting after they put the Bill in place, after 

they’ve already made the decision they’re going to pass it. 

Because when I’ve asked here whether they’ll look at things 

and really consider it, what I’ve heard back across is, no, no. 

 

So what good are public hearings if you’ve already decided 

what you’re going to do? So you’ll listen to people but you 

won’t change your mind. So you’ll consult with people, but you 

don’t care what they hear. That’s what I’m hearing from the 

members opposite chirp from their seats. They’ll say, they’ll 

say, yes, we’ll have public hearings. But what they hear from 

the public makes no difference. They’re saying that. They’re 

saying, what the public says about this Bill during public 

hearings doesn’t matter. Because if they won’t listen to the 

people of Saskatchewan, then what difference do those hearings 

make? 

 

When I’ve asked them if they’ll listen and look at amending the 

Bill or withdrawing the Bill, they say no. So, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, if they won’t listen, they won’t pay attention, they 

don’t want to debate the Bill, they don’t want to consult before, 

they have public hearings and they say they won’t pay attention 

to what happens there, they won’t change their position, they 

won’t change what they’re going to do, then, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, why, the public hearings become a farce. Why have 

them? 

 

They want to have them because they want to give the illusion 

that they care. But if they truly cared, they wouldn’t come in 

with a deadlock, set position and say, I’m going to implement. 

So why, why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, do we have a government 

that wants to implement something prior to consultation? 

Wouldn’t it be far more appropriate to do consultation prior to 

implementation? It would, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But this 

particular government has on many occasions done exactly 

what we’re seeing here — put a Bill in place and then do 

consultations after. 

 

So whose interests are they acting upon? That of the people of 

the province of Saskatchewan or specific stakeholders who, in 

one way or another, support this government? 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, obviously from my comments I 

won’t be supporting this particular piece of legislation. Many of 

my colleagues would like to enter into the debate. So at this 

time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am going to just end by simply 

saying and challenging the members opposite to consider 

withdrawing this Bill, consider doing meaningful consultation 

with the men and women of this province, the people of this 

province, the people of the industry, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 

then next fall, if they still feel the same way after they’ve done 

consultations, but before locking themselves into a position, to 

come back with a Bill. Do it right. 

 

[16:45] 

 

So take a step back. Withdraw this Bill. Do the consultations 

over the summer. Let the committee do the meaningful 

consultation and then, if they still feel the same way, come back 

with a Bill later this year. 

 

Well thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. With that, I will allow my 

colleagues who wish to speak on this Bill have the opportunity 

to enter into this debate, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, unfortunately it’s difficult to even hear myself speak 

to this Bill at times when members opposite are yelling from 

their chairs. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve taken my time. I will now take my 

chair and allow other members to enter into the debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It 

is a pleasure and I appreciate the opportunity to rise and speak 

on Bill 80, The Construction Industry Labour Relations 

Amendment Act. And I appreciate the opportunity, following 

my colleagues from Regina Dewdney, Walsh Acres, and 

Regina Northeast. 

 

A lot has been said about the concerns about this Bill. And we 

have just a few minutes before 5, but I do want to make sure . . . 

There are some concerns that I have, and I’ve been getting 

letters already about what are my points of view. People are 

concerned about this and really essentially, as my colleagues 



2992 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2009 

have talked about, the style of consultations that have gone on, 

that have become really the benchmark of this government. You 

do it first and then you act on . . .You do a bit of consultations 

to get an okay. But really, where did this come from? 

 

But I have three major concerns with this Bill: the impact it will 

have on apprenticeship, the impact it will have on our local 

economies, and really, the whole process around certification of 

craft unions or trade unions. If it ain’t broke, why are you fixing 

this? 

 

And this is really a huge, huge problem and I think that a 

Pandora’s box that this government has opened. And clearly I 

don’t think they’re understanding what they’re getting into. And 

clearly if they had talked to the Building Trades Council, for 

example, they might know a little bit about the issues they’re 

going to be tackling here. But they didn’t. They chose not to. 

And it will be really unfortunate the kind of things we see in the 

construction industry in the months and years ahead if this Act 

goes ahead. 

 

And I agree fully with my colleague from Regina Dewdney 

who talked about, this government has acknowledged the 

mistakes they’ve made in the past, withdrawn legislation. 

We’ve seen that this session with the highway traffic 

amendment Act, with the licence, the super licences they tried, 

and right away they said, oh we made a mistake. Let’s take it 

back. Let’s not do it. 

 

I ask them to consider the same approach with this and realize, 

gee, we should have done this differently. We should talk to 

people first. Let’s drop it right now, and that’s the way it should 

be. But they’re not going to, and they seem to have a particular 

dislike for talking to people who are in unions and they want to 

go after them afterwards. 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about, you 

know, last Saturday night . . . And we had a members’ 

statement on the Saskatoon and District Labour Council and its 

100th anniversary, 100 years. That’s a pretty major milestone 

that folks in Saskatoon celebrated this year. The impact that 

organized folks in Saskatoon, whether they be through trade 

unions or craft unions, the impact they’ve had on our economy. 

Well, the impact they’ve had on Saskatchewan, how they’ve 

built this province. And we know and we appreciate, and I’ve 

come to really appreciate through my own family members . . . 

I have a brother who’s in a craft union, a trade union, the work 

that he’s been doing. We know the people who are organized 

really bring a lot to the work site. We know they get their work 

done on time. We know it’s done well, and we know it’s done 

safely. 

 

Now I understand the Minister of Advanced Education and 

Labour, the part-time Minister of Labour . . . He’s not the 

full-time Minister of Labour unfortunately, you know. It’s the 

approach this government’s taken. It’s talked about Mission: 

Zero in terms of workplace safety. And clearly when you’re on 

construction sites, and we know . . . Unfortunately we’ve seen 

when people have been injured or died in the workplace, this is 

really, really important. And, Mr. Speaker, we know that 

organized workplaces are much more safer. They take this very 

seriously and they train their workers because they don’t want 

to see anybody going home hurt or, in the worst case scenario, 

not going home from their workplace, Mr. Speaker. So I really 

worry about this. 

 

And I worry about this because I see the impact on the 

apprenticeship programs. We see if we’re going to build this 

economy here in Saskatchewan where people get well-paid 

wages, and we’ve talked about that and we’ve seen in many 

cases wages going up, particularly in the construction industry, 

that it’s because they bring skill sets to the workplace. But here 

we see a thrust by this government where they’re going to take 

away the emphasis around skills — in fact might call this 

de-skilling the workplace — and this worries us because we see 

what the impact it will have. Not only will the quality of work 

be questionable, but is it a safe workplace? And we worry about 

that. 

 

I have to take my hat off to the people in the Building Trades 

Council and the many trades it represents in terms of the 

emphasis they place on training people through the 

apprenticeship programs. And not only in the major urban 

centres, Mr. Speaker. I know they’ve gone up North. And we 

had talks over the last couple years where they’ve believed the 

next area they have to really support and organize is in the 

North. So many people, First Nations and Métis people, have 

those skills that really makes a difference in their families. And 

I worry about this because we see an impact on lower wages — 

could this mean lower wages in our local economies? Not just 

in Regina or Saskatoon, but I’m talking about in rural areas, 

particularly in some of the major projects we’ve been talking 

about and particularly in the North. 

 

When you talk about the impact it will have on organizing 

workplaces, particularly around skill sets or trades, this is a 

huge, huge thing. And so I have concerns. I have great concerns 

about this. And when I write back to my constituents about that 

I say I have really . . . I know we’re going to have some 

consultations. The committee will talk about that. But clearly 

this Bill in its entirety is not well thought out. And I have to ask 

the government, I think that in the next few days there is an 

opportunity to do the right thing and withdraw this Bill. I mean, 

I don’t think it makes any sense at all. 

 

And clearly when you start out with excluding one group, one 

major group from the discussion, you know, about what could 

we do to improve the construction industry, I think that you 

should start out by having that scoping — it’s often called 

scoping — conversations where you scope out, where are the 

problems? Where do you think the problems are that we need to 

address? Is it in wages? Is it in safety? Is it in apprenticeship? 

What is it? Are we getting enough workers into the province? 

What can we do better? 

 

And when you exclude a major factor, major group from those 

discussions, you have to wonder, what really is this all about? 

What really is this all about? Does this government understand 

the impact, the unintended consequences it will have by going 

forward with this legislation? And again this is why I say, if it 

ain’t broke, why are you fixing this? 

 

Clearly there’s enough work, enough things we need to do. And 

particularly we see, around occupational health and safety, we 

are still tied with Manitoba with the highest injury rate in 

Canada. And while we have . . . And I have to say, and I hope 



May 6, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2993 

Mission: Zero works. When you have that kind of initiative, 

you need to have the legislative push behind it. We’ve seen no 

amendments to occupational health and safety in the two years 

and three opportunities this government has had to bring 

forward changes to occupational health and safety legislation 

that will have an impact in the workplace. We’ve not seen that, 

and we know there’s work to be done in that area. Why are they 

dragging their feet on this and moving forward in this area 

where, again, I don’t think it’s broke? I think it’s working well. 

 

We have a lot of work to do in the construction industry, but 

this isn’t part of it. We need to get more apprentices working. 

We need to get more apprentices in from different groups who 

haven’t had the access to having good opportunities. And I 

know, for example, my colleague from Walsh Acres was 

talking the other day about how there are 90 courses that the 

building trades folks offer above what SIAST [Saskatchewan 

Institute of Applied Science and Technology] does throughout 

the province, throughout the province. 

 

So they have access. People throughout this province has 

access. This Bill, Bill 80, The Construction Industry Labour 

Relations Amendment Act, puts all of that at risk. Needlessly at 

risk, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And why? Why is that? And I think 

that there is some questions that we need to have answered. 

We’ll go through these consultations, but clearly there is a 

fundamental problem. And I think when you talk to the people 

who know about building strength in infrastructure, you should 

be talking to the building tradespeople who know how to build 

things so they can last. And you don’t talk to them, clearly 

there’s going to be some issues down the road. 

 

We know that we’ve seen this style, where there’s Bill 5 and 6, 

the style that this government, particularly this minister, has. 

The way he’s been working with organized labour. There’s 

some major questions about his real commitment to working 

with working men and women in this province. And I just have 

to shake my hand and just say, you know, I have to . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . My hand . . . My head! Shake my 

head. Shake my head. You know I just, when I think about 

those guys, I just go way off track, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

appreciate their listening and caught me on that one. Very good. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I shake my head when I think about 

the kind of work they are doing in this area. I do. I think that 

they shake their heads too, and I appreciate that, because we do 

have some grave concerns as we move forward. They’ve seen 

some of the things that they’ve brought forward and they’ve 

realized that there’ve been some mistakes. And while we can 

have a few laughs in the House about things that we’re saying, 

Mr. Speaker, this is no laughing matter. 

 

Clearly they would prefer to just gloss over this area that they 

really don’t understand, really don’t understand. They said in 

the House . . . And I think, have they been talking to people 

who work in these industries, who work in these trades, you 

know, that have such a rich history? And as I say, we know that 

they take a lot of pride, the men and women who belong to the 

trades. And whether they be carpenters or plumbers, they are 

worried about, what does this mean to their families? What kind 

of impact does this have on their wages? What will you see in 

the workplaces, the work sites? Will there be job security and a 

decent wage? We’re talking about decent wages, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And clearly this will be a pressure. There will be chaos 

in the bidding systems, the bidding processes here. And I share 

their concerns. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think when the time comes to vote 

on this, I’ll have no choice but to vote against this — even be 

curious to see what amendments that come forward. But I think 

the Bill is flawed. It’s seriously flawed, fundamentally flawed, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I call on the government to withdraw 

this legislation in the next week so everybody can have a good 

season. Everybody can have a good construction season 

knowing what the rules are like they have had for the past. 

 

And we’ve seen the economy grow. We’ve seen the economy 

boom under the old rules. So I don’t know why these folks are 

so intent on changing them. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The time being 5 p.m., this House 

now stands adjourned until 10 a.m. tomorrow morning. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2961 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2961 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2961 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2961 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2961 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2961 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2962 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2962 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2962 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2962 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2962 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2962 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 National Hospice Palliative Care Week 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2963 

 Leadership Campaign Issues 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2963 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2963 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2964 

 Mother’s Day 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2963 

 Rising Hockey Star 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2964 

 Saskatchewan Literacy Awards of Merit 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2964 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Public-Private Partnerships 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2965 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2965 

 Carbon Sequestration Project 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2966 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2966 

 Awarding of Government Contracts 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2967 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2967 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2968 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2969 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 94 — The Profits of Criminal Notoriety Act 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2970 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 94 — The Profits of Criminal Notoriety Act 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2970 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2971 

  Morgan (referral to committee) ............................................................................................................................................. 2973 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2973 

 Standing Committee on the Economy 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2973 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 76 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2973 

 Bill No. 84 — The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Amendment Act, 2009 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2974 

 Bill No. 71 — The Innovation Saskatchewan Act 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2974 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2974 



 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 80 — The Construction Industry Labour Relations Amendment Act, 2009 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2975 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2979 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2986 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2991 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 


