




















































Hansard: October 26, 2009


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 3B  MONDAY, OCTOBER 26, 2009, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3191 

 October 26, 2009 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Hon. Mr. McMorris, seconded by 

Ms. Ross, and the proposed amendment to the main motion 

moved by Mr. Lingenfelter.] 

 

The Speaker: — Being 7 p.m., the session will resume. I 

recognize the member from Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is a 

pleasure again to resume the debate on the Throne Speech, and I 

was just talking about the needle exchange and how we hope 

that we proceed on evidence-based best practices and not on 

ideology. This is so important. We know the history; we know 

what‟s happening Saskatchewan — HIV [human 

immunodeficiency virus] — and this is something we need to 

do our best work in. And people right across Canada, North 

America are wondering, what‟s going on here? Let‟s let 

evidence-based practices guide us. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, what I really want to frame my comments, 

my thoughts around this Throne Speech really can be the two 

headlines that were in The StarPhoenix last week. Thursday, 

October 22, the headline, “Shelter struggles, YWCA turns away 

3,300 women in 2008.” This is on their watch, Mr. Speaker. 

This is on their watch, and this is a serious, serious thing. 

 

Now they can talk about all their stats, they can talk about all 

their stats, but here are 3,300 women that have been turned 

away from the YWCA [Young Women‟s Christian Association] 

in Saskatoon. So that‟s the reality people are facing in 

Saskatoon, in Saskatchewan. 

 

And of course the next day we wake up and we read the paper, 

“More bad news about potash.” “More bad news about potash” 

— the second headline. And then Saturday, the headlines were 

about the 1,100 people who received layoff notices the day 

before. That‟s the reality of Saskatoon. 

 

And while the member from Northwest can talk about a little bit 

more happiness would go a long way — and in many ways we 

should be a little bit more happiness — but you‟ve got to face 

reality. You have to face reality and last week we heard about it 

in spades in The StarPhoenix. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when I heard the minister . . . I believe the 

member from Wood Mountain is in charge of gangs. He went 

on and on about the „80s . . . Wood River. He‟s in charge of the 

gangs and yet he talked about the „80s and „90s — not a word 

about gangs. And you know, I have to tell you that when I talk 

to people in Saskatoon Centre, they‟re concerned about that. 

And I was hoping I would hear more leadership from one of the 

new ministers, from one of the new ministers who would take 

the opportunity in his first Throne Speech to really talk about 

something that people are looking forward to hearing about. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, so those headlines are what‟s going to frame 

my thinking about this Throne Speech. And I need to tell you 

what‟s been missing, what I was hoping I would hear in this 

Throne Speech. And last week in Saskatoon was a special 

week. It was the week, Poverty Awareness Week, and we 

understand there‟s a petition going around asking this 

government, this province to consider putting together a poverty 

elimination strategy. And we know the minister‟s on record 

now and has been on record — you said she doesn‟t like to blue 

sky but — she doesn‟t really like those kind of things. 

 

We know there are three provinces left in Canada that do not 

have a poverty elimination strategy. They happen to be 

Saskatchewan, Alberta, and British Columbia. 

 

I think people are seeing this is the way to go. You have to have 

a comprehensive strategy that puts together all the work that 

you‟re doing right across the government, whether it‟s in 

education, whether it‟s in child care, whether it‟s in housing. 

All of those pieces come together. But you have to have a 

strategy and a commitment and a vision by the government that 

you‟re going to make a difference in people‟s lives in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And while we can talk about the stats and maybe we‟re doing a 

little bit better than other places in Canada . . . But that‟s how 

you look at it. We know when we read the headlines from last 

week, 1,100 people receiving layoff notices; 3,300 women 

being turned away from the YW. Clearly every one of those 

folks have an individual story to tell and they have pain that 

they‟re going to be facing and suffering through, and we need 

something like a comprehensive poverty elimination strategy 

. . . Well I heard about this three-point plan. It‟s about jobs, 

isn‟t it? It‟s about the trickle-down theory. You know, this 

doesn‟t work by itself. You need more than that. You need 

more than that. 

 

And that‟s a second point that I wanted to raise was around a 

comprehensive housing strategy. Now we heard the Minister of 

Justice earlier today raise the issue of municipal elections. This 

is interesting because really we haven‟t really talked about 

elections, and I‟m not sure if that‟s the thing we do in this 

House, talk about elections at different levels. 

 

But I wish that these folks, when they‟re talking to people at 

different levels of government — whether it‟s federal, 

municipal, or provincial — they all need to get together and put 

together a comprehensive housing strategy for all housing right 

across the board. We have an opportunity to do that. And here 

we have . . . And we know if they could talk to their federal 

cousins in Ottawa about this, we could do some amazing work 

on housing. But it‟s just not happening. 

 

Now they will talk a little bit about some of the things they‟ve 

done about increasing the rent supplements, and that‟s all right 

by itself. And every once in a while the minister will do 

something. We heard the member from Northwest talk about 

Habitat, things they‟re doing. And I have said in the House that 

I‟m excited and delighted about those announcements. 



3192 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2009 

Individually they‟re okay, but we need a strategy that ties it all 

together. And that‟s what‟s missing — a strategy that ties it 

together, a multi-year strategy like we see in other provinces. 

And in fact just west of us, we hear about Alberta that‟s got a 

10-year plan. 

 

Why can‟t we be doing that kind of thing here in Saskatchewan 

so people have a sense of confidence that this government is 

more than photo ops, more than one-offs? They‟ve got to have a 

plan about how we move forward together. And I tell you, I like 

those words, moving forward together, but I don‟t see it in this 

Throne Speech at all. 

 

The other thing that I found that was missing, and earlier I 

talked about the mandate letters that were missing from the new 

ministers, but I often take a look at the old mandate letter that 

the Minister of Social Services got, and I am still wondering 

what‟s going to happen. 

 

And I thought today or last Wednesday we would have heard 

about the commitment that that party made throughout the 

election and made it in the mandate letter, but it‟s still not . . . in 

fact, it‟s fallen right off the face of the earth, but I‟ll read it to 

make sure it gets into the record. And this is a letter dated 

November 21st, 2007 from the Premier to the Minister of Social 

Services, and it goes that the things that . . . Here are the "clear 

priorities which are to be addressed by you and your Ministry.” 

 

And the very last one: 

 

Reconvene the Saskatchewan Legislature‟s Special 

Committee to Prevent the Abuse and Exploitation of 

Children through the Sex Trade, which first provided 

recommendations to the Government in 2002, to 

determine whether the recommendations have been 

effectively acted upon and to identify further action that 

can be taken to prevent the abuse and exploitation of 

children through the sex trade. 

 

This is a very important item, and I would hope that the 

minister comes clean, clear, about what is the intention of the 

ministry and the minister, of whether or not they are going to 

live up to this expectation, this promise that was made. 

 

We saw what happened in the spring when the Minister of 

Environment said, you know what? We‟re not going to keep our 

promise on CO2 emissions. We‟re going to break that promise. 

And she was very clear. I didn‟t like it, but at least she was 

honest and straightforward. 

 

Here‟s a promise, and people are just avoiding the discussion. 

And I hope she does reconvene that committee. But I hope that 

as well, when she reconvenes it, the commitment will be along 

with that, that money that would be used or is being used right 

now for helping those who are vulnerable who are involved 

with the sex trade, that money will not be diverted from their 

services to the committee, but in fact there will be more money, 

more resources made available. I think that was the intent of the 

promise that this is an issue that needs to be dealt with. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I also want to talk a little bit about foster care. 

And I am very happy to see that the minister is keeping the 

promise where she talks about reviewing The Child and Family 

Services Act. And the key word though — and she has used this 

— the key word is thorough. We need a thorough review. And 

we need to make sure all parties are involved and have some 

opportunity to be heard on this issue. We need to really make 

sure that the public confidence in The Child and Family 

Services Act has re-established itself. 

 

We see over the last little while . . . In the near future we hope 

that the Children‟s Advocate will be making his report public 

on the follow-up to the February report. I know there‟s one 

that‟s due. We hope to see that soon. We know this a tough 

problem. It‟s been there for several years. It has gone through 

parties of all stripes. And so I hope that we can move this 

forward. This is a very, very important issue. 

 

I was hoping to hear a little bit about the seniors‟ income plan. 

We‟ve heard the members speak a lot about it. We have not 

heard about the indexing, and last spring we raised the issue 

about those who are in long-term care who did not receive the 

same benefits or nearly the same increases as those others. 

 

Just a minute about DISC [Disability Income Support 

Coalition] too, if I can. I was really happy to hear the progress 

made along that. The challenge will be for this government, and 

I hope this government can live up to it, is around the adequacy. 

We don‟t need a program just that has a different name. We 

need to make sure folks who are living with disabilities are not 

living in poverty. 

 

And I have so many I can go on, but I do want to talk about Bill 

80 because that is such an important issue. And I was really 

hoping that I would hear in this Throne Speech that the Minister 

of Labour has decided to take a second thought on this and 

withdraw the Bill, but unfortunately he has not. The other day 

he was quite excited about this Bill. And I would really remind 

him to think about the words respect and respecting working 

men and women right through this province who built this 

province. And what does this mean to them? We need to work 

together collaboratively and not causing more conflict than is 

necessary. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the time. There‟s so many more 

things I would say. Of course, you know when I read through 

this and I start to think about the broken promises, the CO2 

emissions that we‟ve not heard about, the new parks that were 

promised in the campaign — what‟s happening with them? 

 

And I also just want to say, I was looking through last year‟s 

. . . Here‟s one from last year‟s Throne Speech, October 22nd, 

2008, “a strong Saskatchewan . . . a better life.” And here‟s one 

for seniors, and I know seniors will be interested in this one, 

“complimentary home security audit . . . [and] the installation of 

basic security devices” for low-income seniors. I have not heard 

a word about that. Maybe that‟s coming up next week. But I 

know seniors in my riding looked through these things and were 

pretty excited to hear about that kind of stuff. Not a word. I 

have not heard anything about that, so yet another broken 

promise. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I will be voting and supporting the 

amendment. I think it makes a lot more sense than the main 

motion. I agree with the choir last week who thought we should 

just call the whole thing off, maybe send it back and get it 



October 26, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3193 

rewritten, take out the dust, take out the moving back. Let‟s 

move forward more of that stuff. So, Mr. Speaker, I will not be 

supporting the main motion. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And it‟s an honour to 

be up here once again and talking about our Throne Speech. 

And yes, we have to talk about the past because it‟s going to 

lead us to where we are today and some of the future initiatives 

as well. 

 

So before I begin though, I want to take some time to thank my 

family for supporting me of course — and as everyone here, we 

spend many countless hours on the road and at meetings and 

other events that take us away from our family — and for that 

I‟m very thankful. And I think we all are, actually. 

 

The next people I want to actually thank are the constituents of 

P.A. [Prince Albert] Carlton who on November the 7th, 2007 

came out in full force to change the face of Prince Albert 

Carlton politics. But on that note as well, I want to also 

acknowledge Mr. Kowalsky who was a very honourable man; 

he served well in the Chamber as well as for Prince Albert 

Carlton. But people in Prince Albert Carlton wanted a change, 

and part of that change involved our platform with promises. 

 

So for many years growing up in Prince Albert, I saw the NDP 

[New Democratic Party] government at election time always 

coming out with these great cheque signings and these great 

ideas of things they were going to do, and then not to follow 

through until just before the next campaign started, to fulfill a 

promise. Well we tried something different. We made a 

commitment through our campaign platform to come with the 

promises. And in November 7th, 2011, I firmly believe that the 

Prince Albert Carlton constituency will be won again by the 

Sask Party, by myself, and the reason is that we have made 

promises that we can review and we can say we‟ve kept, Mr. 

Speaker. And actually on that note, we see a lot of those 

promises already kept in our Throne Speech today. 

 

But I also want to say, you know, across the floor today, the 

current Leader of the Opposition was asking me that, you know, 

come back, come on their side. And then the member from 

Regina Walsh Acres asked me to take . . . She wants to take me 

out for dinner in Prince Albert when she‟s in Prince Albert 

sometime. And with all due respect, I just can‟t see myself 

doing that because the Prince Albert Carlton constituency 

people voted for change, never voted to go back; they want to 

move forward. They want to see Prince Albert benefit from a 

good strong government, with good strong representation. And 

I firmly believe that we‟ll be here for many years to come. So 

thank you for that. 

 

The first part of our Throne Speech of course talks of moving 

forward, Mr. Speaker, and that‟s a strong message because in 

the last two years we‟ve moved forward. We‟ve committed. 

Over 100 campaign promises have been met, and we‟ve seen 

that because of strong fiscal policy, strong policy development 

involving business community members. We‟ve brought 16,000 

people back to our province, and that‟s an outstanding record, 

Mr. Speaker. 

[19:15] 

 

And you know, the people that we actually have to thank that 

drive our economy are those local entrepreneurs, the men and 

women who come to our province, who‟ve been here, who take 

risks every day of their lives by putting their houses on the line 

and everything they have for equity to start something new, a 

new venture. And it‟s because of them that people get jobs and 

they truly drive the economy. 

 

And we can‟t forget that local businesses in the past have 

spoken to me about how they were left behind by the previous 

NDP government. And one thing that really, really hurt them 

was, in a previous campaign, the previous Finance minister said 

that, we‟re not going to raise taxes during an election campaign 

because that would be just brutal. That‟d be wrong to do. We 

can‟t do that. 

 

But as soon as they got elected, what happened? They jacked up 

the taxes, Mr. Speaker. I can‟t believe they‟d do that. They said 

something, then they went against — as opposed to us that we 

make a promise and we keep it. 

 

One thing we have to recognize, Mr. Speaker, is that we have 

economic times like never before in the world. There‟s a 

recession globally. But one thing that this government never 

talked about doing was raising taxes. We‟ve been firm on the 

fact of lowering taxes, removing the red tape and the barriers to 

growth to allow businesses to come into our province. And 

because of the 16,000 people that we‟ve seen come back to this 

province, we‟ve seen businesses start up like never before, Mr. 

Speaker, which is very important to look at for the future. 

 

My colleague from Saskatoon Northwest talked about the 

entrepreneurial cities. And I thank him for that, because he 

mentioned my great hometown of Prince Albert. So although it 

ranked number 10 in the cities in North America, the 

entrepreneurial cities in Canada, not bad for a city whose 

population is about 34,000 people. I‟m pretty darn happy about 

that, because it‟s the spirit of the people in Prince Albert that 

were ranked, the business people who‟ve led that city — those 

same people that support our government because of all the 

changes we‟re making for the positive, not going backwards. 

 

The next thing about our Throne Speech I want to talk about is 

the health, putting patients first. A patient first was something 

we actually talked about doing in our campaign promise. We 

fulfilled that now. We listened to the patients. They‟ve come 

forward, told us how the system has treated them. We asked 

them for their advice. And moving forward, the Minister of 

Health and this government will take those words of advice and 

implement a plan. 

 

The Prince Albert Parkland Health Region has already said they 

have read the review and they are going to take action to move 

forward on the recommendations. Surgical wait times as well. 

Dr. Jim Cross, who‟s in charge of the emergency services at the 

hospitals talked about how — in fact, he‟s the chief of staff as 

well — how he‟s going to be looking at doing a new program 

there. They‟ve been talking about it for a number of months, to 

bring in a way to ensure that surgical wait times are reduced in 

my city and along the entire region. And I give him credit for 

that. 



3194 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2009 

The staff at the Prince Albert Parkland Health Region are more 

than willing to step up to the plate when they‟re called upon. 

And they will support this province like never before, Mr. 

Speaker. If they are called upon to have a patient transferred 

from another city to come in for surgery and there‟s an open 

O.R. [operating room] room, they‟ll be there to help out. 

 

And to those people that work in the Prince Albert Parkland 

Health Region, I want to thank them very much — the CEO 

[chief executive officer] and the administrative staff and the 

board in Prince Albert who have a vision. 

 

And to talk about that vision, they had to have financial backing 

for that. And for many, many years, the previous government 

always shortchanged the health region in Prince Albert. They 

were always in a deficit position. Finally, in the last year‟s 

budget, we provided in excess of $30 million to go to some 

renovations but also operating capital — operating money that 

was required to meet their needs and their demands. And that‟s 

given them a strong foot moving forward now, where they‟re 

able to balance their budget and be able to provide services to 

the entire region. 

 

And that particular hospital in Prince Albert has also been very 

well blessed, I guess, by the staff who work there who have a 

commitment to the addictions issue in Prince Albert. 

 

And just two weeks ago, I was honoured to cut the ribbon on 

the new social and brief detox centre in Prince Albert, which is 

attached to the hospital, the north end of it. I also was there 

prior to do the sod-turning. But no one knew what it was going 

to look like and how it truly would function. There was myself 

and the mayor. The chief of police was there — a good friend of 

mine — Dale McFee. We all had a vision, from our 

backgrounds, to make Prince Albert better. We know we 

needed that centre. But we left it up to the architects and the 

staff there who in fact provided the footprint, the plan. 

 

And when I toured the facility I saw that they have a facility 

that now the police can drop off those who are addicted to drugs 

and alcohol versus being left in a cellblock for eight hours with 

no supervision. They can be met by a doctor; they can be met 

by a nurse, an LPN [licensed practical nurse]; and if required, 

they can be moved over to the actual social detox part of the 

facility, which will in turn address their needs and be linked to 

community-based support as well. 

 

So that‟s an important part of our Throne Speech, talking about 

what we‟ve done in the past, but more so the re-establishment 

of a provincial addictions council. 

 

We know that when they formed the health regions back in the 

early mid-„90s, that they were made responsible for addictions 

treatment through their regional concepts and their boards. Well 

I think it‟s sad to say that some people fell through those cracks 

because the previous government didn‟t see the foresight of 

keeping the SADAC [Saskatchewan Alcohol and Drug Abuse 

Commission] system in place, that council. So those people 

have done very well with what they‟ve been told to do and 

directed to do by the previous government, but having this 

provincial addictions council now will actually make them 

move forward with some continuum of treatment, I believe is 

the best way to describe this. 

My colleague from Saskatoon Sutherland and I were talking 

about it this morning that that‟s one thing that‟s been lacking. If 

a person needs to get treatment and they‟re full in one facility, it 

was difficult to transfer and move them to something else, 

another place in the province, to get that much-needed 

in-patient time. And now this particular council will have the 

means and be able to have that continuum of care to make sure 

there‟s bed spaces available. 

 

The next part in the Throne Speech that I found was truly 

beneficial to my city is under the education component. Myself 

and the Education minister, we were able to turn sod on a brand 

new St. Anne School in my constituency in the spring, and it 

was within a week afterwards that I drove by there and they 

were going full bore on excavation of land. And it‟s well under 

way right now to serve that area of the city which is growing, in 

population as well. I‟m happy to say that. 

 

And the people there had a very old school that required their 

own investment as well, from the Catholic school division who 

stepped up with part of the funding as well. And the 

government was more than willing to help meet that need and 

that demand. Because they had one bathroom in that school for 

all the students, and that was just . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — One bathroom? 

 

Mr. Hickie: — One bathroom. And they grew by having 

portables attached to it. It was never envisioned to have that 

many students there, but the area of Prince Albert expanded so 

they were tied without having any infrastructure to meet that 

demand. 

 

The students were very well-behaved. I saw them in the hallway 

a couple of times when I toured there. And even the staff said 

that that was the biggest part of the new school, was going to be 

the bathroom. Myself and the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers were there and they told us that day that the kids are 

happy because now they each get their own bathrooms to go to 

which is quite the . . . You know, you don‟t think about it. You 

think that what we take for granted in our schools, some schools 

haven‟t got that. So it‟s good to be able to do that for the 

students of St. Anne‟s and for the people of Prince Albert. 

 

The next part that I thought was exciting was the student 

housing announcement that I took part in on behalf of the 

Advanced Education minister where, for the first time ever in 

the province of Saskatchewan, SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute 

of Applied Science and Technology] has student housing. 

 

And it‟s not just for students who are coming out of high 

school. We‟re looking at targeting from the North because as 

we saw our economy expand in the last two years and the 

demand for skilled trades and other people, there was a barrier 

for the northern people to come down to Prince Albert — to 

actually feel comfortable and welcome in their area, to take part 

in school, and find available housing. So we have actually just 

opened up the student housing as about two weeks ago, I think 

October the 16th. So last week. 

 

And right now they‟re taking applications but they‟ve had 

single parents in there right now. They‟ve got working couples 

from up north who are both going to school. So that‟s a positive 



October 26, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3195 

step forward where they can actually feel comfortable because 

they‟re right next to the school and they see what they‟re doing 

every day. They get to go home to their families. SIAST has the 

child care facilities for their children as well. So it‟s a great 

overall picture for them moving forward. 

 

As most of us had the experience to go to university much 

younger in our lives, we didn‟t have to worry about the burden 

of having children and a family. But on that note, those who 

now take the step forward to better themselves and our 

economy can take part and actually feel at home. 

 

The thing with the Social Services minister, and, you know, 

putting vulnerable children first, that‟s a great step forward for 

this government, the looking at and reviewing of The Child and 

Family Services Act and The Adoption Act long overdue. There 

are parts of every Act that are working. We know that. But there 

are parts of every Act that have become redundant or have aged 

very poorly in the changing environment we‟re working in, 

whether it be the level of scope of need by the clients or the 

professional level of care provided by the social workers and 

the professionals who work within that particular ministry. 

 

So you always have to ask yourself, what can we do better? 

And that‟s a step that‟s going to be taken on by the Social 

Services ministry and our minister. And I look forward to 

seeing that come to fruition because Prince Albert, like most 

other places in this province, have a big demand on their social 

workers and the demand on their child protection workers. They 

draw a huge catchment area as well into the city. And while I 

was policing — as everyone knows, I was a police officer 

before I got elected — on any given weekend our population 

would at least double, if not triple . . . [inaudible interjection] 

. . . You didn‟t know that? Oh yes, I was. 

 

So we had demands placed upon the system, and the mobile 

crisis units saw that same demand as well placed on them. And 

the next week when the files are transferred over, social 

workers or child protection workers were overwhelmed within 

what they were given. 

 

So the next part about this is implementation of a new 

electronic case management system. And as time‟s evolved, 

cases become more complex. And we hate to lose anyone 

through a crack, especially those children — the future of our 

province. 

 

You know, the early years of a child are definitely a time for 

growth and wonder and discovery. But so many of our children 

in our province are, again, having trouble, growing up in 

families where they need assistance, whether it be through 

addictions or through financial means. And this government 

recognizes that. The Social Services minister recognized that 

when we first formed government. I was privileged to be on the 

Treasury Board whereby I sat back and I helped out with some 

budget development to put funding forward for that and across 

all of Saskatchewan. 

 

And the next step now, with the case management system, we 

talk about that. We don‟t want to lose any of these families or 

these children. So if we can track them better, kudos to the 

government, kudos to the minister and to the staff out there who 

need to work within a system that‟s antiquated but now will 

have some new feet underneath them to take on challenges. 

 

Another level of our Throne Speech that I found was quite 

interesting was talking about justice and policing. And it‟s 

linked to the vulnerable children aspect as well because when I 

was the minister, I was very honoured to announce some 

funding for an integrated child protection unit in Prince Albert, 

which was some new initiative where we had social workers 

now working with police officers, investigating offences against 

children, whether they be abuse of a sexual nature or violence, 

neglect as well. So I want to give the chief of police in Prince 

Albert extreme kudos for that and he‟s done a great job in 

showing leadership and initiative. 

 

But along with his counterparts in Saskatchewan, the 

Saskatchewan Association of Chiefs of Police, they all see that 

we‟re evolving in this province because things have changed 

since 2007. We have more people in the province; we have 

more demands upon resources. And they are looking outside 

that box as well. For too many years they were forced to look 

within a box. 

 

When the previous government promised 200 police officers — 

never delivered. Restated that same promise — never delivered. 

And I know that because when I was in the police association 

we kept track of the numbers and we knew that. 

 

So now we have 120 officers we‟re going to contribute. We 

have 60 already in place. We‟re going to have at least 60 more 

in the next two years. And this government, there‟s a promise 

made, going to be a promise kept. We‟re going to do it well 

because we recognize that our cities, as they‟re growing as well, 

need that resource, big and small alike. So we have a good 

balance of rural with the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted 

Police] and small town policing and our bigger cities as well. 

 

So on that note I want to just say that, you know, keeping our 

communities safe and protect all of our citizens is very much at 

the forefront of our endeavours. We don‟t want to have anyone, 

like I said before, fall through the cracks. And policing has to 

change, and it has. It has because you no longer just go arrest 

somebody. They have a social problem they deal with every day 

of the week when they go to a call, and they want to have 

resources to be able to transfer these people to. And they leave 

the houses, and they just simply walk away. Sometimes they 

have to solve a problem, and they have no resources to go to. So 

this is going to be a good step. 

 

The chiefs of police are working on initiatives. I know the new 

minister has talked to them already about business plans 

moving forward. And this government will be able to utilize 

any means possible to ensure that our most vulnerable children 

are safe and our people and our province are safe from the 

criminals that actually are out there preying upon us every day 

of the week, whether you‟re in a big city or a small town. 

People are opportunistic in looking for any means to take 

advantage of those who can‟t protect themselves. And it‟s an 

honour to be a part of a government that actually has that 

commitment in place, a promise that has been made and will be 

kept absolutely. 

 

Another part of policing that I find — and I know my 

colleagues get tired of me talking about policing, but it‟s what I 



3196 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2009 

know, so a little bit longer, little bit longer — is that, you know, 

we‟ve . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Thank you, Mr. Deputy 

Premier. 

 

One thing about policing is that we know that there is problems 

involving violence in our communities. And by talking to the 

police chiefs, talking to the associations as well of what they 

need, they need to look at a different approach in crime and law 

enforcement. And one thing that they noticed — and I didn‟t 

talk about it very much with the addictions part of it — we 

know it‟s affecting families. But almost all the crime the police 

officers are dealing with involves a level of addiction, whether 

it be a domestic dispute, whether it be drunk driving, whether it 

be a violence and an assault. Typically we see officers 

responding to calls involving violence, and alcohol addiction is 

part of that, but also it becomes those people out there who can 

prey on those who are unable to say no to the drugs and drug 

use and addictions problems. 

 

[19:30] 

 

So again, I was very honoured to be a part of a government and 

as a minister in my tenure that started a new enforcement unit 

for the North where I know the new minister announced that, 

and he did a great job — thank you for that — to follow 

through with the promise we made about that. 

 

And I‟d look to the police forces, the RCMP, and the city police 

in Prince Albert who talked about that need because the North 

is an area of the province where criminals and drug use abuse 

. . . And the member from Athabasca and I have talked, 

Cumberland and I have talked about it as well, that it‟s tough to 

police such a vast area. But with a new integrated unit where 

you have RCMP and city police working as a unit, not as 

separate entities, they can share information better. They can 

respond to crime better. And we‟re seeing that in the public 

right now, that there is a general dislike for criminals. People 

are starting to come forward now and actually say that they‟ve 

had enough, and they‟re going to help out as well with that. 

 

So I want to talk about the issue of . . . You know, front-line 

battle with criminals is one that the government takes very, very 

seriously, and we‟re going to keep moving on that issue as well. 

 

First Nations and Métis Relations, this is the Year of the Métis, 

and for all of us, we have to respect the fact that that has been 

overlooked for many years, and this is another good initiative 

for us and our government. 

 

I know Robert Doucette, head of the Métis Nation, and I used to 

play hockey together at Prince Albert Midtown. He was a heck 

of a goalie. He probably could have gone somewhere if he had 

the level of . . . now with the amount of hockey teams out there 

that were able to take players. Robert was a heck of a 

goaltender. I know he shut me down many times, and it‟s 

because of him I didn‟t make the AA team one day. I know that 

for sure because I couldn‟t get a goal on the bugger, so that‟s 

why . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . No, I was a good . . . I was 

fast. I was fast. Hockey‟s a game where you can be speedy; you 

don‟t have to be big, Christine. 

 

I guess, in closing, I wanted to say that, you know, our 

government‟s been very proud of our relationship with the 

federal partnership we have as well. In Prince Albert we took 

part in an announcement recently for a new water treatment 

facility. And when I talk about announcements in Prince Albert, 

housing as well, the same way, is that we have facilities that are 

going to be all across Prince Albert, not just my constituency. I 

don‟t want to be taking all the credit for that because I mean, if 

I had to do that and ask for my own constituency, that‟d be 

great, but we‟re going to service all of Prince Albert. 

 

So we have more housing available now with our partnership, 

new water treatment facility in Prince Albert, and the economic 

diversification fund has actually been utilized to give $1 million 

to the city to expand our airport as well. Not our initiative for 

sure but because of our talking, lobbying, we‟re going to make 

sure it gets done because Prince Albert‟s expanding. 

 

So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I just want to say that I will — 

because of all the great things we talked about and our vision 

for the future still was promises made, promises kept, some still 

outstanding — that I will not be supporting the amendment, but 

I will support the Throne Speech. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m very happy to 

get up and talk about the Throne Speech today. 

 

But before I do, I‟d like to welcome our newest members to the 

Assembly. For the member from Douglas Park, it‟s his second 

time he‟s been elected for the first time. And I welcome him to 

the Assembly. 

 

And the new member from Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, I had the 

pleasure of meeting her husband a couple nights ago. And they 

have a very young child about almost exactly the same age as 

mine. And it is refreshing to watch another MLA [Member of 

the Legislative Assembly] chasing a child around a public 

function because I‟ve been doing that, and it‟s a lot of fun. And 

I wish that member luck. It‟s going to be a great experience. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with that in mind, I think this is a good 

opportunity. I‟d like to thank my wife for all the help she gives 

me and support. I know it‟s not easy being a wife of an MLA. 

My little girls, we try and manage it as best as we can, that they 

get to be around. But it‟s not always easy. And my wife has 

been a great support and a great help for me. 

 

I‟d also like to thank the people that work in the constituents‟ 

office in Lloydminster — Marilyn and Caren. They keep me 

organized and pointed in the right direction. And I can‟t say 

thank you to them enough. It makes life a lot easier, and it 

makes the people of Lloydminster . . . They‟re very well served 

by our office, and it‟s very much a reflection on the good work 

those ladies do. 

 

In this Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to have a couple 

themes come through. One is coincidence. You know, what is a 

coincidence and what isn‟t? And I kind of picked up off where 

the member from Saskatoon Northwest was enlightening us on 

the difference between ingenuous and disingenuous. And I 

think I got my head wrapped around that, and I truly 

appreciated that little educational tidbit. It‟s something that I‟ll 

use again and again, so thank you. 



October 26, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3197 

But if I can offer anything to debate, Mr. Speaker, it will be 

coincidence. What is and what qualifies as a coincidence? If 

you think football, you know, the Roughriders have won Grey 

Cups never when the NDP have been in power. Is that a 

coincidence? Is there something deeper to it? I‟m going to give 

that the benefit of the doubt. I don‟t think that the members 

opposite actually are calling plays in from the sidelines, that 

they think it‟s another Crown corporation and they‟ll call a 

CEO and start fiddling with the plays and screw it up, which is 

kind of how the Crown corporations have worked for them. 

But, Mr. Speaker, I think that that truly is a coincidence. 

 

But going down that, Mr. Speaker, I‟m going to start off going 

at some of the stuff I‟ve seen in this Throne Speech that it‟s 

really, I think, affected my community and been very positive 

for the province as a whole. Starting off, you know, we‟ve seen 

16,000 people move back to Saskatchewan this year. You talk 

about a different feeling in the province; I think that the people 

that are here are more confident and they feel great. People 

around Canada are looking at Saskatchewan as a real option. 

You know, maybe my family will flourish there. And they will. 

And these people have come here, and they will continue to 

come here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

With that said, when they‟re looking at Saskatchewan, the new 

study that came out with five cities in the top 10 in Canada for 

entrepreneurial cities are in Saskatchewan. The number one city 

two years in a row was a Saskatchewan city. 

 

And the city of Lloydminster, Mr. Speaker, for two years in a 

row has made the top 10. I‟m from Lloydminster, and I know it 

is one of the most entrepreneurial cities. There are businessmen 

and businesswomen there that are being very successful and 

working very hard. And as the MLA, that‟s something I‟m 

going to try and foster as much as I can because I think that 

having a society of hard-working people that are trying to make 

their lives better are really making lives better for everyone in 

society. And I‟m going to try and help out where I can. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a major theme of this Throne Speech was health 

care. We talked about what we‟ve done to this point, why we‟ve 

done it. The big one here, Mr. Speaker — we said before we got 

elected — we think that we can attract 800 nurses. And I can 

remember when we made that announcement during the 

campaign, and there was just boo-hooing from the opposition, 

the then-government saying that isn‟t doable. We‟ve tried; 

we‟ve talked to all the experts, and you cannot bring 800 new 

educated nurses into Saskatchewan. 

 

And we said, you know, it‟s going to be tough. We‟re starting 

out here, but what we‟re going to do is we‟re going to raise the 

bar. We‟re going to say, this is how high we want the bar to be 

and we‟re going to try and exceed it. We said 800. We said we 

could try; we could do it. And so far, Mr. Speaker, we‟re at 560 

nurses. We‟re two years into a mandate, not quite, and we‟re at 

about 70 per cent to that. Mr. Speaker, that‟s a promise that 

we‟ve made, and we haven‟t got there yet, Mr. Speaker, but 

we‟re going to. 

 

In this Throne Speech we said we think wait-lists are too long. 

We hear from our neighbours. We hear from our communities 

that people in our family that have back problems, knee 

problems, they need surgery. They can‟t go to work. They may 

not be as active in their communities. They may be coaching 

their kids‟ ball teams, but they can‟t do it because they‟ve got a 

bad knee or a bad back. 

 

Their doctor says, you know, you‟ve waited six months for your 

MRI [magnetic resonance imaging] or you‟ve waited for your 

diagnosis, and that‟s great, but now that you‟ve got it, you‟ve 

got to wait for your surgery. And, Mr. Speaker, that‟s 

unacceptable. These people have to earn a living. They want to 

contribute to their society. They want to be part of their 

family‟s family life, and they find out it‟s 18 months to get back 

surgery. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government in this Throne Speech, we said 

very clearly we want to get that down to three months. I don‟t 

think anyone wants to wait three months but, Mr. Speaker, 

that‟s where we‟ve put the bar. We‟re going to strive for it, Mr. 

Speaker, and I can tell you we‟re going to make it, Mr. Speaker. 

That‟s what this government does: we set goals and we achieve 

them. It‟s a simple plan, but it‟s something that‟s going to work 

for us for a long, long time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, financially, what have we done so far, Mr. 

Speaker? Let‟s lay the groundwork out. We‟ve dropped 80,000 

people off the tax rolls. The 80,000 people that are in the 

bottom part of the working people in Saskatchewan that can 

least afford to pay a large tax bill are dropped. They can put that 

money into where their priorities are. And the other people in 

Saskatchewan that, I guess, are the higher income earners are 

able to contribute more and are able to still pay tax. But, Mr. 

Speaker, taxation is something that we‟ve looked at across the 

board. 

 

We identified property tax, Mr. Speaker. We identified it. Well 

I guess the opposition identified it too. They talked about it for 

a long, long time. They often talked about the status quo not 

being on. In fact I believe they made the same speech twice to 

SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] and 

still never solved the problem. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it wasn‟t easy, I will admit that. I don‟t 

think it was easy. The Legislative Secretary wrote a report. He 

had to work very hard on it. He truly understood the issues. He 

made recommendations. And the Minister of Education also 

took a good, long look at the report, educated himself and 

figured out that this is doable. 

 

It‟s not easy. I‟m not saying it was easy. That‟s probably why it 

never got done before. But, Mr. Speaker, we said we were 

going to do it and we did it. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would like to talk a little bit about policing. 

The last member that graced the Assembly with some 

intelligent words spoke about policing. We said we think 

Saskatchewan needs 120 new police officers in the mandate, in 

the four years. We set the bar. We said this is what we can do. 

You know, the opposition, the then government, I believe, said 

they were going to bring in 200 new police officers, and that 

was what needed to be done. That‟s great, they set the bar. They 

set a goal. But the fact is they never achieved it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Our government, in the short two years we‟ve been here, we 

said a similar type thing. We said we think that 120 police 



3198 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2009 

officers. That‟s 30 a year; it‟s manageable. And each year, what 

have we done, Mr. Speaker? We‟ve done what we said we 

would do. And again it‟s a simple, a simple thing, but you just 

have to do it. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to talk a little bit about 

immigration, another target — 3,400 under the nominees 

program. Now not easy, again not easy, I think the opposition, 

the then-government four years ago, they talked about bringing 

in immigrants, and they were pretty happy with some pretty low 

numbers. That isn‟t acceptable on our side of the House. If 

you‟re going to set a goal, set something reasonable. 

 

And if you read the Throne Speech, how are we going to 

achieve such a bold and ambitious goal? We‟re finding 

efficiencies. Last year I believe it was a 25 per cent efficiency 

in the speed in the number of applicants that were processed. 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan expect a government 

to do the work of government. And bringing in nominees, 

bringing in workers to Saskatchewan that want to raise their 

families and build lives here — that‟s what we said we‟re going 

to do. Mr. Speaker, we‟re going to do it. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, another section in the Throne Speech which 

is near and dear to me is the energy. The Crown Corporations 

Committee, we‟ve just wrapped up the first half of energy 

committee hearings looking into the future energy needs of 

Saskatchewan and how we could best meet those needs, those 

growing needs, in a manner that is safe, environmentally 

friendly, reliable, and cost-effective for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in those nine days, day number one SaskPower 

was invited. SaskPower was asked to really lay out the 

groundwork. What does it look like in Saskatchewan? What are 

our needs? What‟s our current generation? When will it need 

replaced? Nothing lasts forever. 

 

SaskPower came in. They put together a very comprehensive 

document. It did. It spelled out that currently we‟re about 3800 

at peak load, that our infrastructure is aging, and that our 

growing economy and industry are requiring more electricity. 

 

When we asked them a little further, let‟s spell this out, let‟s get 

our head‟s really wrapped around where we are and where 

we‟re going . . . We asked them, you know, it‟s fairly obvious 

that these coal mines, these coal-fired power plants and these 

generating stations, they need replaced or they need upgrading. 

And the timeline, it‟s very specific that in 30 years this needs to 

happen, in 20 years this needs to happen. And a lot of those 

timelines are coming up fairly quickly. 

 

And we asked the people from SaskPower, is there money put 

away to do these extremely expensive replacements? Well no 

there wasn‟t. Was it known from the former government that 

this was going to need replaced, that this infrastructure would 

need rebuilt? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it‟s right from the power poles that are in the 

ground through the substations. The infrastructure is aging and 

needs some serious work. This year alone SaskPower has spent 

over $1 billion to upgrade their system. 

 

[19:45] 

 

So we pushed SaskPower on a lot. Pushed is the wrong . . . We 

questioned them on a lot of things. But a few things jumped out, 

and it was really maybe the lack of preparedness from the 

former government and planning into the future. And what 

really jumped out at me was rate increases. Starting back in the 

mid-„90s, what were the rate increases of SaskPower? In 1999 

there was a zero per cent rate increase. I think that‟s great. 

Nobody wants to pay too much. 2000 — 1.5 per cent. 2001 — 2 

per cent. 2002 — 4 per cent. „03 — zero per cent again. „04 — 

5.7. „05 — zero. „06 — 4.9. „07 — 4.3. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, you know, the numbers are up and down 

depending on . . . but one thing that kind of jumps out at you is 

in every election year it‟s zero. Why did the electricity rates 

never go up in election years? Except for „07, Mr. Speaker. I 

correct, I correct that, Mr. Speaker. In 2007 the electricity rates 

went up by 4.3 per cent. But, Mr. Speaker, that was after the 

election. SaskPower very quickly after the election came to the 

rate review panel and said, oops, we have some major growth 

needs here. We need to raise rates by 4.3 per cent. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t know if that‟s a coincidence. I don‟t 

think that is a coincidence. If we‟re trying to figure out 

coincidence and not coincidence, I don‟t know. Someone might 

say disingenuous, but on the coincidence scale, I‟m going to 

leave that one just hanging out there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on the growth side, that‟s a very good news story. 

We know that Saskatchewan has got some fairly good growth 

in our province, in our industry, and that need‟s fed with 

electricity. 

 

We finished up our nine days. We‟re going to put out an interim 

report here shortly, and we‟re going to have nine more days for 

people to comment on that interim report in January, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Further on the energy front, Mr. Speaker, I want to make some 

comments to the new member who is the Leader of the 

Opposition. Now he left Saskatchewan about 10 years ago to go 

work in Calgary. And, Mr. Speaker, I guess I should premise 

this with, I‟ve never been a lobbyist for the big oil industry in 

Canada. So I premise . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . There‟s 

always hope when my colleague said, but I premise my 

comments with the fact that I don‟t want to second-guess 

anyone that‟s been there because I have never been a big oil 

lobbyist, Mr. Speaker. But in his comments in his speech the 

other day he spoke of many countries where he was the front 

man, he was their political government relation man. 

 

He spoke of Yemen where it was a country where his company 

did a lot of work. Doing some research for this speech, Mr. 

Speaker, on the Internet on the BBC [British Broadcasting 

Corporation] they just did a story called Yemen in crisis. 

Yemen‟s running out of oil, Mr. Speaker, and they rely . . . 

About 30 per cent of their GDP [gross domestic product] comes 

from the oil industry. And, Mr. Speaker, Yemen is not a society 

like Canada where we have very many resources and options. 

Their poverty level is far higher than here. I don‟t know the 

exact numbers, but the number of people living on $1 a day or 

less is a reality in that country. 



October 26, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3199 

Nigeria is another country that the former energy lobbyist used 

to do a substantial amount of work. Now Nigeria — doing some 

research for this again — the Nigeria delta is one of the 

roughest places in the world. They‟ve been embroiled in civil 

war. The Nigeria delta is the heavy oil area in Nigeria, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We look at Madagascar. Now I have never been there. I would 

love to go to Madagascar. I think it would be a beautiful place. 

Again it‟s a place that has just come through a military coup. 

The former president was ousted with a military strongman. 

That was in March. I know that that has to be a tough place to 

do business, but we know that the former member was heavily 

involved with the former president before he got ousted. 

 

Now when we look at those countries, and we know that they‟re 

not like Canada, but where are they ranked, Mr. Speaker? 

We‟ve got Amnesty International which looks at the human 

rights areas around the world and compares what one country 

does to another, and they put out a ranking from first to about 

200 of the world‟s best to worst human rights records. Now 

there‟s a company called . . . not a company, an organization 

called Transparency International, and they rank the corruption 

of different countries around the world. Now, Mr. Speaker, 

Canada as you would expect is in the top 10. We‟re a very 

democratic country. Corruption is not tolerated here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don‟t know if this is a coincidence but, Mr. 

Speaker, Yemen, Nigeria, Madagascar are all well down in the 

list. Yemen is 141st. Nigeria is a similar number. Mr. Speaker, I 

don‟t know, if that member was part of a team that was 

approaching these countries, why not . . . I don‟t know. But it 

just seems like we could set the bar higher, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Before I wrap up here, Mr. Speaker, I would just like to look at 

that former member‟s timeline. We know that Saskatchewan is 

an oil-producing province — one of the best, Mr. Speaker. And 

we‟re getting better at it all the time. But back in the „70s, there 

was something called Saskoil. It was a nationalized oil 

company owned by the province. And it was good. It was bad. I 

don‟t know. I wasn‟t old enough in the „70s to know. But in the 

90‟s, it was still controlled by the provincial government. In the 

„80s, part of it was sold off. But there was certain laws, where 

their head office had to be here in Saskatchewan. They had a lot 

of employees here in Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the then minister of CIC [Crown 

Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan] repealed The 

Wascana Energy Act . Sask Oil became Wascana Energy, and 

they repealed that Act that allowed their head office to move. It 

then got sold under the minister of CIC to a company in 

Calgary. That company was Canada Occidental, Mr. Speaker, 

and Canada Occidental became Nexen. Again, Mr. Speaker, 

coincidence? That‟s for everyone to decide. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask was SPUDCO 

[Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company] a 

coincidence? Was the membership scandal a coincidence? I 

don‟t know, Mr. Speaker. Was Channel Lake a coincidence? 

Mr. Speaker, these are all questions we have to ask. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to wrap up with something a little 

lighter. We talk about the good news in Saskatchewan. The 

opposition thinks that we‟re cheerleading. I don‟t mind 

cheerleading, Mr. Speaker. In fact you know, when my hockey 

team beats the hockey team in Edmonton — let‟s say — I call 

up my buddies in Edmonton, and I rub it in a little bit. If my 

football team beats the team in Vancouver, I call my 

mother-in-law and I rub it in a little bit, Mr. Speaker. If my 

province is ranked top five out of ten for cities in the country 

for entrepreneurship, Mr. Speaker, I stand up and I say, I think 

that‟s good news, and I‟m proud of this province. 

 

As members of the Legislative Assembly, we represent people 

in this province. I‟ve got about 17,000 in my constituency. And, 

Mr. Speaker, when I go to Alberta, when I go to British 

Columbia, I hold my head high because I‟m proud of my 

constituency. I‟m proud of my province. I think that we‟re one 

of the most exciting places in the country. And I think that if we 

tell people about it, they‟re going to get excited as well — and 

as they should — many of which have heard about it now and 

are coming here, 16,000 last year. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, to call us cheerleaders, to say that spreading 

the word about how great Saskatchewan is, is a negative thing, 

Mr. Speaker, I just don‟t buy it. Mr. Speaker, I often think 

Saskatchewan is going to be at the front of the pack for a long, 

long time. And, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t know how long the good 

people of Lloydminster will grace me with the opportunity to 

represent them but, Mr. Speaker, be it two more years or longer, 

it doesn‟t really matter. I‟m always going to be proud of the 

time I‟ve served here and of the province I call home. And with 

that, Mr. Speaker, I thank the Assembly for listening to my 

speech tonight, and we‟ll allow one of the other members to 

take the floor. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I want 

to first start out by saying please bear with me; I‟m fighting a 

bit of a cold. Some days the cold is winning and some days I 

think I‟m winning. But so if my voice crackles or I have to clear 

my throat, please bear with me. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is truly a pleasure and an honour for me to rise 

in the House and to take part in this Throne Speech, especially 

an honour to do so on behalf of the fine people of Regina 

Northeast. I think, Mr. Speaker, I‟ve said this before in the 

House, but I do believe it bears repeating, is that wherever you 

travel in this fine province of ours — north or south or east or 

west — you meet nothing but fine, friendly, hospitable people. 

And that is a testimony for Saskatchewan people. 

 

But I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, there is nobody finer than 

the fine people in Regina Northeast. I say that with a degree of 

certainty because I have spent a lot of time on a doorstep 

visiting with the good folks. Every summer I like to get out and 

knock on doors and talk to folks on their doorstep to find out 

from them what their issues are, what their concerns are, what 

their thoughts are. And I find that quite useful. 

 

And having done it for a number of summers now, it‟s to a 

point now, Mr. Speaker, where many people will recognize me 

at the door as soon as they answer the door. It‟s also to a point 

where many of these people I‟ve visited before. And I‟ve had 



3200 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2009 

the privilege of having a conversation with them before, and 

you begin to relate after a while as to what their experiences are 

and how things are going for them and how their family is 

growing and how the world is developing in their own way. So 

with that, I find that quite rewarding and I enjoy doing it every 

summer because I always come away . . . Every evening, I sit 

back and I think about the conversations I‟ve had, and I think 

about the knowledge I‟ve gained from talking to folks in my 

constituency. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to start out by congratulating our two new 

members of the Legislative Assembly, first, the member from 

Regina Douglas Park who is certainly a welcomed addition to 

our caucus. His experience, his talent, his commitment is 

something that we will benefit from. But I think also, for those 

of us who know our member fairly well, I think the thing above 

all that stands out — and there‟s a lot of attributes there — but 

the thing that stands out for me at least is his passion for 

Saskatchewan and Saskatchewan people. And that passion 

shows through. And I know, Mr. Speaker, that his service here 

will be to us all a great service. 

 

He will serve the New Democratic Party as a leader very well. 

He will serve the opposition in the House here very well. But 

he‟ll also serve the people of Saskatchewan in an outstanding 

manner. So I want to once again congratulate the member for 

his election, the by-election win and the election to the 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

I also want to pass on my congratulations to our newest member 

from Saskatoon Riversdale. I had the opportunity during the 

by-election campaign to spend a little time in Saskatoon. I was 

out door knocking in a poll there. And it didn‟t take me very 

long to find out and quickly learn that the member, our member, 

the member from Saskatoon Riversdale is a member of her 

constituency. She reflects that constituency and she is very 

much a part of that constituency. 

 

And I‟m, I suppose, double pleasured in having the opportunity 

to share similar office space with her. And just over the last few 

days, I‟ve had the opportunity of a couple of short 

conversations. And from those conversations, I‟ve learned that 

she‟s certainly a person of passion, a person who cares. And 

that‟s demonstrated quite clearly, that she has a deep caring for 

the people of her constituency. 

 

And with that, Mr. Speaker, I am sure that it‟s safe to say that 

she will have a long, long political career in this Assembly. It 

will be a short career on this side of the House — only another 

two years — and then she‟ll join the rest of the NDP members 

on that side of the House when we form government. Well 

she‟ll be joining the NDP members on that side of the floor 

when we form government after the next election. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to take a moment to just touch briefly on 

just a couple of my critic areas. First, the Saskatchewan 

Transportation corporation. And I would suggest members 

should do this. I had the honour over the last few months to get 

to know some of the employees that work for STC 

[Saskatchewan Transportation Company] — not only the bus 

drivers, but some of the guys in the garage and some of the 

clerks and some of the guys working the freight areas. And 

there‟s really a uniqueness about them. 

They‟re certainly committed to their company. They‟re 

committed to providing good service. There‟s a pride, there‟s a 

pride that they exhibit in the company. And you can hear it in 

the language: they don‟t talk about the company or they don‟t 

talk about the Crown, they talk about our company or they talk 

about my company. And I find that very, very, very rewarding 

because there‟s a dedication there, a true dedication that we 

should be very proud of. 

 

[20:00] 

 

And certainly STC is providing an essential service throughout 

this great province of ours, particularly the rural areas. There‟s a 

lot of our small towns that is populated by seniors, in many 

cases widows, who don‟t drive or don‟t feel comfortable 

driving, at least into the big cities, so they‟ll take the bus to 

keep health appointments or to visit family. They just find it a 

lot more convenient to do that, and I think the STC provides an 

excellent service in that way. 

 

Many of our students also have used STC to travel back and 

forth from home to university. And I think they provide a great 

service, and I think a lot of that is due to the fine, fine quality of 

personnel or employees that STC does have. So I just want to 

take my hats off to the employees of Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it‟s safe to say exactly the same thing about 

the employees in the Department of Highways, what used to be 

the Department of Highways, now Ministry of Highways. I 

have a hard time to always put it like that because for me it will 

be the department for the longest time. But they are great 

people working in the Department of Highways or the Ministry 

of Highways. They‟re dedicated, and they feel the same 

dedication I think as the employees in Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company, but they are truly dedicated to their 

cause. 

 

Many of them, particularly the snowplow operators in the 

winter months, will travel out into conditions that I think you 

and I would rather just sit at home. But they will do their job. 

They‟ll go out there and they‟ll do what they‟re called upon to 

do. And I think often we don‟t recognize that within the 

employees, certainly not often enough. The dedication and the 

commitment they have to their job is something that I think we 

all in this province are proud of, certainly I know we all in the 

Assembly will be proud of. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this summer I had the opportunity to travel 

through Saskatchewan a fair amount with my colleague from 

Regina Walsh Acres as part of our MLA summer tour. We 

travelled through five or six, I think it was about six 

constituencies in the province, and during that time we of 

course travelled over a lot of roads and gave me sort of an 

opportunity to see some of the road conditions first-hand. And 

after that, Mr. Speaker, over the last five or six weeks I on my 

own have travelled a lot of kilometres, checking out and 

seeking out roads throughout Saskatchewan. 

 

In the last five weeks the ones I‟ve concentrated my efforts on 

have been those who have been brought to my attention by 

good people throughout Saskatchewan here — and they have 

done that by contacting my office, either by telephone or email 



October 26, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3201 

or even a number of letters I‟ve received — of good folks of 

Saskatchewan who have concerns about different highways. So 

I took it upon myself to check it out. 

 

I always kind of like to know things first-hand. I like to say that 

I‟ve travelled over a particular road. If somebody says it‟s good 

or it‟s bad, I can verify that to some degree at least because I‟ve 

been over that road. So I took that opportunity to do that and I 

guess you would say, Mr. Speaker, it was a bit of an eye-opener 

because I soon discovered that there are a lot of miles and roads 

in this province that are in need of much attention. 

 

I know that the government often likes to suggest that every 

highway in Saskatchewan is fixed to the letter T and that there 

is no problems. Well that‟s not quite the case; that‟s not quite 

the case, Mr. Speaker. I know that there‟s a number of roads 

that are in a sad state of repair. Some are under construction and 

some, I believe, are on the five-year plan to be addressed. 

 

But what‟s scary, Mr. Speaker, is a number of these roads that 

are in sad state of repair today have been for some time, and yet 

don‟t make the five-year plan. That is scary because it‟s telling 

those folks there that they don‟t have a hope for at least five 

years of having any consideration to their roads. Now that is 

something that many people are concerned about and I certainly 

have heard that throughout my travels. 

 

There‟s then a number of instances where they just couldn‟t 

conceive why their particular road had been left out. It had been 

left out for a while. It‟s not just something that happened in the 

last year or two, Mr. Speaker. It‟s been in need of repair for a 

number of years and most people would think that would be 

priority enough to at least get into the five-year plan — perhaps 

not this year, perhaps not next year, but at least into the 

five-year plan. But here they have their road . . . Their road is in 

a sad state of repair. It is deteriorating even further and it hasn‟t 

yet made the five-year plan. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I can assure you there is a number of 

people out there that are quite concerned about that. And I can 

assure the minister that he will be hearing more about those 

roads as the session goes on. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech. Well, Mr. Speaker, I‟ve, 

as you well know, been around this, had the honour of being 

around this Assembly for a number of years. And with that 

honour comes the opportunity to listen and sit through a number 

of throne speeches. And that I have done over the last number 

of years. 

 

But I think it‟s safe to say, Mr. Speaker, I have never sat 

through a throne speech that has been so hollow and so empty 

and so void of substance — long on rhetoric, but empty on 

substance. And as my colleague pointed out earlier today, Mr. 

Speaker, if you look through the Throne Speech, you will see 

there‟s approximately 10 items that is relatively forward 

looking. 

 

Now in its own being, a throne speech is a tool of government. 

It‟s an opportunity for government to paint with a very broad 

brush, to paint a wonderful picture of the future, of all these 

things that they want to achieve for the province of 

Saskatchewan. And that‟s what a throne speech is usually used 

for, is to paint those wonderful things that all governments want 

to see for Saskatchewan. 

 

They want to see Saskatchewan people prosper. They want 

Saskatchewan to move forward. And here‟s the opportunity to 

lay out in the broadest of forms — no details, no specifics — 

just the broadest of forms through a throne speech of the 

wonderful, bountiful opportunity that Saskatchewan is going to 

have into the future. 

 

But this Throne Speech doesn‟t do that. This Throne Speech has 

approximately 10 items that is forward looking. And it has 

another 50 to 60 items that‟s referencing the past — referencing 

the past, Mr. Speaker. Well as I said, a throne speech is an 

opportunity for the government to paint a beautiful picture of 

the future, beautiful picture of the future, but this Throne 

Speech doesn‟t do that. This Throne Speech concentrates its 

time and its efforts on the past. It‟s like one of the members 

once said when asked about what their vision was. They said, 

well don‟t tell me we don‟t have a vision; look at all the things 

we‟ve done. Well a vision isn‟t in the rear-view mirror. A 

vision is forward looking. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, what message does that send to us? What 

message does that send to us? It sends to us, Mr. Speaker, that if 

the government has got 10 items forward looking and nearly 60 

items in the past, I think the government is trying to tell us that 

the past is a lot brighter than the future‟s going to be. The past 

is a lot brighter than the future‟s going to be. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let‟s look at this Throne Speech. Let‟s look at this 

Throne Speech as far as the working people is concerned. 

What‟s in this Throne Speech for the working people, the 

working people of this great province of ours — east and west, 

north and south, big cities, smaller communities, villages? 

What‟s in this Throne Speech for the working people? 

 

Simply, nothing. There‟s nothing in this Throne Speech at all, 

Mr. Speaker, for the working people. Even it doesn‟t even 

mention the working people — the very people who drive our 

economy. Our economy is driven by the working people of our 

province. It‟s those people who go to work every day, who 

come home, who make the payment on their mortgage, make 

their car payment, buy groceries, buy some clothes for the kids, 

have a little bit of disposal income. They spend it in the 

community. 

 

They don‟t spend their money in New York, London, Dallas, 

Boston. They don‟t spend their money down there; they spend 

their money right here, right here in our local communities. And 

that‟s what drives our economy is those people with disposable 

incomes spending the money here in our economy, here in our 

province, here in our community. 

 

And yet, Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech doesn‟t even mention 

them. And I asked why. Well, Mr. Speaker, I guess you just 

simply don‟t mention in a throne speech the people you‟re at 

war with, people you‟re at war with. Because that‟s what this 

government said prior to the election. They said if they were the 

Government of Saskatchewan, they would go to war with 

labour. And that they have. And that they have, Mr. Speaker. 

They have gone to war with labour. 

 



3202 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2009 

And I can assure those members opposite that they can go to 

war with labour, but they will lose the battles. They will lose 

the battles. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, what‟s in this Throne Speech for 

farmers? What‟s in this Throne Speech for farmers? Simply, 

nothing. Nothing in it for the farmers. 

 

Oh yes, there‟s a mention about agriculture, mention of moving 

bureaucrats from one community to another. But, you know, 

there‟s no mention, no mention of any type of relief for the beef 

industry, the beef industry that is under siege and has been for a 

couple of years now, a beef industry that is shrinking in this 

province. The cow herds are shrinking in this province because 

people are just going broke and getting out of the livestock 

industry. And, Mr. Speaker, it could very well be the end of the 

industry. 

 

And I know the members over there, particularly those in the 

rural areas, will understand this. This summer I talked to a 

couple of different farmers, one who has been in the industry 

for quite a few years, and he was running about 150 cows. And 

he told me that that was it. This fall, he was done. He was 

taking his cow herd to market and he was out of the business. 

He was tired of fighting, tired of losing money, and he was just 

going to get out of the industry. 

 

I also talked to another young fellow, I‟d say about 45, 

thereabouts. Been in the business, in the industry, been in the 

business about 20 years now. And he was running about 800 

head. Now that would be cows and calves and feeders and so on 

and so forth. And he too tells me the same thing — that this fall, 

they were all going to market. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the sad part of it is, there has been 

thousands of cows, good quality breeding cows go to market 

this fall and none of them have gone back into the cow herd. 

They‟ve gone to slaughter. And that, Mr. Speaker, is a formula 

for a loss of an industry, and this government has failed to 

address that issue. They have failed to be able to convince the 

federal government to join them in a meaningful program to 

support the industry, support an industry through its hard times 

so would be something there when the good times return. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there‟s no mention in this Throne Speech about 

relief for the beleaguered hog industry, a hog industry that has 

been under pressure for a long time and continues to go down. 

Oh yes, I believe that if you ask the minister about what is he 

doing or what is this government doing about the beleaguered 

hog industry in this province, he would probably say, well 

we‟ve provided them loans; we‟ve provided them loans. 

 

Well I can assure you, if you talk to the hog producers out there, 

they will be the first to tell you that the last thing they need is 

another loan. The last thing they need is another loan. What 

they need is a meaningful program to support them until the 

marketplace returns and they can start to make a reasonable 

profit in their operations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it‟s safe to say, if you drive through 

Saskatchewan today, even in the southern parts of 

Saskatchewan but more pronounced in the central and northern 

parts, you will see hundreds — no, I‟m wrong there — you‟ll 

see thousands of acres of crop out, thousands of acres of crop 

that‟s not harvested, thousands of acres of crop that‟s sitting 

there. And I‟m afraid, at this time of year, it‟s going to end up 

going under the snow, and it won‟t come off till spring. Many 

of those crops will be valueless in the spring — valueless. And 

yet, Mr. Speaker, there was no mention, no mention in this 

Throne Speech about any type of an emergency program that 

the government was even willing to look at or consider some 

type of emergency program for those farmers who will not be 

able to get their crop off this fall — nothing. Those farmers are 

left to winter the best they can I guess. 

 

[20:15] 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech — and I don‟t want to 

be negative all the time; I want to be positive when I can — and 

I want to suggest that the Throne Speech does, does do a couple 

of things. It does admit to government failures. The government 

admits to government failures. 

 

It admits that the government has failed in their health care 

plan. Oh yes, two years into their term and they‟re announcing 

that they‟re going to implement a new plan, a new plan. Well 

the only reason you bring in a new plan is because the old plan 

has failed. And that old plan was what they campaigned on. 

They campaigned on, in the election, they said if they were the 

government, they would reduce waiting lists in this province. 

Well they haven‟t. In fact I‟ve been led to believe that there are 

some waiting lists even longer now than they were in the last 

election. 

 

So they‟re going to fix this with a new plan. The old plan didn‟t 

work. The new plan we‟re going to introduce. But we‟re not 

going to see the results of the new plan until after the next 

election. Vote for me, trust me, I guess is what they‟re trying to 

say. Well, Mr. Speaker, that plan has failed as they have failed 

the people of Saskatchewan. On a health care issue, this 

government has admitted to failing. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, another failure, another failure to bring 

financial stability to our province. Remember when they 

became government and they inherited $2.3 billion, $2.3 billion 

at a time that resource revenues were flowing in at a rate never 

heard of before in this province. It was flowing in. They had 

money to spend, so they put together a rainy day fund, put 

nearly $2 billion into a rainy day fund. 

 

But I believe it was the Premier, not certainly the other 

members of the government opposite said, that was going to be 

the rainy day fund, and that was going to be a fund like a rock 

— a rock the Saskatchewan people could lean on for 

generations to come. That money was going to be there as the 

rock of Saskatchewan. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, two years have gone by and what‟s 

happened? They‟ve stripped money out of that rainy day fund. 

They stripped money out of that rainy day fund in order to 

balance the books, and they‟re going to be stripping more in 

order to hope to balance the books for this year. And, Mr. 

Speaker, two years ago they set up a rock, and today some two 

years later, they‟ve turned that rock into a marshmallow. Mr. 

Speaker, last spring, with their overenthusiastic predictions of 

resource revenue, has now come back to haunt them. 



October 26, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3203 

This summer, in touring the province of Saskatchewan, that was 

one of the things that was common. And it didn‟t matter really 

who we were talking to, whether we were talking to municipal 

leaders or urban leaders or various different groups, Mr. 

Speaker, and certainly they weren‟t New Democrats, but they 

all expressed this underlying fear of this government‟s ability to 

maintain its spending level. They realized that this government 

had increased their spending in two short years by in excess of 

30 per cent. And they wondered what would happen if, as we 

were seeing at that time, resource revenues going down. Good 

folks out there were beginning to wonder what would happen as 

they strip away the rainy day fund. What happens when that‟s 

gone? Oh they can buy themselves a year or two or maybe even 

three, but it‟s taking their money out of the rainy day fund and 

bailing themselves out. 

 

But what happens then? That was the question that was being 

posed to us. What happens then? Well, Mr. Speaker, the last 

two years have been kind of interesting and in some ways even 

exciting in Saskatchewan. There was a song made popular a 

number of years back by — I believe it was — by the Dave 

Clark Five. The name, a number of years ago, but the Deputy 

Premier obviously remembers the song. It was a catchy tune. It 

was called, “Catch Us If You Can.” 

 

An Hon. Member: — That was Dave Clark Five. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Dave Clark Five, that‟s what I said, Dave 

Clark Five, “Catch Us If You Can”. Nice tune, good tune. And 

it was to that same tune, Mr. Speaker, it was to that same tune 

that the Sask Party members over there travelled the province 

over the last two years, and they were humming and singing 

that same tune. The words they were using was, we have lots of 

money to spend; we have lots of money to spend. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, today in Saskatchewan, today in 

Saskatchewan as a result of the fiscal mismanagement, fiscal 

mismanagement that‟s now becoming accountable to this 

government — and people of Saskatchewan are recognizing 

that — today the people of Saskatchewan are singing, they are 

singing to the same tune as the Dave Clark Five, only they‟re 

using a little different words. The words they‟re using in 

Saskatchewan today is, uh-oh, here we go again. Uh-oh, here 

we go again. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to assure the members opposite they 

don‟t have to panic. It‟s two years. It‟s two years. It‟s two years 

to the next election, two years to the next election. And a lot of 

things can happen in politics in a week, let alone two years. 

And I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, that when the election does 

roll around in 2011, let me assure the members opposite that the 

people of this province will change their tune. They will change 

their tune, the tune they will be humming as they go to the polls 

in the next election. Urban Saskatchewan, as they‟re driving 

along the streets and they see the big billboard over that says 

vote for Sask Party, or in rural Saskatchewan when they‟re 

driving along the grids roads and in the ditches, there are signs 

in the ditches saying vote for the Sask Party, the good folks of 

Saskatchewan will be singing a jazz tune, “Let‟s Call the Whole 

Thing Off.” “Let‟s Call the Whole Thing Off” is what they‟ll be 

singing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am voting, I am voting, I am voting for the 

amendments. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — We‟re so very happy to be speaking today 

in support of our government‟s Speech from the Throne, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Before I begin, I‟d like to take a moment to thank several 

people. First I‟d like to thank my family, my wife Martha and 

our daughter Jacqueline, for their love and support. We all 

know, Mr. Speaker, the impact of our positions as it relates to 

the amount of time that we can spend with our families. We are 

humbled and honoured, you know, regardless of party, 

regardless of partisanship, to hold these positions. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we know that our families bear the brunt of the service 

that we undertake. I want to also offer my sincere thanks to my 

broader family, to my mom and my dad, to my sister, to my 

grandparents, Bill and Sheila. But tonight, Mr. Speaker, my 

thoughts are with my other grandmother, Blanche Coté. She‟s 

fighting a courageous and final struggle with cancer. And she‟s 

in my thoughts, she‟s in my thoughts tonight, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I‟d like to thank our remarkable team in Greystone. Kalle and 

Brendan Curson and their new son Emmett, Kathy Ejack, 

Lesley Porter — all doing excellent work. A lot of other former 

colleagues, many neighbours, friends for their ongoing support, 

I offer again my sincere appreciation. 

 

I‟d also like to extend congratulations to two new MLAs: in 

Regina Douglas Park, on the return of a gentleman who‟s 

returned to this Assembly; and Saskatoon Riversdale. Welcome 

to the new member. My daughter goes to the Saskatoon French 

School, so I‟m in your constituency on a regular basis, and it‟s a 

fine part of Saskatoon. 

 

I‟d be remiss if I didn‟t also highlight though the efforts of 

Kathleen Peterson and Corey O‟Soup. Our candidates did 

remarkable work. They organized remarkable teams, and it was 

just an honour to be associated with both of them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I‟d also like to acknowledge the outstanding people who make 

up the office here: Linda Roy, Jenn Franks, Matthew Glover, 

Laura Buckley, Lindell Veitch, and Mary Donlevy-Konkin. 

 

And I want to also extend a thanks to the officials in the 

ministry. Our deputy minister, Clare Isman, is doing excellent 

work. She‟s tireless in her efforts. And that thank you extends 

all the way through to our front-line people, right across the 

Ministry of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour as 

well as into the WCB [Workers‟ Compensation Board], into the 

Apprenticeship Commission. Mr. Speaker, it‟s an honour to 

work with all of these officials. 

 

I thought I‟d start my substantive comments, Mr. Speaker, by 

talking a little bit about the economy. To do that is to make the 

connection because it‟s so important to the people of this 

province, to our communities. We know we‟re not immune 

from what‟s going on around us, Mr. Speaker, but at the same 

time we know there are real signs of optimism. 

 

Recently the Dominion Bond Rating Service upgraded 



3204 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2009 

Saskatchewan‟s credit ratings. And the rationale offered related 

to the reductions in debt, our fiscal prudence, sound economic 

fundamentals, and the second best debt to GDP ratio in the 

Dominion. That‟s significant, Mr. Speaker, because it helps to 

set the tone for what we‟re doing — moving forward while 

others perhaps may have a vision for moving the province 

backwards. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while we know there have been layoffs and we‟re 

working diligently with some of the affected manufacturers and 

those in the resource sector, we need to highlight that 

Saskatchewan still has the lowest unemployment rate in the 

country. Saskatoon and Regina respectively have the lowest 

unemployment among major cities in the country. 

 

It‟s important to note that we‟ve added, as has already been 

said, more than 16,000 people to our population, Mr. Speaker, 

just in the last year. It‟s important because, as we work to meet 

our talent challenge, as we work to meet more, work more 

closely with First Nations and Métis peoples in our province, as 

we work to ensure that our ex-pats are invited back home, as we 

work to ensure that newcomers realize that we want them to call 

Saskatchewan home — not for a few months, not for a few 

years but to actually stay and raise their families and have their 

careers and benefit from and contribute to our increasingly 

diverse, dynamic, and cosmopolitan communities . . . We know, 

Mr. Speaker, that we‟re not immune from what‟s going on 

around us, and I don‟t want to minimize that. 

 

I want to make sure that we are empathizing with and working 

on behalf of those that are feeling the effects of what‟s going on 

around us. Through the ministry, we‟re undertaking some 

significant steps. Our Canada-Saskatchewan rapid response 

teams are working diligently to help workers affected by the 

global economic downturn through layoffs or production 

slowdowns. The rapid response teams promote federal and 

provincial programs and services like the work sharing program 

that protects jobs through challenging times, the provincial 

skills training benefit that supports the training and career 

development of individuals. And importantly, Mr. Speaker, so 

far we‟ve been able to assist 1,300 individuals and prevent more 

than 640 layoffs. 

 

As we focus on our communities, Mr. Speaker, it‟s important 

for us to focus on what the Premier has established as a bold 

vision for health care in Saskatchewan through the excellent 

and endless efforts of our Minister of Health. I‟m proud to 

support that vision. The Ministry of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Labour plays a key role in helping our 

province train and keep the highly qualified health care 

professionals that are the backbone of our health care system. 

 

And I want to take a moment to thank all of the health care 

workers who joined us here at the legislature today during this 

Health Care Providers‟ Week. As my colleague, the Minister of 

Health, stated earlier today, day in and day out, these amazing 

women and men help mend the bodies, heal the spirits, and save 

the lives of our neighbours, friends, and family. 

 

But the sad truth, Mr. Speaker, is that there just aren‟t enough 

of them working in our system. We need more and we know 

that there‟s more to do. We‟ve already seen success in 

recruiting and retraining nurses. There are over 500 more nurses 

in Saskatchewan than on November 7th, 2007, when we took 

office. And we‟re going to keep working with partners locally 

and globally to continue to recruit and retain even more nurses. 

 

We‟re also focusing on recruiting and training and retaining 

more doctors, and again the Ministry of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Labour will be proud to support these efforts, 

especially those led by the Minister of Health. We‟re working 

with partners in health care to recruit internationally educated 

health care professionals and we‟re doing this through the 

Saskatchewan immigrant nominee program. 

 

[20:30] 

 

That leads us to a discussion, Mr. Speaker, of post-secondary 

education, skills training, personal and professional 

development. Training and keeping health care professionals is 

only one piece of our government‟s commitment to 

post-secondary education, skills training, and development. Mr. 

Speaker, our government is helping to position Saskatchewan to 

be a national leader in post-secondary education, in skills 

training, in areas of development, in research, in innovation, in 

the knowledge economy, and we‟re making investments that are 

needed to make that a reality. Over the last two years, Mr. 

Speaker, we‟ve dedicated over $1.1 billion to that task. 

 

The key emphasis obviously focuses on people, but what we‟ve 

realized is that we need more spaces for our students, for our 

faculty members, for our scholars to learn, and, in some 

instances, to live. Since taking office our government has 

invested more than $150 million into post-secondary 

infrastructure alone. That‟s the biggest post-secondary 

infrastructure investment ever. 

 

And certainly when I‟ve met with Dean Chuck Rhodes at the 

Western College of Veterinary Medicine, and he says this is 

making all the difference to be able to complete this project, to 

ensure that we maintain our competitive advantage across 

Canada and around the world, and that we‟re better positioned 

to make contributions in research relating to zoonotic diseases. 

That means that Saskatchewan is making a difference, Mr. 

Speaker. It‟s making a difference here at home. It‟s making a 

difference around the world. 

 

Our government has also supported the first ever SIAST student 

housing facility at Woodland Campus. We were just up there a 

few days ago, Mr. Speaker, for that announcement. I was able 

to meet two of the families moving into that new facility. 

 

And of course we‟re getting under way with the new residence 

at the University of Saskatchewan. When I arrived as a graduate 

student in 1994 at the University of Saskatchewan, it was 

obvious, it was apparent that residences were needed. It‟s been 

a long time coming, Mr. Speaker, but we‟ve been able to 

deliver on this when members of the other party just simply 

overlooked that priority of providing housing in Saskatoon. 

 

There have been some comments earlier this evening regarding 

the academic health science building. Well, Mr. Speaker, I‟ll 

phrase it like this: construction‟s under way; we‟re under 

budget. 

 

And the track record of those members opposite, well it rests 



October 26, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3205 

simply like this: they were willing to allow the College of 

Medicine to go on probation. They were willing to risk training 

doctors in Saskatchewan forever. We said, that‟s no way to go 

forward, Mr. Speaker. We‟ve increased the number of seats. 

We‟re going to go up to 100. We‟ve increased residences. 

We‟re going to go up to 120, Mr. Speaker. D-wing is well under 

construction. And I was just on campus on Sunday morning. 

E-wing is already started. Those preparations are under way, 

Mr. Speaker. And there were cost savings so that the people of 

the province were able to ensure that they received some dollars 

back, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This speaks both to our government‟s commitment to 

post-secondary infrastructure and to previous neglect, Mr. 

Speaker. It‟s also part of a broader commitment that we‟ve had, 

more than $2 billion, regarding infrastructure across the 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And if I may, Mr. Speaker, I‟ll speak a little bit about what that 

means for us. It means we want to see increased competition 

within the construction sector. It‟s one of the reasons we‟re 

moving forward with Bill 80, to have a more robust and 

competitive construction industry, a growing industry within 

Saskatchewan. We want to maximize taxpayer investments in 

infrastructure and support major private sector investments right 

across the province. 

 

Now what does that mean, having a more robust construction 

sector? It means there‟s more choice. It means government 

shouldn‟t choose unions for workers or associations for 

employers. So employee choice, Mr. Speaker, regarding which 

union or bargaining unit can provide representation; employee 

choice regarding the type of bargaining unit employees seek to 

belong to. That can be a traditional tradecraft or it can be a 

multi-craft bargaining unit according to Bill 80, Mr. Speaker, as 

happens in other provinces, Mr. Speaker. 

 

For union choice, it means which unions are able to participate 

in the construction sector. Mr. Speaker, this is pretty 

fundamental to a democracy — freedom of association. It also 

offers us an opportunity to clarify the issue of abandonment. 

And finally, it offers an alternative to the status quo, a status 

quo that is no longer likely constitutional, Mr. Speaker. 

Freedom of association has evolved within the Canadian 

constitutional, judicial network and framework of decision 

making.  

 

And we‟ve been able to ensure that this is a flexible, reasonable, 

moderate response to ensure that we have a more robust and 

competitive construction sector offering greater choice, greater 

clarity, and moving forward for Saskatchewan‟s construction 

sector. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟ll make one additional comment before I circle 

back into the specific remarks regarding the speech, and that 

relates to a few individuals who have commented and quoted 

Winston Churchill. I‟ll follow in their stead. He once said that 

only the facts can tell the tale and the public ought now to have 

them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Saskatoon Fairview this evening 

misconstrued a comment that I made last week, and I want to be 

very explicit about this. Last week I offered informal criticism 

on a point made by the Leader of the Official Opposition, not 

for what was included in the economic model that he was 

offering, but over whom he omitted in his analysis. 

 

He mentioned — and these are obvious, Mr. Speaker — the 

value of organized labour within Canada. Of course. Since 1872 

unions have been recognized and legitimated for their important 

role. The Leader of the Official Opposition also recognized the 

significance of private and public entities, including 

co-operatives. Of course, Mr. Speaker. This speaks to our 

history within Saskatchewan, but also more than 500 years of 

enterprise within Canada. 

 

He then made mention, Mr. Speaker, of the vital role for 

government. And again we can go back to the 1890s and see 

where this regulatory role began, whether that was addressing 

areas of new competition, regulation, public ownership. And we 

can look at an example, for example, the Combines 

Investigation Act passed in 1900. All of these in the late 1800s, 

early 1900s. 

 

But the Leader of the Official Opposition, he left a significant 

gap regarding who he missed, who he discounted, for the efforts 

of thousands of people across Saskatchewan were missed by his 

three categories. 

 

There are other categories. The most significant for us would be 

what the OECD [Organization for the Economic Co-operation 

and Development] calls social partners — the open door 

societies, the literacy organizations, churches and community 

networks, and a whole range of other community-based 

organizations. Mr. Speaker, our government, we are working to 

ensure that we are more inclusive, that we are forward looking 

in our relationships with these social partners because we 

recognize the significance of their efforts for our community 

and for our economy. Unfortunately what we had presented last 

week — and perhaps we‟ll have an opportunity, I hope so, to 

debate the model that was on offer — it‟s a model that‟s rooted 

in decades past. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟ll now return to the substance of the speech and 

it relates to key areas where we‟re making progress. We‟ve put 

additional dollars into apprenticeship, Mr. Speaker, more than 

$17 million in apprenticeship. This has resulted in over 8,900 

registered apprentices as of June 30th, 2009, a 64 per cent 

increase from approximately 5,400 registered in 2005. 

 

And that‟s not all. This year alone, through budget „09-10, we 

invested $23.5 million to keep tuition reasonable; up to 18.5 

million to expand the graduate retention program, including 6.5 

million in new funding; $2.8 million to index the provincial 

training allowance for shelter and energy costs; $2.2 million for 

student loan enhancements, the first enhancements of their kind 

since 1994; 1.8 million in new funding for regional colleges, 

and expanding the Mathematics of Information Technology and 

Complex Systems or MITACS program, which has opened up 

even more opportunities for graduate students for their research 

to be linked into Saskatchewan industry. 

 

And we created a new Saskatchewan Scholarship of Honour, an 

award that‟s been mentioned already today, Mr. Speaker, a day 

that I think it‟s safe to say members on the government side and 

the opposition side took great appreciation in being able to 



3206 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2009 

honour those who serve our country. And I would like to pay 

special appreciation and note of congratulations to the Minister 

of Corrections and Policing. His work as liaison officer has 

served our province so very well. Thank you, sir. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, along the way, along the way I‟ve had 

an opportunity to meet a lot of interesting people, as we all 

have. But one of the most interesting has been in a women‟s 

shelter, and she was a three-year-old girl, Mr. Speaker, a young 

First Nations girl. And at the time I was on crutches, and she 

came over and began to ask me, what happened to your leg? 

And I thought, you know, that‟s not really the question. The 

question is, how can we help you, little girl? 

 

Because we know statistically, Mr. Speaker — Eric Howe has 

done some work — that for a First Nations or Métis woman 

who doesn‟t graduate from grade 12, she‟s not likely to make 

$100,000 in her life. And we know what imperative that means 

for all of us in this House. It means we need to work even 

harder. 

 

And so we need to redouble our efforts regarding First Nations 

and Métis people because Professor Howe has also done some 

analytical work to say if that little girl, if we can made sure she 

graduates from grade 12, if we can make sure she enters and 

graduates from a diploma or certificate or degree program, then 

her earnings — as just one indicator, but an important one, of 

her quality of life — will then begin a trajectory up 250,000 or 

500,000 or 1 million. 

 

And as important as the money is, the gifts that she possesses, 

whether maybe she‟ll play the cello or discover a cure for 

cancer, that she‟ll be able to meet her full potential, Mr. 

Speaker. That‟s the imperative with which we all work. 

 

And that‟s why in the speech we highlighted the importance of 

the province‟s First Nations and Métis peoples and the funding 

that we‟ve provided to the Gabriel Dumont Institute, the 

Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies, to other 

post-secondary educational institutions right across the province 

to help ensure that more First Nations and Métis peoples have 

the skills and education they need to enter our growing 

workforce. 

 

Mr. Speaker, under the umbrella of the Ministry of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Labour there are over 70,000 

learners. More than 13,000 of those are First Nation and Métis 

peoples. We know there‟s more to do. That‟s why in this latest 

budget, „09-10, we included over $30 million for First Nations 

and Métis post-secondary education, skills training, personal, 

professional development opportunities — a 31 per cent 

increase over „08-09, our first budget. And there are millions of 

additional dollars embedded in other investments that we make 

within this ministry and well beyond that have those same 

objectives. 

 

And we‟re working in partnership with other levels of 

government, with industry, with First Nations and Métis 

communities to increase employment and educational 

opportunities through initiatives like the two Aboriginal skills 

and employment partnerships. 

 

These are called ASEP [Aboriginal skills and employment 

partnership]. We have one in northern Saskatchewan. It‟s $33 

million. It‟s helping to train over 1,000 people. It‟s the largest 

of its kind in Canada. We‟re delighted to be working with the 

private sector, with the federal government, with a number of 

First Nation organizations across the North. This focuses 

specifically on the mineral sector. 

 

We‟ve just launched a second one, Mr. Speaker, with a focus on 

Saskatoon where more than 400 people are being trained in the 

construction trades, and they‟re being trained, Mr. Speaker, 

well they‟re being trained while they‟re building affordable 

houses. 

 

[20:45] 

 

These are the types of projects that we‟re undertaking in this 

province, Mr. Speaker. We‟re doing more regarding 

construction career projects that have provided our construction 

industry an increasingly skilled labour pool and initial work 

experience for those participants. 

 

In both Regina and Saskatoon, we have the trades and skills 

centres which offer skills trades training for youth who are still 

in high school and young adults who want to better prepare 

themselves for work and their careers. In fact we just had 

another announcement in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, regarding 

even more dollars for that trades and skills centre. 

 

We have workplace essential skills . . . We have pilot projects 

that are enabling 250 workers and job seekers to build the skills 

they need for long-term employment and advancement through 

partnerships between public training institutions, industry, 

employers, and community-based organizations. 

 

And most recently, we‟ve launched up in La Ronge the fourth 

phase of the multi-party training plan, an agreement between 11 

public, private, and non -profit partners. The total funding for 

this agreement is 12.7 million over five years for training in 

apprenticeship opportunities in northern Saskatchewan. The 

Ministry of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour is 

providing $3 million, close to one-quarter of the total agreement 

funding. 

 

Through this multi-party training plan, over 100 mining-related 

training opportunities are provided each year, as well as 

scholarships and additional supports for apprentices and 

northern contractors. I met one of the young students already 

participating in this. We‟re seeing young students at the 

University of Saskatchewan actually form their own association 

so that, through peer learning and peer support, they can ensure 

that they‟re succeeding in their studies and succeeding on their 

career paths. 

 

On the employment side, we continue to see gains in First 

Nations and Métis youth employment. In September 2009, 

employment among First Nations and Métis youth aged 15 to 

24 was 8,400 — up by 300 for a 3.7 per cent increase from a 

year ago. 

 

Of course I need to mention another important milestone, and 

that was a summit that we held — that is the Deputy Premier 

and myself — through CMEC [Council of Ministers of 

Education, Canada], a national summit on Aboriginal education 



October 26, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3207 

that we hosted in Saskatoon. It was historic. For two days, 

ministers from across the country met with national and 

regional First Nation, Métis, and Inuit leaders, former prime 

minister the Rt. Hon. Paul Martin came in. And we came out 

with a clear vision on future steps. 

 

And I want to applaud the Deputy Premier for his work on this 

file on the K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] system. After all, 

Mr. Speaker, when First Nations and Métis students, when their 

families, when employers and employees, when our 

communities, when we succeed, we think we‟re getting closer 

to Saskatchewan succeeding because we know that the secret of 

this province meeting its full potential is to have each and every 

one of our individual citizens meet their full potential. 

 

Before closing, Mr. Speaker, I‟d be remiss if I didn‟t touch on 

immigration. As we focus on meeting our talent challenge, 

helping first and foremost those people across our province as 

well inviting back our expats, we‟re also inviting newcomers 

from across Canada and around the world. From across Canada, 

we have some numbers. In the fourth quarter, almost a thousand 

people came in from other parts of Canada. Nine hundred 

twenty-one of those came in from Ontario, people seeking a 

new life not unlike 100 years ago where they see Saskatchewan 

and the West as a land of opportunity, not without its challenges 

but with a real sense of purpose and pride. 

 

As mentioned in the Throne Speech, our targets have moved up 

to 3,400 nominees. When families are included, we anticipate 

that that means 10,000 people will be arriving over the next 12 

to 18 months. Let me give you a reference point, Mr. Speaker. 

Between 2001 and 2006, Saskatchewan brought in just over 

8,000 people through both federal and provincial immigration 

programs. What we‟re talking about is ensuring that we are able 

to reach those targets on an annual basis. The reason for this is 

that we need to ensure that our communities continue to be 

revitalized and our workforce continues to grow. And we‟ve 

certainly caught the attention of other governments including 

Ottawa. 

 

During that same period of time, Mr. Speaker, Manitoba 

brought in over 30,000 people. What we‟re doing is simply 

picking up our game to ensure that we‟re competitive with our 

neighbours. And our goal is to have the best immigration 

system in the country. We‟re not there yet, Mr. Speaker, but 

we‟re well under way. 

 

But importantly this is not about numbers. This is about our 

neighbours, and that‟s why we ensured that there were more 

than 2 million additional dollars put into the budget this year to 

help for additional settlement activities. That‟s more than $12.5 

million dedicated to immigration. 

 

We know there‟s more to do, and that‟s why I want to send a 

special and deliberate thank you to those settlement agencies, to 

those community-based organizations, to those church groups, 

to our institutions who are helping to ensure that people who are 

coming to Saskatchewan as newcomers that they have an 

opportunity call Saskatchewan home. And certainly we‟re on 

the right track, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have just launched a new initiative, Mr. Speaker, as part of 

our broader strategy. We launched that strategy in Greystone 

Heights School, right in the heart of Saskatoon Greystone, one 

of the most cosmopolitan schools that there is. And what we 

were able to do, Mr. Speaker, is move forward on a number of 

fronts. Most recently we announced our entrepreneurship 

streams. We said that it‟s time for us to move forward because 

entrepreneurs coming in to live in Saskatchewan are helping in 

key areas of succession planning. We know that over the next 

five years, 40 per cent of small- and medium-sized businesses 

within Saskatchewan are looking for ways to transition their 

leadership — that is, transition the ownership and senior 

managers. This is a way to help address that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We‟re also focusing on ways to ensure that it‟s easier for those 

from other countries seeking to invest in our impressive R & D 

establishments, research and development establishments and 

institutions, have the opportunity to do that. 

 

We‟re also undertaking work that links some of those 

international investors with First Nations and Métis 

communities. That remains a work in progress. I‟ve sat in on 

one of those dialogues — very, very impressive to see the 

amount of energy and the ideas that are coming along. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we‟ve also identified a mega investor class to help 

ensure that those who are focused on creating more jobs in 

Saskatchewan can receive the attention from government that 

they warrant. 

 

Out of this, Mr. Speaker, we anticipate that over the next two to 

three years there will be about $90 million entering the province 

through the Saskatchewan immigrant nominee program, the 

entrepreneurship stream. And that will help to foster and 

facilitate about 900 new jobs. Mr. Speaker, this is just a small 

contribution our government is making to help ensure that 

we‟re sustaining the growth that‟s under way in Saskatchewan 

and sharing the benefits of that growth with the people of the 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is much more to say, but I will simply 

conclude with this. The Speech from the Throne highlighted 

many exciting areas of endeavour for the Ministry of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Labour. I look forward as always 

to working with our Premier, with my caucus colleagues, with 

our ministry officials, and most importantly with people right 

across this beautiful province of ours to help ensure that this 

Speech from the Throne further builds the promise and potential 

of Saskatchewan. That‟s why, Mr. Speaker, I‟ll be voting in 

favour of this speech, and I hope everyone in this Chamber does 

too. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. Well I‟m honoured once again to stand in this 

Assembly and speak to the Speech from the Throne and enter 

the debate. 

 

Before I start, I‟d like to join my colleagues on my side of 

House with congratulating the two new members to our 

Assembly. The member from Saskatoon Riversdale, I heard a 

lot of good things about her while I was out door knocking with 

our candidate in Saskatoon Riversdale. She seems like a very 

fine lady and a hard worker. And I enjoyed a little bit of her 



3208 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2009 

company at the Lieutenant Governor‟s house the other day, and 

I enjoyed watching her young child playing on the floor. And I 

just hope she hangs on to a lot of that kindness and that 

sweetness that she brings to this Assembly because, you know, 

it is definitely a refreshing, refreshing personality. 

 

I‟d also like to welcome the new member from Regina Douglas 

Park and, as has been said, he has graced this Assembly before. 

And I couldn‟t help, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in my work past over 

the 9 or 10 months with the honourable member from 

Martensville, the Minister of Environment, my work with 

specifically the three Rs — reduce, reuse, recycle — I couldn‟t 

help but focus on the recycle side of that as I welcome the new 

member back to this Assembly. 

 

I would first off really like to, as some of the other members on 

this side have done as well and I think members on the other 

side, have thanked their families. Without my family, the 

support of my family, I definitely couldn‟t do this job. I 

wouldn‟t be able to be here without their support. So to my 

wife, Leone, my daughters, Katelin and Rayanne, thank you 

very much for all the support they give me and all the leeway 

they give me in carrying out this job. 

 

And it isn‟t easy, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Quite often when 

attending public events where, you know, your wife maybe 

wants to dance, you‟re taken away and talking to people about 

certain situations. And it can be very difficult, but my wife time 

and time again just proves her understanding and letting me do 

the job that the people expect me to do in representing them. So 

I thank her very much for doing that as well as the children 

allowing me to be away from home as much as I am and being 

as understanding and loving and caring and supporting me in 

that. Again I thank them, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The people of Yorkton, I can‟t say enough about them. 

Obviously, I mean, Yorkton has a wide demographic of 

political beliefs and philosophies. There‟s a strong New 

Democrat movement there. There‟s a strong Sask Party 

movement there, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

One thing I found very encouraging in carrying out my job in 

the constituency is the understanding there as well. Quite often 

some of the kindest notes and words I‟ve gotten have been from 

people I know didn‟t support me in the election. But by 

carrying out the job in the best way I can and being as fair and 

equal of everybody, looking after their constituency concerns, 

trying to get success with all case files . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

as I say, quite often some of the kindest notes and letters and 

words come from people I know never supported me, but I‟m 

hopeful that they will at least consider us in the next election 

two years from now. 

 

The business community in Yorkton, the whole community as a 

whole, Mr. Deputy Speaker, very supportive, very kind, and 

always there to give a kind word and keep you going when 

you‟re having a tough day or even a successful day. They‟re 

always there encouraging, no matter what. 

 

My colleagues on this side of the floor, as well as at home . . . 

My two girls that work for me there, Annie and Lauretta, I 

couldn‟t do the job I do without them. Their capacity in work 

and their people skills are second to none. And time and time 

again, I continuously get feedback from constituents and people 

around the province who have come across them at different 

meetings and the like, with just their kindness and their work 

ethic and their skill and the way they help me and support me in 

carrying the job that we have to do as a team back in Yorkton. 

 

Back to my colleagues on this side of the House, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I couldn‟t imagine working with a more diplomatic, a 

more cohesive team: no egos, no personalities, Mr. Speaker, 

everybody working together, helping each other out. And I 

think that‟s a big reason how we‟re able to keep moving this 

province forward is . . . Well that positive attitude, that work 

ethic, that cohesiveness — it does rub off. As I‟ve heard many 

members on this side of the House as well speak about . . . I 

think my friend, the member from Saskatoon Northwest talked 

about that, where the attitude just carries through. It‟s almost 

like a virus but a good virus, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that spreads 

throughout the constituencies, throughout the province, and is 

why we have such a positive attitude and optimistic attitude 

going throughout the province as we do. 

 

As I mentioned, the Minister of Environment, working with her 

is a very pleasant experience. 

 

The work I did formerly with the Minister of Social Services, 

the member from Humboldt, again a very good experience and 

very encouraging, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to see how a lot of what 

would be perceived as formerly New Democrat-type areas of 

expertise or support where we have found success. We‟ve 

found where the people need help. We‟ve been able to carry 

through and help them with a lot of the work done through 

Social Services, with the supports and the helps coming through 

that ministry. The work ethic and the hard work coming from 

that member is very reflective, I believe, in the Throne Speech. 

And I will get to speaking about that more in detail. 

 

I‟ve heard the odd, I guess, lighthearted jab I think, at our 

Premier, the member from Swift Current, referred to as a 

cheerleader. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe he is a 

cheerleader and a sorely needed cheerleader for this province. 

We‟ve seen this province for year upon year, decade upon 

decade being sort of dragged back by the doom and gloom 

attitude, this province can never grow attitude, we‟ll never be as 

good as our neighbours attitude. And that just isn‟t acceptable. 

It isn‟t acceptable on this side of the House. It shouldn‟t be 

acceptable on that side of the House either. 

 

[21:00] 

 

And if we break down that word cheerleader . . . cheer, well I 

think a lot of us over here cheer. I really reflected on the 

comments of my friend, my colleague, the member from 

Lloydminster, in his speech to the Throne, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

about, you know, what‟s so bad about cheering for your home 

team? What‟s so bad about cheering for a child? What‟s so bad 

about cheering for a friend? What‟s so bad about cheering for 

our home province? If we aren‟t going to cheer for this 

province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, who will? Who will? If the 

opposition doesn‟t want to, that‟s their philosophy. The 

government, the Sask Party members on this side of the House, 

definitely will be cheering for our province and our home. 

 

Again getting back to our Premier, yes he‟s a cheerleader, Mr. 



October 26, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3209 

Deputy Speaker. He‟s been cheering this province up, not only 

within our borders which . . . you know, all due respect to the 

former member from Riversdale — a very nice man, always 

pleasant to talk to, philosophically different than myself in a lot 

of respects to be sure but, you know, always there for the 

province — but quite honestly from my point of view, 

inward-looking. 

 

We‟re looking outward, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We‟re looking 

outside the borders. We‟re looking at what works in other 

jurisdictions, what works in other provinces, building 

relationships that goes across the country, around the world, and 

we‟re seeing the fruits of those labours right now. We‟ve seen 

the potash industry take a little bit of a hit over the last year. 

That can be expected in any resource-based industry. But still 

we‟re out there promoting our province, looking for other 

avenues. The Premier‟s out there looking for other opportunities 

for our province and, as the Throne Speech says, moving 

forward. We are moving this province forward. 

 

Breaking that word down a little bit further, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, the other half of that word is leader. And I‟ve said 

over and over again at anywhere I‟ve been able to speak or 

anywhere I‟ve been able to share with my personal thoughts 

and my personal feelings about our Premier, the member from 

Swift Current, is . . . I‟ve never found or run across in my life 

another true-born leader as he is. I‟ve run across different 

leaders in different areas and different things I‟ve been involved 

with before, but quite often will find, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 

at times those people are more of a dictator than a leader. I 

don‟t know. You know, I can‟t speak for any members across 

the floor. I can speak for this member who I refer to not only as 

a leader, but I‟ve grown to know him as a friend and a 

confidante. Someone you can share . . . even very interested in 

your personal life. If he thinks you‟re having a bad day, he‟s 

more than interested to take a couple of minutes out his day to 

see how things are going — how‟s the family, how‟s the wife? 

— interested in the people back home, interested in the 

community, interested in the province. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to me that‟s a true leader, not 

somebody that rules by an iron fist, not somebody that rules by 

dictatorship but somebody that rules by example — kindly, 

respectfully — but can rule regardless, the type of a leader 

where people don‟t have to follow. Every member on this side 

of the floor, Mr. Deputy Speaker, wants to follow, and to me 

that‟s the sign of a true, honest-to-God leader. And I truly 

believe that‟s what we have on this side of the floor. 

 

And if you look around the province, speak to people around 

the province — philosophical differences, political differences 

— I hear the same thing over and over again. Well I‟m not sure 

if I‟m philosophically aligned with your party. I‟m not sure if I, 

you know, am really excited about openly supporting you, but 

you know, that member from Swift Current — almost said his 

name — that member from Swift Current is definitely what 

we‟ve needed in this province for year upon year upon year. 

And now we‟re seeing where that‟s taking us, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

I‟ve heard a reference over and over again to these metaphorical 

pompoms. Initially I was a little upset. I heard about these 

pompoms. And I‟ve never been a cheerleader in the true sense 

of the word. Metaphorically, no doubt, I . . . [inaudible] . . . My 

wife was a cheerleader. Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, anybody 

that knows my history with my wife, my family, we‟ve been 

together for 29 years, and she was a cheerleader when we were 

in high school. And I have to admit, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 

had a little bit to do with my attraction to her. There‟s nothing 

like a good-looking blonde cheerleader in high school. But I 

regress. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to get back to attitude. And over 

and over again . . . And this is something I‟ve lived my life by, 

especially over the last number of years. And it‟s all about 

attitude. And I found and it‟s true — and whether you believe in 

New Age, whether you believe in Christian spirituality, 

whatever — over and over again different beliefs and different 

philosophies around the world will pretty much say the same 

thing: what you think about is what you bring about. And 

thinking negative thoughts, talking about the rainy days here, 

needing an umbrella, well I think one of my colleagues in a 

conversation here over the last days mentioned something about 

I‟d rather have pompoms than an umbrella. And that goes to 

attitude, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

You‟ve got to believe. You‟ve got to believe in yourself. You 

have to believe in the province. We over here in the 

government, we believe in this province. 

 

Granted we had some hiccups. The Minister of Finance has 

referred to a mistake. If anybody remembers back to Happy 

Days, the Fonz, he couldn‟t say the word. He was . . . 

[inaudible] . . . the Fonz was . . . [inaudible] . . . Well the 

Finance minister has said we were wrong. We were wrong in 

information we have gotten from experts that are widely 

recognized throughout the world, throughout their province, 

throughout the industry, time and time again have had spot-on 

information, and they were right on the numbers with what 

projections we could expect in our resources. As I think has 

been pointed out by other members, the pricing wasn‟t the 

problem. The sales volumes were the problem, something 

nobody could forecast. 

 

But what seems to be neglected to be mentioned, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is the same thing happened with oil, only the other 

way. We are looking at almost double prices of oil that were 

forecast which has offset some of those potash misforecasts as 

well as other things like tax, PST [provincial sales tax], PST 

income that has come in because of the unbelievably high 

amount of retail sales we‟ve experienced in the province. 

 

The members across, as they chirp and holler, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, they like to paint that bleak picture. But you know, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people in Yorkton aren‟t buying it. 

And over and over again, over the past number of weeks, we‟re 

in the fall supper season right now, and I‟ve been enjoying the 

fall suppers at churches and organizations around the 

constituency from Rokeby . . . I wasn‟t able to go to the 

Willowbrook one last Saturday because of the Health 

Foundation gala — I might touch on that a bit later — but 

wasn‟t able to take them all in. But I take in as many as I can. 

 

And again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, talking to these people . . . and 

I know they‟re not all my supporters. But time and time again, 

what do I hear? You guys are doing a great job, keep up the 



3210 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2009 

good work. They‟re not hearing the doom and gloom. They‟re 

not listening to the doom and gloom from the other side of the 

floor. They‟re understanding that things, some of the resource 

industries are having a little bit of trouble much like a farmer 

might experience a crop failure, short-term thing. 

 

Year over year, it‟s not going to happen. We‟ll be looking at 

some more resource revenues coming in, in the coming months 

and years to offset the downturn that we‟ve seen and experience 

the growth as has been mentioned again by my friendly member 

from Saskatoon Northwest, GDP expected to grow over the 

next couple of years at three and a half per cent. So we‟ll be 

awaiting that, waiting that to happen, and we‟ll be planning 

ahead and enjoying that as it comes in. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — It‟s getting just loud 

enough that I can‟t hear. And I‟d appreciate the opportunity to 

hear each of these speakers as they take the floor, and the 

member from Yorkton has the floor. We‟d appreciate hearing 

what he‟s got to say. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So what‟s 

the best word that wraps up all these comments, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker? Optimism, optimism, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that‟s what 

we‟re seeing around the province, and we‟re not going to let 

any words from across the floor influence that. Now getting to 

the Throne Speech . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I would appreciate 

being able to hear the speech. I think we have agreement that 

it‟s the honourable thing to let members speak as they have the 

floor, and I‟d like the member from Yorkton to continue. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Now 

getting back to the Throne Speech, “Moving Forward,” and you 

know when I first read the Throne Speech, I thought what an 

aptly named speech. The quote from Einstein I thought really 

points it all out. It‟s like riding a bicycle. If you want to 

maintain your balance, which we need a balance in this 

province, you have to move forward. Continually moving the 

province forward, keeping a close eye on all things that affect 

the province and keeping our balance will suit us just very well, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I was very excited to see the reference in the Throne Speech the 

16,000 people, the growth the size of Yorkton we‟ve gotten 

over the last number of months and year, another city the size of 

Yorkton effectively within this province. Yorkton is actually up 

I think over 17,000, so we‟re getting up, and by this point, we 

probably have caught up, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Again as mentioned by other members on this side of the 

House, unemployment rates all-time low. The lowest 

unemployment rate Saskatoon, second is Regina. Property tax 

limits through the education property tax incentives we have 

brought in, very well received throughout the province. We‟re 

seeing that great effect, not only in homeowners but specifically 

landowners, farmers, ranchers. Very excited about these 

initiatives, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Again massive record investments in infrastructure including 

our roads and highways, another very welcome addition to the 

province, helping to keep our economy strong and grow. We all 

know we need that strong infrastructure, that positive 

infrastructure to keep our economy moving, and that‟s what 

we‟re seeing. Not only is it a boost to the economy, but it‟s 

something well needed in the province that we all well know 

has left to decline over the past number of years. 

 

The member from Lloydminster touched on, as well, the five 

best cities to invest in, in the province. I don‟t think that point 

can be repeated enough. Him and I have this ongoing sort of a 

debate over the third largest trading area, third best trading area. 

This pretty much proves it, Mr. Speaker. I will concede that the 

member from Lloydminster has, I would argue, probably the 

third strongest trading area in the province. Yorkton still is the 

third largest. His economy is quite strong. We‟re in close, 

nipping at his heels there, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

But I reflect on the numbers. It‟s cities over 25,000 I think, 

Yorkton at 17,000, very close in the running and for a city the 

size of 17,000 with such a strong trading area, again the third 

largest trading area. Lloydminster, welcome cousin in the area 

of economy, and I‟m glad to see that Lloydminster‟s doing so 

well. 

 

Any interviews I‟ve done, the first thing that the interviewers 

want to talk about is our initiatives in health, talking about what 

a lofty goal that may be, reducing the wait times for surgeries to 

three months within four years. Now, Mr. Speaker, I‟ve heard a 

lot of doubt and maybe doom and gloom on that point as well. 

But quickly people realize the lofty goal we had with nursing. 

The Minister of Health, the Legislative Secretary for Health — 

the member from Regina Qu‟Appelle — very successful in that 

front. Within a year, we were 570-some nurses. We‟re 30 per 

cent to go to that goal. 

 

As the member for Lloydminster said as well, set that bar high. 

Let‟s try and meet that goal. If we don‟t measure up to that 

goal, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we can measure ourselves. Where 

did we come up short? We can admit we were wrong. We came 

up short of that goal; how can we better change our plans to 

meet that goal next time? There‟s no sense setting the bar so 

low that we can attain it but it‟s not going to get us anywhere. 

We‟ve got to recognize where our needs are, and we‟re going to 

strive for that goal. And if we come up short, we‟re going to try 

and do better next time. 

 

It‟s not for us, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It‟s for the people of this 

province. It‟s for my wife. It‟s for my in-laws. It‟s for my 

parents. It‟s for our children. If we‟re going to maintain our 

health care system and get to the point that we have to get for 

when a lot of us are getting up in years — I‟ve got a couple 

years to the time I hopefully need that extended care — but we 

want to make sure that we start building that system for the 

future. It‟s not going to get done in one day, as the Minister of 

Health pointed out, but we‟ve gotten some great headway on 

that. We‟ve gained some great momentum. 

 

And looking at a lot of the strategies that were also mentioned 

today, we‟ve seen an increase in doctor training seats. We see 

an increase in nurse training seats. I just got some great news 

Saturday, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at the Health Foundation gala 



October 26, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3211 

which I mentioned before, that we will soon be having 

four-year nursing programs at the college in Yorkton. We 

already have the RPN [registered practical nurse]; we‟re 

expanding nursing into Yorkton. Building that college capacity 

out in some of the more rural areas is an exciting thing. Yorkton 

used to train nurses back in the „60s, and now finally back, 

2010 we will be looking at training nurses again. And that‟s 

very welcome to the community. 

 

We‟ve seen improvements for our long-term care for our 

seniors, as has been mentioned about the investment in some of 

our long-term care facilities. Some of the places we‟re not 

actually adding beds, but we‟re improving the beds that were up 

to this point pretty much unliveable, Mr. Deputy Speaker — 

totally unrealistic and unreasonable for our seniors. We‟re 

moving forward. We‟re getting it done. 

 

So what we‟re seeing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the health care, is 

optimism. We have a lot of challenges, but if we keep 

optimistic I know we can get there. 

 

[21:15] 

 

What I want to touch on now in my closing minutes is some of 

the work that the member from Humboldt was able to 

accomplish that just never got done. And we‟re going back to 

1992 with a lot of these things that just weren‟t improved upon, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. The seniors‟ income plan virtually 

untouched since 1992. In the last year, double recipients, double 

the income. 

 

Housing. Well we‟ve seen some new low-income housing in 

Yorkton coming up. We‟re seeing some more projects coming 

for at-risk youth in Yorkton, and moving forward, looking at 

some help for low-income seniors and others, to be sure. 

 

We see a disability plan sorely needed in this province, not 

necessarily for the income side of things, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

but for the dignity side of things. I‟ve got a lot of friends in the 

province who have disabled children, and adults that quite 

frankly are uneasy with the stigma attached to social assistance 

at times. We see these people, because of their health concerns 

and their special needs, they will never be able to go to work. 

They were asking for disability, a separate disability plan from 

social assistance, for years and years and years. This year, this 

October, we‟re getting that done. 

 

The benefits of the income tax cuts to those, a lot of them 

low-income, or all low-income, some of them with special 

needs, a lot of them seniors as well. The income tax cuts 80,000 

people off of the provincial income tax registers, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. We see social assistance, transitional employment 

assistance, food allowances, housing allowances all increased 

virtually the first time since 1992, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Justice and policing very well received. We‟re looking at 

banning texting and hand-held cellphone use in vehicles. Very 

welcome throughout the province. The police officers, I believe 

the Minister of Corrections and Public Safety touched on where 

they‟re going with that. Yorkton was blessed to be the recipient 

of two of those police officers. We now see for the first time in 

probably 15 years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Yorkton having a full 

complement of police officers addressing some of the crime 

issues that we have in Yorkton. And having a full force, we 

have those boots on the street and we‟re moving forward with 

that. 

 

Agriculture. Moving AgriStability to Melville, another 

welcome thing that . . . I‟ve heard some sneers and jeers from 

across the floor. How is this going to help? Well, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, moving jobs to rural Saskatchewan where we can 

better look after this program and have those jobs spurring our 

economy, I think is welcome news. 

 

First Nations and Métis relations. I won‟t get into that too 

deeply, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but one thing I have heard from a 

lot of my friends in the First Nations community, the Aboriginal 

community, is respect for our Premier. How they‟ve got nothing 

but good to say about our new Premier, our Premier of two 

years, that they‟re looking forward to great things coming with 

the relationship that they‟re building with him. 

 

The member from Lloydminster and the Standing Committee 

on Crown and Central Agencies with the program they‟re going 

through, talking about, you know, not focusing just on the 

nuclear. A lot of the people just want to focus on the nuclear to 

take away from the other initiatives, but we are looking at wind 

power, possibility of more hydroelectric power. We‟re looking 

at more natural gas plants. We‟re looking at clean coal. We‟re 

looking at all avenues of energy for our province in the coming 

years. We know that our energy needs are going to double 

probably in the next 15 years, that we can‟t just be looking at a 

one-trick pony, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We have to be looking at 

all forms. And I think they‟re doing a great job in getting out 

there and getting that information. 

 

I‟ve heard a few comments about investing in the Olympics. 

Well you know, I can‟t say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we 

shouldn‟t do that. You look across the provinces. Every one, 

every province across this great Dominion is investing in 

forums and in venues at the Olympics to promote the province. 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would ask you, how would that 

look? The province with arguably the best economy, the best 

and strongest economy in the Dominion of Canada, does not 

invest in a pavilion at the Olympics. That‟s ludicrous. And the 

numbers I‟ve heard thrown around where we know in fact the 

pavilion itself at the Olympics is half of the numbers that the 

members throw around, $3.6 million for the pavilion there, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

With that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I‟ll conclude my comments. 

Again thank you to all my colleagues for being the people you 

are and being as enjoyable as you are to work with. Many 

thanks to my Premier, the leader and friend that has nothing but 

respect from this side of the House and the people of the 

province. And with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will be voting 

against the amendment. I‟ll be voting for the main motion. 

Thank you very much. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

for Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a true pleasure to 

be on my feet this evening, Mr. Speaker, and join the debate on 

the Throne Speech that was given a few days in the legislature. 

As I said a couple of days ago in question period, it is great to 



3212 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2009 

be back in the Assembly. It‟s great to be back with colleagues 

from both sides debating the issues that are important to people 

in Saskatchewan and I‟m very happy to be here and very happy 

to enter this debate. 

 

Before I get into my remarks about the Throne Speech, Mr. 

Speaker, I want to say a few hellos and a few thank yous to 

people. Of course every MLA is highly dependent and needs to 

have a solid constituency assistant back home. And in my 

situation with Donna working in the office, it‟s a great feeling 

to be here in Regina knowing that things are being taken care of 

in Saskatoon competently and with the good service that 

individuals are accustomed to when they come to the office. So 

thank you to Donna. 

 

I also want to thank the staff here in the building, Mr. Speaker, 

whether that‟s our caucus staff and the good work they do in 

supporting us and making us have the information available to 

us that we need and all the other work, a thank you to them. 

And everyone else tied into this building, Mr. Speaker. There 

are a great number of people that are involved in this type of 

production that goes on here during session and outside of 

session. And I want them to know we do appreciate, I‟m sure 

all members do appreciate the work that they do. 

 

I also want to say hello and a thank you to my wife, Ruth, for 

her support. And yes, enough said. And also to my good friend 

Linsay, thank you for his support. I do want to make one special 

hello, Mr. Speaker — and the special hello was to my wife; that 

one does count — but perhaps a more special hello to my 

grandma, Ferne Vincent. I know she‟s at home in Outlook in 

the Luther facility watching when the legislature is sitting. All 

members can be confident that my grandma has the TV on the 

whole time. She listens to everyone equally; she likes to know 

all the issues. And a special hello to Ferne Vincent in the town 

of Outlook. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with the new sitting, we also have a couple of new 

members here in the Assembly. I‟d first like to welcome the 

Leader of the Opposition to his seat, the member of Douglas 

Park, and say that it is great and it is an exciting time for our 

party and our caucus and very happy to be part of it. 

 

I also want to . . . Well the members opposite are talking about 

who supported who. And I can tell you, during the by-elections, 

Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity to work a good amount on 

both of the campaigns going on. And what I found so 

encouraging and so positive as a New Democrat, Mr. Speaker, 

was whenever I went into the committee rooms, there was 

always a wide representation of people working in those 

offices. And people from all of the leadership campaigns, Mr. 

Speaker, all the campaigns, all the volunteers are on board and 

were certainly doing the work that needs to be done at the 

constituency level and as a party on the whole. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟d also like to welcome the new member for 

Saskatoon Riversdale. I spent the lion‟s share of my time 

working in Riversdale during the by-election, and I know that 

the member will be a great addition to this Assembly, as many 

other members who have welcomed her have agreed to that 

statement. Having spent a lot of time door knocking, I know 

I‟ve seen how individuals respond to her in a very positive way 

because of her genuine desire to help individuals and to listen. 

And I think the members of Riversdale will be served well by 

the new member for Saskatoon Riversdale for a good number of 

years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Last and certainly not least, perhaps the most important — right 

up there with grandma, I would say — is thanking the 

constituents of Saskatoon Massey Place. Over the summer I 

was able to do a good amount of door knocking in my 

constituency, knocking on a lot of doors in different areas, 

knocking off a lot of polls, Mr. Speaker, and always good 

interactions. Happy to hear from individuals who voice 

concerns with what they see with the Sask Party government, 

and happy to receive encouragement from them in terms of 

what we are doing as an opposition. So I thank the good people 

of Saskatoon Massey Place for their support. And I guess we‟re 

about midpoint now in this term and I look forward to the next 

two years, Mr. Speaker, a great deal. 

 

Well when looking at the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, it‟s 

important that before we get into the meat and potatoes, if you 

could say that — I think that‟s perhaps an overstatement on this 

particular Throne Speech because there isn‟t much in there 

certainly . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Gruel, says the member 

from Saskatoon Centre, and I‟d have to agree with him on many 

fronts. 

 

It‟s important to look at the situation that we find ourselves in 

as a province, Mr. Speaker. And in order to do that it‟s 

necessary to look a bit at the current reality that we face. And 

we do that, Mr. Speaker, I think by looking at the previous 

budget that we had because the budget and the fiscal state of the 

province, Mr. Speaker, has great bearing, has great bearing on 

the ability of government to carry out what they put down on 

paper in their Throne Speech. 

 

And when we look at that budget, when we look at the current 

state of the finances here in the province, I think members on 

both sides of the House and members in the public would agree 

that we see some very troubling things. We see a situation that 

is not encouraging, in my opinion. 

 

And there‟s been a good amount of debate in the first two days 

here in the legislature and I predict — I don‟t know, but I 

predict — that we‟ll be discussing this for some time here in the 

legislature. And one of the main issues that we will be 

discussing, Mr. Speaker, is the huge error that occurred with 

predictions of potash revenue and where we would be as a 

province in receiving revenue from the potash industry. 

 

Now a few days ago, on October 22nd, the Minister of Finance 

in question period, Mr. Speaker . . . We were having this 

discussion, as you will recall. We were talking about potash 

numbers and the current state of the books, and the Minister of 

Finance said — this is in Hansard from October 22nd, 2009 — 

he said, “There is virtually no one in the world that would have 

predicted what has happened in the potash industry.” This is the 

Minister of Finance‟s remark on October 22nd. “There is 

virtually no one in the world that would have predicted what 

has happened in the potash industry.” 

 

So I thought to myself, well I know the Finance minister is a 

good man, and I wonder if in fact his statement holds water and 

whether that is a correct assessment of whether or not 



October 26, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3213 

individuals in Saskatchewan and here in the province and in this 

Chamber thought that what was going to potentially happen in 

the province in regards to potash, would happen. 

 

So I went back, Mr. Speaker, and looked at some of the budget 

statements that were made at the last budget, knowing that the 

numbers that we face now here in the province, the budget 

numbers that we have here in the province have a direct impact 

and influence on how that Throne Speech that was delivered a 

couple of days ago will or will not come into being. And what 

is the motive behind that Throne Speech? Why would they be 

taking the angle that they are taking, Mr. Speaker? 

 

So if we look back to March 26th, coming out of the budget 

discussion, the same Finance minister, some time earlier, said, 

“And so, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the people of 

Saskatchewan and members opposite, I am very much 

convinced we‟re using cautious, prudent numbers in the 

presentation of this budget.” It goes on further, in these remarks 

on page 2586, Mr. Speaker, and he says, “And so, Mr. Speaker, 

you‟re right if you say that we are optimistic in a prudent and 

guarded way about the future of this province,” Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, with the remarks that the Finance minister 

said, I mean at the time it sounded like he was saying, well 

we‟re, you know, we‟re pretty careful and, you know, we think 

we actually . . . numbers aren‟t bad. And so, so far, according to 

the member‟s statement where he said recently in question 

period a couple of days ago that, well no one could have 

predicted — well according to the remarks so far, Mr. Speaker, 

I suppose that‟s true. 

 

But I dug a little deeper and I looked at some of the other 

remarks that were made around the budget, Mr. Speaker, and 

this is where I feel that the statement that he made a few days 

ago about the ability, a few days ago that no one knew what 

was coming in the potash industry, I found these statements to 

shed some additional light on how that initial statement doesn‟t 

hold water, in my opinion. 

 

Now the previous member for Regina Douglas Park who was 

serving as our Finance critic at the time of the last budget, Mr. 

Speaker, he of course had some comments to make as Finance 

critic. And, Mr. Speaker, at the time when the Finance critic 

made his remarks, he took a lot of flak from the members 

opposite. They were saying oh he‟s a Debbie Downer, and like 

come on, how does this guy call himself a Finance critic? 

 

[21:30] 

 

But I think when we see his remarks and we look a little closer 

at his remarks, I think there may perhaps be some vindication 

for the former member of Regina Douglas Park. And the 

member said — this was in a question period exchange, Mr. 

Speaker, on March 19th, 2009 — the previous member from 

Regina Douglas Park said: 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party is projecting potash 

to generate almost $2 billion, one-fifth of the provincial 

revenue in the coming budget. This is an incredibly 

optimistic projection, considering that the Potash 

Corporation has just announced a further $1.5 million 

tonne cut in production, and market reports since the 

budget was prepared, market reports also point to changes 

in price structure, Mr. Speaker. To the minister: did his 

budget projections take into account the most recent cut in 

production by PotashCorp? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, at the time that the member made this 

statement, there were all sorts of remarks made by the members 

opposite. Oh it‟s not about the production levels; it‟s about the 

sales that determine how much revenue is coming in on potash. 

And they were making fun of the member and saying he doesn‟t 

know what he‟s talking about. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, production is the first step to selling the 

actual potash. So while these initial cuts to production may not 

necessarily affected the amount of revenue generated from 

potash, when you looked at what was going on in the world 

economy, when you saw what other countries, the fiscal state of 

other countries on a global scale — the countries that buy 

Saskatchewan potash — it‟s a fairly logical conclusion and 

fairly logical understanding that this would have huge 

implications for the revenues of the province when it comes to 

potash, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to the remarks that Mr. Van 

Mulligen said, the past Finance critic, clearly, clearly, Mr. 

Speaker, what the Finance critic was saying a couple days ago 

about no one knew what was going on, this just came out of 

nowhere, how could anyone have predicted it, well, Mr. 

Speaker, the official opposition some time ago — through 

looking at what was going on in the world and listening to not 

only the voices they wanted to hear, but looking at all of the 

analysis and the voices from individuals who were analysing 

the situation — clearly knew that the numbers that were 

predicted by the other side were not sound and solid numbers, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it‟s not only the numbers, Mr. Speaker. It‟s 

not only the amount that he predicted to get from potash, Mr. 

Speaker, but there‟s a huge amount of concern about the 

percentage of provincial revenue that was being placed on 

potash, 20 per cent, one-fifth of government revenue based on 

the potash numbers. So it‟s not only the numbers that were off, 

Mr. Speaker. That‟s concerning. But it‟s the reliance on those 

numbers that was also concerning. And this too, Mr. Speaker, 

was pointed out by the opposition. 

 

On March 19th in his reply to the budget, the former member 

from Regina Douglas Park said, quote: 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, where I come from, if you have that 

great a reliance on a single revenue source — to put it in 

metaphorical terms, if you have that many eggs in one 

basket — you should be careful. You should be doubly 

careful, very careful, Mr. Speaker. Because since the 

budget was put to bed, what we get are indications that 

may not necessarily be incorporated into the 

government‟s assumptions about what is taking place in 

the potash industry and therefore what kind of revenues 

we can expect. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, contrary to what the Finance minister said 

about no one knew what was going to happen, no one predicted 

this, totally came out of the blue, if we look at the record, Mr. 



3214 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2009 

Speaker, as to what was said in this Assembly — not even what 

was said around the world by analysts and economists — if we 

look at just the record in this Assembly, that simply is the not 

the case, Mr. Speaker. There were plenty of individuals saying 

that the numbers were off. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, okay if the Minister of Finance was off on this 

statement and wasn‟t clear of the record at the time of the 

budget, perhaps there were other members, Mr. Speaker, that 

had a better understanding of what was going on, other 

members of cabinet who would have a say about potash 

numbers, would have a say about the state of economy in how 

things should be controlled. And, Mr. Speaker, when I was 

considering that, well maybe it‟s not just the Finance minister; 

maybe there are other individuals perhaps. 

 

If we look at what the member from Kindersley said, if we look 

at what the member from Kindersley said, he said — this was 

on March 13th, 2009 — on the potash numbers, in addition to 

that, this is what he says, I quote: 

 

In addition to that, we‟ve talked to senior executives of all 

the potash corporations and said to them, we want your 

best estimates as to what you think is going to happen in 

the potash market. They‟ve been very forthcoming with 

respect to that. [And] They have said . . . they think our 

numbers are accurate. They think that they may even be 

on the low side in terms of these projections. 

 

Mr. Speaker, thank goodness the member from Kindersley was 

not in control the entire budget. I shudder to think of what our 

current state of the fiscal affairs would be in this province if the 

member was responsible for the entire picture. So on this, on 

this issue alone, I will give some credit to the Minister of 

Finance for his ability to have a bit of control over things even 

though he was horribly off with his numbers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this isn‟t just me saying this, Mr. Speaker. It‟s not 

just the opposition that has some serious problems or made 

some real statements about the state of fiscal affairs in this 

province. From Murray Mandryk on August 26th from an 

article, “Gov‟t made Devine error.” I know some of the 

members opposite who sat under the Devine administration and 

have a deep fondness and still a deep amount of support and 

admiration for the man, Mr. Speaker, perhaps don‟t mind this 

comparison. Maybe they think being compared to Grant Devine 

isn‟t all that bad, perhaps. Yes, happy to be compared to Grant 

Devine. But if we look at the track record of that Devine 

government and now if we look at the emerging track record in 

two years of this Sask Party government, we see some 

problems. And what this columnist said, Mr. Speaker, on 

August 26th was, “This happens to be the biggest government 

miscalculation since PC finance minister Gary Lane‟s 1986 

budget.” 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when the budget came out, there was all sorts 

of talk, all sorts of talk about how this budget was a historic 

budget. This budget is the most amazing thing ever. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, this budget has proven to be a historic budget — 

historically brutal, Mr. Speaker, historically brutal in its 

projections for revenue, historically brutal in the way that it 

miscalculated what revenues would be in the province, 

historically brutal in how it treated the people of this province 

because now we‟re in a situation where the government, when 

they came to office, the Leader of the Opposition talked about 

how they think they found a wallet full of cash. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, the cash has been spent. It hasn‟t been managed. 

They‟ve messed the numbers so badly, Mr. Speaker, that now 

this historic budget that was touted by the Sask Party, by the 

members opposite, is now no better than a brutal budget from 

Gary Lane in 1986, Mr. Speaker, and sadly that‟s where we 

now stand. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t think the members opposite — based 

on their comments from their seat — I don‟t think they really 

appreciate how much they were off by, how great $1.3 billion 

actually is. I don‟t think they get it, Mr. Speaker. And it‟s a 

huge number. You have to put a whole lot of zeros down on the 

calculator to see $1.3 billion — so far, so far, Mr. Speaker. We 

don‟t know how much more off they are. But I thought I would 

break it down into terms that I think they can understand, terms 

that are near and dear to their heart and terms that have a really, 

a daily influence on what they do here in this Assembly. 

 

Let‟s look at the issue of pompoms, Mr. Speaker, pompoms. 

And I‟m not talking about, you know, these cheap little 

pompoms for a buck or two. I know the Premier demands 

top-notch pompoms. He wants every member to have the best 

pompoms possible. I‟m surprised pompoms, Mr. Speaker, 

didn‟t make it into the Throne Speech. There was enough fluff 

and other stuff in there. Why pompoms aren‟t in there, I don‟t 

know. But, Mr. Speaker, with $1.3 billion, members opposite 

could buy 52 million sets of pompoms at 25 bucks a pop. Not 

bad, not bad — 52 million. And that could go around 

Saskatchewan a long time. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I know some of the members opposite are 

better than cheering than others. But I know all members on the 

other side — and truth be told, members on this side as well — 

do have a fondness for cake, Mr. Speaker. And what we‟ve seen 

in these first two years of Sask Party government is a lot of cake 

cutting, a lot of balloons. I didn‟t calculate the numbers for 

balloons, but I‟m sure you could buy a lot of balloons for $1.3 

billion as well. 

 

But if we look at cakes, Mr. Speaker, say $50 a cake. I haven‟t 

purchased a cake recently. But you know, if you want a good 

slab of Black Forest cake probably to feed a good amount of 

people — because if you have balloons out, people will come 

— Mr. Speaker, you probably need . . . at 50 bucks a pop, 

members opposite could have bought 26 million cakes to cut. 

That would have been a lot of cake cutting. I think the members 

could have paraded around their constituencies for a long time 

cutting those cakes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well if pompoms don‟t cut it, if cakes don‟t cut it, let‟s talk 

about something else, Mr. Speaker. We know members 

opposite have a certain fondness and a certain attraction to . . . 

They‟ve a vehicle of choice. There‟s a vehicle of choice on the 

other side, Mr. Speaker, and the vehicle of choice is the Jeep 

Patriot. These members love their Jeep Patriots. The member 

from Cannington . . . Not all members, the newest minister in 

the back there says, no I don‟t like the Jeep Patriot; I‟m more of 

an Impala guy. That‟s all right. I understand. 

 

But I know the member from Cannington loves the Patriot. He 



October 26, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3215 

said well hey . . . Oh he doesn‟t love them as much as Hummers 

but, Mr. Speaker, I think based on his remarks earlier in 

justifying why Patriots are okay . . . But, Mr. Speaker, at $1.3 

billion, members opposite . . . Now I don‟t know the exact cost 

of a Jeep Patriot, but we‟ll say $30,000 because I know the 

members like the a/c [air conditioning] and the four-wheel drive 

and the works, you know. Maybe even, well maybe not leather. 

Any leather in those Patriots? Perhaps not. But at $30,000, the 

members opposite could buy 43,333 Jeep Patriots. That‟s 

enough Patriots, Mr. Speaker. They could give one to everyone 

in Moose Jaw and Swift Current, so clearly a great deal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for $1.3 billion, the last amount, Mr. Speaker, let‟s 

look at . . . and this one it‟s not as much, Mr. Speaker. The 

amount isn‟t in the $50 range. It‟s $2.50, Mr. Speaker. It‟s only 

2.50. I called Peavey Mart this afternoon and said how much 

this is. And, Mr. Speaker, for $1.3 billion, members opposite 

could buy 520 million packs of rat poison, Mr. Speaker. There 

would be plenty to buy with $1.3 million, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we know, Mr. Speaker, from the financial state that we find 

ourselves in, that colours, Mr. Speaker, how we examine this 

Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker. And this is where, Mr. Speaker, I 

have trouble taking this Throne Speech for what it is because, 

given everything that‟s occurred, Mr. Speaker, given how badly 

the numbers have been messed up, given how arrogantly they 

plowed ahead with numbers that were totally off, Mr. Speaker, I 

would expect this Throne Speech to speak to that in some way. 

I would expect this Throne Speech to recognize the historic 

blunder on the budget that occurred, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the contrition in this Throne Speech is absent, 

Mr. Speaker. There‟s one sentence — it‟s a short sentence, four 

words — “This forecast was wrong.” That‟s it. They‟re out $1.3 

billion, Mr. Speaker, and the only reference to being out $1.3 

billion — a historic blunder, Mr. Speaker — are four words: 

“This forecast was wrong.” Not even, I am sorry; this has 

horribly affected the province. This has horribly affected our 

ability to deliver things in the Throne Speech. No, none of that, 

Mr. Speaker, no contrition, Mr. Speaker, no I‟m sorry — 

nothing. 

 

So now when I look at everything they put out in this Throne 

Speech, Mr. Speaker, when I see how badly they have messed 

the numbers, how can I take them, Mr. Speaker, with a straight 

face, expecting them to deliver what‟s in this Throne Speech? 

It‟s just not believable in my opinion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I say it‟s not believable because I think Saskatchewan 

people want more than a four-word apology or a statement on 

the issue. It‟s not an apology. In fact it‟s so far from an apology, 

they blame the structure. They don‟t even own the issue. They 

don‟t take responsibility for this huge blunder. No, Mr. Speaker, 

they blame it on the process and say, oh the process is wrong; 

we‟ve got to tweak that process now, Mr. Speaker. Well the 

process worked well, Mr. Speaker, for quite some time. And we 

look at the process at that time. There were all sorts of people 

saying the numbers weren‟t good; the numbers weren‟t solid. 

They weren‟t on solid ground, Mr. Speaker. So for them now to 

say the process was wrong, in my opinion, Mr. Speaker, is 

passing the buck. 

 

Any parent in this room, Mr. Speaker, or someone who‟s dealt 

with anyone in life, when there‟s been an error, when you‟ve 

been wronged in some way, it‟s not enough just to say sorry, 

Mr. Speaker. There needs to be a change in behaviour. I know 

you would understand this, Mr. Speaker. And I think some of 

the members opposite might understand this too. Now I think 

some of the members that understand it, Mr. Speaker, aren‟t in 

cabinet any longer and aren‟t able to actually speak up to this 

issue and speak to how actions need to follow words, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[21:45] 

 

But I say there is no change in behaviour, Mr. Speaker, because 

I keep seeing the hollow cheerleading. I keep seeing the empty 

words, Mr. Speaker. If we look back at the budget that was back 

a while ago, the member from Carrot River . . . And I like the 

member from Carrot River a great deal, Mr. Speaker. He‟s a 

pleasant guy. I always enjoy chatting with him and I‟m sure 

he‟s doing great work in his constituency. But his remarks on 

the budget, Mr. Speaker, he said, speaking how this budget was 

historic back in the spring, and I quote from Hansard, page 

2431: 

 

Mr. Speaker, of course I support this budget. Let‟s face it, 

Mr. Speaker, this budget is not only a fantastic and 

historic budget for Saskatchewan but also the best budget 

in all of Canada and [possibly] . . . the best in North 

America. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if the member stopped there, perhaps it 

would be okay. But this is the part, Mr. Speaker, when I talk 

about hollow cheerleading and pompoms, a perfect example 

here: 

 

Oh heck, let‟s go a little further, Mr. Speaker. I think it‟s 

going to be the best [budget] in the whole world. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, when a budget, Mr. Speaker, when a budget 

is out $1.3 billion, Mr. Speaker, not the best budget in the 

world; not the best budget in North America, Mr. Speaker. I 

think it‟s a pretty brutal budget. Same way, if you look at the 

comments in the press about the budget, how it‟s in comparison 

to 1986 — not so good, Mr. Speaker. And this is my problem. 

 

And now in the rhetoric and the talk in this Throne Speech, Mr. 

Speaker, it‟s the same over-the-top new direction, great horizon, 

moving forward, stuff that‟s coming from the members all the 

time. It‟s nothing but pompoms, Mr. Speaker. It‟s not looking at 

the reality on the ground. It‟s not looking at the reality in the 

bank account which is empty, or getting that way, Mr. Speaker, 

because of the mismanagement. 

 

So when they talk about this Throne Speech and how it‟s a 

great plan forward, I have a problem really taking this Throne 

Speech as a valuable document because I don‟t think it matches 

reality here in the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Part of the change in behaviour, Mr. Speaker, would be a 

recognition and a change in behaviour, a change in actions. 

And, Mr. Speaker, the one issue was the change in a reliance on 

analysts to do with the economy, economists and different 

financial analysts, Mr. Speaker. Back when the budget was 

being discussed, Mr. Speaker, the opposition pointed out that 



3216 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2009 

the growth projections that the members opposite were using 

were out of whack with the average of, it was six or eight 

private sector lending agencies, Mr. Speaker. Totally off, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But the opening paragraphs to this Throne Speech were all 

about referring to analysts. So what‟s changed, Mr. Speaker? 

Why were those analysts believable now, but not believable in 

the past, Mr. Speaker? So when they‟re dealing with the Throne 

Speech now, another instance where I don‟t think actions are 

matching the reality, Mr. Speaker, in not showing any sort of 

contrition, any sort of new direction that shows the finances the 

province will be . . . they will be good stewards of the finances 

of the province. They are simply not cutting it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But we can also look at . . . I‟ve used up more time than I 

probably ought to, so I won‟t go down that avenue. I‟ll save it 

for another day, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So looking at this Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t think 

their actions give a whole lot of credibility to what they laid 

down in this plan. Because, Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech is 

a channel-changing document. It is nothing more than an 

attempt by the other side to change the channel from the brutal 

mess that they have left here in the province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I wasn‟t in this Assembly and, you know, I 

was in grade school during the Devine era. I know some 

members were here, members from both sides, Mr. Speaker, 

and they can speak to the situation. But sadly, Mr. Speaker, 

history is repeating itself here. Nothing but fluff, nothing but 

pompoms, nothing but over-the-top rhetoric. And no sound 

financial stewardship, Mr. Speaker. Just simply a reckless 

attitude and that‟s it. 

 

If we look at the issues, Mr. Speaker, over the summer that I‟ve 

heard about as I‟ve had the great opportunity to door knock in 

Saskatoon Massey Place, a whole lot in Saskatoon Riversdale, 

some in Douglas Park, and also part of rural tours, Mr. Speaker, 

in various communities throughout Saskatchewan, you know, 

the Throne Speech might touch or have a, you know, a passing 

reference to some of the issues. I‟ve heard about issues like 

affordable housing, Mr. Speaker, issues like rent for individuals 

here in the province, cost of living issues like utilities. Mr. 

Speaker, I‟ve touched so much on the issue of financial 

stewardship. But people were bringing this up on the doorstep, 

and people really aren‟t pleased with what they‟re seeing. And 

people are concerned. 

 

In terms of student issues in the province, Mr. Speaker, for 

students in our post-secondary institutions, just to name a 

couple of the issues, nothing in this Throne Speech, Mr. 

Speaker, about continuing to fix the problems in the grad 

retention program. Master‟s and Ph.D. [Doctor of Philosophy] 

students are still excluded from the program, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So much doublespeak, Mr. Speaker, about how everything is 

great, Mr. Speaker. But when you actually look at the programs 

for master‟s and graduate students for benefits — not there. No 

reference to tuition, Mr. Speaker. We can only assume by how 

badly, how brutally they‟ve messed up the finances here in the 

province that it won‟t be good news for students here on the 

tuition front in the province. So it doesn‟t surprise me that it is 

absent from this document. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I‟ve touched on a lot of issues but I think 

they‟re relevant issues. I talked about how really the situation 

we find ourselves in today goes back to the brutal mistakes that 

were made in the previous budget. I‟ve talked about how this 

Throne Speech here really doesn‟t hold water, in my opinion, 

because we haven‟t seen any change of heart with how they 

deal with the finances of this province. And I‟ve talked about 

what I‟ve heard and how individuals really, I don‟t think . . . I 

think individuals see this document for what it is: a 

channel-changing document full of fluff, full of pompoms, and 

not addressing the real issue. 

 

So it won‟t be a surprise to members on this side, and likely to 

members on the other side as well, but I will not be supporting 

the Throne Speech. I will be supporting the amendment, Mr. 

Speaker. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m glad the 

last speaker was talking during Frasier because there was 

probably nobody watching while Frasier was on. Anyway 

thank you for the opportunity to talk about the Speech from the 

Throne. 

 

And we are living in good times in Saskatchewan. You can visit 

all over the world but anywhere else you go, it‟s always nice to 

come back, to return with much appreciation for the amenities 

of life and the opportunities to work and to create wealth and be 

part of a community and to raise your family in this province. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is moving forward. There‟s 

certainly been an attitude change over the past number of years. 

And the opportunities are now and they‟re here. 

 

You know, growing up in a farming community, there was a 

struggle over the past generation to find opportunities in this 

province. Four of my seven siblings, like thousands of other 

young people, Mr. Speaker, found it necessary to move out of 

the province, you know, and it seems a shame that after the 

years of growing up and being educated here in Saskatchewan, 

they left. They left to build careers elsewhere, to build the 

economies of other parts of Canada and beyond. 

 

But now there is optimism. There is future. There is an 

opportunity for everyone to live and to grow and to prosper here 

in this province. Saskatchewan is moving forward. 

 

Over the summer I attended three conferences on behalf of the 

people of Saskatchewan — conferences in Toronto and Kansas 

City and in Edmonton. 

 

The Regional Commonwealth Conference was held in Toronto. 

We met delegates and legislators from all across Canada as well 

as Great Britain and Pakistan and Australia. We discussed a 

variety of topics, but one topic was about laptops and computers 

in the Assembly. And I thought one of the delegates from 

Pakistan put it in a good perspective when she referred to the 

conversation and she said, you guys are discussing computers in 

your Assembly. We‟re discussing about stopping wars and 



October 26, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3217 

preventing people from dying from starvation in my country. 

And it did put it in a bit of perspective. And when you hear 

these stories, you realize how wonderful it is to live in Canada 

and particularly here in Saskatchewan. 

 

I attended the Midwest Legislative Conference in Kansas City, 

which was also an interesting experience, conversing with the 

American legislative counterparts on many topics of mutual 

interest. We talked about the economy and transportation, 

education, energy, and of course Medicare is a big issue in the 

States. 

 

But you know, it was nice to get back to Saskatchewan. You 

know I think my wife, Debbie, said it best. After being in 

Kansas City, we landed in the airport and she mimicked the 

words of Dorothy from The Wizard of Oz when she clicked her 

heels together and said, “There‟s no place like home.” “There‟s 

no place like home.” And really, Mr. Speaker, there really is no 

place like at home. 

 

I actually was pleased to be part of the delegation to attend the 

Canadian conference on public accounts in Edmonton as well. 

An interesting addition to this conference was an opportunity to 

tour the Alberta oil sands. The oil sands is a mammoth project. 

And I found it very interesting as they showed us the process of 

oil recovery from the tar sands. I was amazed at the size of the 

project and rather impressed with the respect shown to the 

environment and the rehabilitation of the area back to its natural 

state after the extraction of the oil. 

 

It was a gratifying experience to see the white sand after the oil 

extraction and to view the reforested area where the natural 

vegetation had been reintroduced. The trees, the grass, the 

greenery was much more than I expected after hearing much 

negative before I actually saw the project. There was even a 

herd of buffalo that were grazing on the reclaimed area, totally 

oblivious to the work that was being done just a few kilometres 

away. 

 

After all, it was nice to return home and consider all the 

opportunities of this great province. Saskatchewan is moving 

forward, and it‟s a great place to call home. I can proudly say 

that my four adult children are making their homes in 

Saskatchewan where they were born and raised. It‟s certainly a 

change from a generation ago when my siblings had to leave the 

province and establish their careers and create a living in other 

parts of the country. 

 

To me there is no greater misdeed of past governments than to 

allow the export of our young talent, especially, especially 

when Saskatchewan has a wealth of resources and an 

opportunity in this province. And I‟ve spoken about this before 

— about the great coalfields of southern Saskatchewan. We 

have a third of the world‟s potash, a third of the world‟s 

uranium deposits. Two-thirds of our province is covered with 

forestry. We‟ve got gas. We‟ve got oil. And we‟ve got almost 

half of the agricultural land in Canada is right here in our 

province. Yet for years there was the short-sightedness of 

people in power that kept this province poor. But now, now, 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is moving forward. 

 

I‟d like to thank the people of Moose Jaw and other 

acquaintances from many parts of the province that have 

expressed their encouragement and appreciation to the 

Saskatchewan Party government for making this a province of 

development and a province of opportunity. I thank my 

constituents for their positive comments. They tell me that they 

appreciate the improved programs and the policies making their 

lives better here in Saskatchewan. 

 

I particularly appreciated the comments of one of our city 

councils who confessed to me that she, like many others, were 

sceptical of this new party and this new government. However 

she went on to say, we, the city of Moose Jaw, has never 

received this much money as this government has given us by 

any other past government. I appreciate the people who 

comment that we are on the right track. 

 

Another citizen of Moose Jaw that was at the Ducks Unlimited 

banquet just a week ago told me in the past he had voted for the 

NDP; however he‟s likely to vote for the Saskatchewan Party 

the next election because of the good work we‟re doing. As a 

matter of fact he said he had an NDP membership because their 

leader had bought it for him, is what he said. I suspect this may 

be part of the NDP membership scandal and the criminal 

investigation that‟s conducted by the RCMP that was 

announced in this past June. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people are realizing that this province has to 

provide for a better living for all of us. The attitude of the 

province is changing. People are understanding that 

Saskatchewan is a land of opportunity, and we are moving 

forward. 

 

The personal income tax exemption increase has let people keep 

more of their hard-earned money. This in itself is a huge 

assistance to citizens, especially low-income earners who now 

have more money in their pockets to pay for the needs of them 

and for their families. 

 

The property owners are paying less for their property tax. And 

this is especially in Moose Jaw where the education mill rate 

was the highest in the province. 

 

Our government paid down the debt. Paying down the debt by 

40 per cent is saving huge dollars in interest costs. By reducing 

the provincial debt, it improves our credit rating. But more 

importantly to our citizens, the interest saved can be better 

invested in social programs and infrastructure upgrades here in 

Saskatchewan, making living better for the people in 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is moving forward. 

 

[22:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to thank my wife, Debbie, for her support 

and assistance with many of the MLA functions. To us this is a 

family venture, and I do appreciate her support. There are all 

kinds of events and business openings, meetings, sports days, 

anniversaries, social functions, and lots of fowl suppers. We 

really love fowl suppers. There are a lot of late nights too, and 

there are a lot of missed suppers and interrupted socials that 

come with serving the constituents. But it‟s all part of the 

representation for the constituents, and we all appreciate that 

opportunity. 

 

I‟d like to acknowledge my assistant, Denise Arnold, and the 



3218 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2009 

other office staff in our constituency office, addressing many of 

the concerns of our constituents. Most of these are handled in a 

timely manner, and I appreciate the dedicated work that they do. 

 

But Saskatchewan is moving forward, and the Speech from the 

Throne shows it, that was presented on October 21. The speech 

reminds us of what has been accomplished by this government 

for the continued benefit of all Saskatchewan people. 

 

Yes, it reflects some of the accomplishments that have been 

achieved and the progress we are continuing: paying down the 

debt by 40 per cent, increasing seniors‟ assistance plan, 

doubling it. It‟s the first increase in the plan since 1992. The 

largest income tax reduction in Saskatchewan‟s history — 

80,000 people in our province don‟t have to pay any provincial 

income tax at all. The largest education property tax cut in 

Saskatchewan; a commitment to a long-term revenue-sharing 

deal with municipalities helping to meet the needs of those 

communities; infrastructure improvements in roads, schools, 

health facilities, daycares; the largest youth retention program 

in Canada, $20,000 if you stay in Saskatchewan after 

graduating from post-secondary education; the municipal 

economic enhancement program, Moose Jaw graciously 

received $3.5 million for the MEEP [municipal economic 

enhancement program] program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was interesting to hear the members of the 

opposite shouting about where the money went. We heard this 

even just a few minutes ago and during the by-elections. Where 

did the money go? Well, Mr. Speaker, any grade school student 

could do the math and tell them where the money went. The 

money went to improve the lives of Saskatchewan people. 

 

The members opposite mention this, that they had $2 billion 

when they left office, and that‟s true. However our government 

paid down the debt by $2.7 billion — 40 per cent. Our 

government invested $1.2 billion repairing over 3200 

kilometres of provincial highway that had been deteriorated. 

Post-secondary infrastructure projects, over $150 million; 18 

million was spent on student housing. 

 

When it‟s so obvious where the money went, why would they 

even ask? Perhaps they really don‟t recall. But I think I know 

why. Because they try to be masters of manipulation, 

manipulation by fear. The message they tell can be light years 

away from the truth, and yet they tell it with fear and false 

accusations, embellishment. And they keep spitting it out in an 

attempt to mislead people when there‟s no validity at all for the 

statements that they make. 

 

I think that mantra of where did the money go must be part of 

the opposition‟s makeup. Maybe it‟s even in the Regina 

Manifesto. Maybe it‟s what they used when they were in 

government for 16 years. I‟m sure that question was asked by 

themselves. Lord knows the people of the province never got an 

answer. 

 

Where did the money go? Where did the money go from 

tappedinto.com, over $6 million? And where did the money go 

for Persona, over $9 million? Where did the money go for 

Navigata, over $40 million? Where did it go? 

 

Where did the money go for SPUDCO, $35 million? For 

Channel Lake? Craig Wireless, $10 million. Coachmen 

Insurance, where did the $16 million go? The Meadow Lake 

pulp mill, $800 million, where did the money go? ISC 

[Information Services Corporation of Saskatchewan], $100 

million. Where did the money go, with nothing to show for the 

benefit of the people of this province? 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is moving forward. The 

Saskatchewan Party government is continuing the solid 

investment into the future. The Speech from the Throne assures 

all Saskatchewan citizens that this government is working for 

the betterment of the people‟s interests. We‟ve seen population 

growth. We continue to have the lowest unemployment rates in 

the country. Saskatchewan has — this has been brought up a 

few times — Saskatchewan has five of the top ten 

entrepreneurial cities in Canada, and Moose Jaw is number 

four. 

 

I talked to Mayor McBain this morning, and he tells me there‟s 

171 new businesses started since the start of the year. The 

chamber of commerce CEO, Brian Martynook, also said there‟s 

been an additional 69 home-based businesses that started as 

well. Moose Jaw should be one of the entrepreneurial cities, and 

it certainly is with those kind of records. 

 

Unfortunately there‟s some businesses who are experiencing 

slowdowns and temporary layoffs. However things are looking 

good as part of what is happening in Moose Jaw. We have a 

new multiplex complex that‟s going in downtown. Also in 

downtown is a new downtown development that‟s going to be 

close to the multiplex and of course the 171 new businesses that 

have been attracted to Moose Jaw. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne highlights 

accomplishments and sets a strategy for the future. Our 

government is focusing on the surgical wait lists. We all know 

people who are waiting extensive periods of time for surgical 

procedures, people who are suffering during this waiting time. 

This endurance can take its toll on families and relationships 

and can develop secondary complications that require even 

costlier procedures. So establishing an aggressive goal for 

surgical wait time is just the right thing to do. Extended wait 

times can no longer be considered just part of the system. 

 

We heard before, the waiting times have improved since 2004 

when over 9,000 people were waiting on surgical waiting lists 

for longer than a year. Well, Mr. Speaker, that number is down 

now to less than 4,200 that are waiting for more than a year. 

And that‟s a great improvement of course, but it‟s little comfort 

to the 4,200 on the waiting list. 

 

This government has already started to address the concerns by 

expanding the number of seats in our universities for training 

doctors and nurses. We‟ve hired 500 nurses to fill the shortfall 

of many years and are getting more aggressive in attracting 

doctors from other parts of the world. This government is now 

addressing wait times. It‟s an aggressive target for sure, but it is 

an achievable one. Our goal is to reduce surgical wait times in 

Saskatchewan to no longer than three months. It is an 

aggressive goal but what‟s more important, that it‟s the right 

thing to do for the people of the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to take a moment to talk about the needle 



October 26, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3219 

exchange program as well. The Leader-Post reporter in last 

Thursday‟s edition stated that there are almost 4 million needles 

a year that are given out in the needle exchange program in 

Saskatchewan with an estimated 5,000 users. Mr. Speaker, an 

easy math tells you that‟s between two and three needles per 

day. That‟s the highest rate anywhere in Canada. We should be 

concerned about that statistic. 

 

The report says there‟s a rate of return of more than 90 per cent, 

and while that‟s considered a good return, it means there‟s still 

approximately 400,000 needles that are unaccounted for. 

Should we be concerned? I would think so. This is a concern for 

safety not only for the addicts but for the neighbourhoods and 

the children who play in those neighbourhoods. What we‟ve 

been doing with needle exchange hasn‟t been working well. 

This is an issue that needs to be addressed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government has done a lot to lead the 

province into growth. We will continue to lead, to promote, to 

provide, and encourage the citizens of Saskatchewan. The solid 

enthusiasm for our productive future for this province comes 

from the people of this province, the men and women that go to 

work every day to earn a living and to establish a quality of life 

for them and for their families. It comes from the initiative of 

leaders and managers who have the foresight into the future and 

accept huge risks to attempt to achieve goals. It takes the vision 

and dedication of women and men who create the inspiration 

for all Saskatchewan people to realize the potential of this 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it comes from leadership like the men and the 

women that lead our ministries and a positive, energetic person 

that occupies the chair as the Premier of this province, a person 

who carries a message of opportunity to markets and leaders all 

around the world. Mr. Speaker, I‟m pleased to sit on the side of 

vision, of growth, enthusiasm, good management, and common 

sense. 

 

But there is one question. Why do most of the citizens in this 

province get it, yet there are 20 people of the most negative 

people in the province sitting on the other side who cannot see 

the potential of this great province? Mr. Speaker, the 

amendment has been conceived in a negative mindset. It‟s 

poorly thought out. It does not focus on the positive momentum 

of a province moving forward, and I cannot support the 

amendment. 

 

As for the motion for the Speech of the Throne, it moves 

forward for the betterment of the Saskatchewan citizens, and it 

has my support. May God continue to bless this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s getting 

pretty late in the evening, Mr. Speaker. But you know, I played 

a lot of baseball, Mr. Speaker, and I batted ninth a lot of times 

so this is nothing new. So we‟ll finish up here for the night, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I‟m pleased to rise in the Assembly and speak in favour of the 

Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, and the motion moved by the 

Minister of Health. But before I place my comments on the 

Throne Speech on the record, I want to acknowledge a number 

of individuals, Mr. Speaker. First, Mr. Speaker, I want to 

express thanks and appreciation to my constituents for really an 

incredible summer of well wishes and congratulations and, in 

many ways, a lot of patience that they showed me. Being named 

to the cabinet at the end of May, Mr. Speaker, meant a bit of an 

adjustment for the amount of time that I can be around the 

constituency office, and the people of Weyburn-Big Muddy 

have just been very, very gracious about it in their support and 

their patience. 

 

And I also want to thank my constituency assistant Marcie who, 

Mr. Speaker, is celebrating her 10th year as a constituency 

assistant in the Government of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

And Marcie does a tremendous job in handling the office duties, 

largely without me over the summer, Mr. Speaker, and she‟s 

been great with constituents as well who contact the office and 

so I greatly appreciate her. 

 

I also want to thank the staff here at the Legislative Building 

that I work with, Mr. Speaker. Melissa, Heather, Bob, Marg, 

and Darin have been great to work with and have done a 

tremendous job, first in bringing me up to speed and now in 

helping me to do my job as a member of the cabinet, Mr. 

Speaker, and I appreciate them very much. And I also want to 

thank the folks in the ministry, especially in those initial weeks, 

that made sure that I was up to date on the file. 

 

[22:15] 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to mention and thank my wife, 

Amanda, who‟s been very supportive of me not only in the last 

few months as I took on this new job but throughout my life, 

the short time that I‟ve been an MLA. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in David Gergen‟s wonderful book Eyewitness to 

Power, he correctly points out, Mr. Speaker, that the ones who 

pay the highest price for government service are always the 

spouses, Mr. Speaker, and I couldn‟t agree more. It‟s certainly 

been the case in our house. And Amanda‟s probably watching. 

She said she was going to tune in so she‟s probably watching. 

And I‟m very grateful, Mr. Speaker, for her support and for the 

fact that I get to drive home most nights. So, Mr. Speaker, I 

appreciate her support and I consider myself very lucky in that 

respect. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to extend my congratulations to the 

two new members of the Assembly, to the member for 

Saskatoon Riversdale, who I had the pleasure of attending the 

SPRA [Saskatchewan Parks and Recreation Association] 

president‟s minister luncheon on Friday with her, and I want to 

wish her the best as she gets used to this new life. Certainly I 

don‟t want to wish her too well seeing that she‟s my critic, Mr. 

Speaker, but I know that she will do a good job for her 

constituents in this House. And, Mr. Speaker, I also want to add 

my congratulations to the Leader of the Opposition, the new 

member for Regina Douglas Park, on his return to the 

legislature. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, members of the House will know that I have 

a keen interest in history, Mr. Speaker. And I note with interest 

that by the time the 2011 election rolls around, Mr. Speaker, 

and assuming the Leader of the Opposition is still a member of 



3220 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2009 

this House — you never know but, Mr. Speaker, for the sake of 

argument, I‟ll assume it — by the time the 2011 election rolls 

around, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition, the new 

member for Regina Douglas Park, certainly you know this is 

something to be commended, but the member will have spent 

parts of five different decades as a member of this legislature, 

Mr. Speaker, which is certainly something to be noted. 

 

It is an achievement that he has served constituents that long, 

Mr. Speaker, you know, and I think that is an accomplishment 

— five different decades. I think that‟s an accomplishment that 

really only Gordie Howe could maybe appreciate, Mr. Speaker. 

And after just only a few question periods sitting in the House 

at the same time as the member for Douglas Park, I was starting 

to think that that‟s not the only thing that the Leader of the 

Opposition has in common with Gordie Howe, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, before I get to the Throne Speech, I want to 

add a couple of congratulations. Mr. Speaker, when the Order 

of Merit were announced, there were a number of recipients that 

fall under the category or the sectors of tourism, parks, culture, 

and sport. 

 

And so I do want to mention, Mr. Speaker, that and 

congratulate Dr. Sharon Butala, who is an author and has been 

important in the Eastend cultural and artistic development, Mr. 

Speaker; Mr. Jack MacKenzie who has been a leader in the 

areas of physical education in Regina, Mr. Speaker; Arne 

Petersen who has certainly contributed a lot to the tourism 

sector. I‟ve been fortunate to stay at the Elk Ridge Resort, Mr. 

Speaker, on a couple of occasions and certainly has added a 

tremendous amount to that industry. 

 

William Shurniak who has an incredible art gallery in 

Assiniboia. And I know the member from Wood River knows 

all about it, Mr. Speaker. And I would encourage all members if 

they have a chance . . . It‟s just since 2005, when Mr. Shurniak 

founded this art gallery, more than 50,000 visitors have visited 

the art gallery and that‟s in a community of less than 3,000 

people, Mr. Speaker. So it‟s certainly something to see. 

 

And I also want to add somebody who I‟ve met before, only 

once, Geoffrey Ursell who‟s an author. Mr. Speaker, I in fact 

met him at the opening of the Persephone Theatre earlier this 

fall, at the grand opening of the adaptation of Martha Blum‟s 

novel, The Walnut Tree, which Mr. Ursell wrote. And so 

congratulations to him. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, of course to Linda Rudachyk of Weyburn 

who has meant a great deal to me in my short time as a member 

of this House, who has added so much to the community of 

Weyburn, Mr. Speaker, and somebody who I have a great deal 

of affection for and respect for. 

 

And so congratulations to not only those members, but all 

members of the Saskatchewan Order of Merit for 2009, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, obviously it‟s been a very busy summer for me, 

getting to know not only my new role, my portfolio, but in 

many ways, Mr. Speaker, in a lot of ways, rediscovering a 

province that I have lived in my entire life. It seemed like 

almost on a daily basis we were out around the province and 

seeing something new that the province had to offer, such as my 

first time out at the T.rex Discovery Centre, Eastend, or a 

number of other places across . . . Wanuskewin was another 

place that I was able to visit for the first time, Mr. Speaker. So it 

certainly was a very good summer and a busy summer and one 

that involved a lot of work and a lot of learning and I appreciate 

the time that I was given to do this. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do want to mention that certainly Weyburn-Big 

Muddy is a very busy place despite the doom and gloom that 

we hear from others, Mr. Speaker. I know that my constituency, 

along with the Estevan constituency and the Cannington 

constituency, the entire southeast part of the province, Mr. 

Speaker, has seen a bit of slowdown but certainly there‟s lots of 

activity. 

 

I‟ve been fortunate just in the last couple of weeks to attend the 

grand opening of one of our new hotels in Weyburn, Mr. 

Speaker. We have two, in fact, the Ramada and also the 

Canalta. And, Mr. Speaker, the Canalta group, who builds the 

Ramadas and I believe Super 8‟s across Western Canada, they 

decided that Weyburn would be their location for their first 

Canalta branded hotel, Mr. Speaker. So that was certainly a 

positive event in the constituency. And I believe the same group 

is building in Humboldt and Moosomin, Mr. Speaker. There‟s a 

hotel going up right now and certainly there‟s lots of activity in 

my constituency. 

 

Weyburn has undergone a significant amount of growth in the 

last number of years. Mr. Speaker, I have a new neighbour on 

the north side of our house on 6th Street, a gentleman and his 

family who‟ve moved from the Prince Albert area to work in 

the oil industry, running an oil service company, Mr. Speaker. 

So there‟s lots of development and lots of new houses going up. 

It‟s been a very busy year, and much of that‟s been driven by 

the world-renowned Bakken oil play, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I also want to offer my congratulations — I 

know we have civic elections coming up and we‟re not, I guess 

nobody‟s sure what will happen but — certainly I want to offer 

my congratulations to the council that is looking for re-election, 

Mr. Speaker. The city council has decided to partner with our 

school board to build a performing arts centre in Weyburn, Mr. 

Speaker, attached to the high school. The city‟s going to put up 

$3 million, Mr. Speaker. There‟s going to be fundraising for I 

believe another 2 or $3 million. 

 

So certainly that‟s something that will fill a void that we‟ve had 

in Weyburn. There‟s some venues that you can have events but 

nothing of the magnitude of something like the new performing 

arts centre. So we‟re looking forward to that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to touch on one other event that was a 

highlight for me over the summer. Not long after being named 

to the cabinet, Weyburn hosted the oil and gas show, as 

Weyburn does every second year. And, Mr. Speaker, this was 

the most well attended in terms of not only exhibitors from 

Saskatchewan and out of the province, but also just people that 

wanted to come and hear what‟s happening in the oil industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the best days in the short time that I‟ve 

been a member was having the opportunity to escort the 

Premier around the grounds of the oil show, Mr. Speaker. And 



October 26, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3221 

there was so much enthusiasm and positive attitude. And when 

the Premier spoke, Mr. Speaker, the ovation that he received 

was just tremendous, Mr. Speaker. And certainly a lot of people 

were talking to him and about him, but congratulating him on 

the record level of infrastructure being built. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it doesn‟t matter whether you‟re driving on 39 

Highway or 33 Highway to Francis has received a great deal of 

upgrades this summer, Mr. Speaker. You know, people were 

thanking the government for the great inconvenience of so 

much highway construction, Mr. Speaker, and of course the 40 

per cent of the debt that‟s been paid off. That‟s something that 

has been very well received by the people of my constituency. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you know what they weren‟t talking about at the 

oil show, Mr. Speaker? They weren‟t talking about the Leader 

of the Opposition. They weren‟t talking about the member from 

Douglas Park that was coming back from his oil job in Alberta. 

There was no talk about . . . Well I‟ve got to correct that a little 

bit, Mr. Speaker, because if you remember the oil show was in 

early June, and there was something else happening in June, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And a lot of people asked, a lot of people asked around the oil 

show, you know, people were saying, I need to check whether 

or not I‟m an NDP member when I woke up this morning, 

because it seems like a lot of that‟s going around this province, 

Mr. Speaker. So there were a lot of people at the oil show that 

were wondering, you know, did I wake up and magically 

become a member of the NDP? So, Mr. Speaker, you know 

certainly that‟s not a new story around these parts, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as for the Throne Speech, there is a number 

of areas that I want to highlight, areas that I think will be of 

benefit to my constituents. And the areas that the government is 

addressing, I think, are the priorities of my constituents, Mr. 

Speaker. First is the commitment to health care and in particular 

the reduction in wait times. Mr. Speaker, I think there are few 

priorities that align so well with my constituents, Mr. Speaker, 

who have expressed, in my time as being an MLA, their 

concern with wait-lists. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I remember very well a long-time resident, a very 

well-respected man in our constituency, a gentleman that had 

been retired for quite a while. He and his wife live in Weyburn. 

And, Mr. Speaker, his wife was on a wait-list. She‟s on a 

wait-list. At the time, she was on a wait-list for surgery and she 

didn‟t know when she was going to be able to have the surgery, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And this gentleman, you know, he‟s worked his entire life in 

Saskatchewan. He‟s worked hard. He‟s paid his bills. He‟s 

abided by the law of the province. He‟s in my office sitting in 

front of me and he has tears running down his eyes, Mr. 

Speaker, because his wife was in such pain that she was on such 

a strong painkiller, Mr. Speaker, in essence a strong narcotic, 

Mr. Speaker, to control her pain. And there were times when he 

wasn‟t even sure if she could even understand what he was 

saying — she was in such pain, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so I think that this government needs to, you know, I think 

the measure that we have introduced, Mr. Speaker, to make a 

commitment on wait-lists, something that the NDP never did, 

Mr. Speaker; everybody knows that — one of the reasons I 

think why they‟re sitting on those benches, Mr. Speaker, and 

why we‟re over here. And it‟s a commitment that we‟ve made 

to the people of Saskatchewan and it‟s one that I‟m certainly 

supportive of, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another event not long ago that is indicated in the 

Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, was the commitment that we are 

making to the more special people in Saskatchewan, our more 

vulnerable people, Mr. Speaker, and that is partnering with 

CBOs [community-based organization] to eliminate the 

wait-lists for specialized residential and day program service for 

people with intellectual disabilities. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, one of my happiest days as a member of this 

government was opening new group homes in Weyburn, Mr. 

Speaker. In fact we had a really great picture taken — it was in 

the newspaper — of all the residents of these new group homes. 

And in fact, Mr. Speaker, it‟s a special picture for me because 

my niece is in the picture, Mr. Speaker, because she‟s one of the 

residents that will benefit from a new group home being opened 

in Weyburn, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This was a part of funding provided by the Minister for Social 

Services, one that addresses a wait-list. We‟re not finished on it, 

Mr. Speaker, but an unacceptable wait-list that was brought in 

place by the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, and the Minister 

for Social Services is working hard to address it . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Being the hour of adjournment, this Assembly 

stands adjourned until tomorrow afternoon at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 22:30.] 



 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3191 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3193 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3196 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3199 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3203 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3207 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3211 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3216 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3219 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium Development 

Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

 Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

Government House Leader 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. James Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Capital Commission 




