




















































Hansard: March 09, 2009


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 29A  MONDAY, MARCH 9, 2009, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2181 

 March 9, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — Before I introduce guests, I would ask leave 

of members to make a personal introduction on behalf of 

Commonwealth Day. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Thank you, members. As hon. 

members will know, today is Commonwealth Day, a day that is 

celebrated throughout the Commonwealth. Seated in the 

Speaker’s gallery are a number of guests who are here to hear 

the Queen’s Commonwealth Day message. 

 

First I want to extend my welcome and congratulations to the 

two students present who are winners of the Commonwealth 

essay competition. Several other members of the Canadian Club 

and the Royal Commonwealth Society are seated in the 

Speaker’s gallery. I want to especially acknowledge the 

Canadian Club sponsorship of the essay competition. 

 

In particular I am pleased to introduce Dr. D. Michael Jackson, 

the president of the Canadian Club of Regina, who was 

instrumental in the development of the Commonwealth Day 

essay contest for Saskatchewan. Mr. Jackson is accompanied by 

his wife, Helen. I would ask them to rise and ask members to 

welcome them to their Chamber here today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

seated in your gallery, and to you and through you to all 

members of the Assembly, is Ms. Robin Holmes. She is from 

Spiritwood High School, and she is the recipient of the $500 for 

the Commonwealth Day essay contest. Seated with her is her 

father, Eric, and her teacher, Mr. Kurtis Hamel. Today they had 

a busy day. They toured the Legislative Assembly, then on to 

Government House. They had a luncheon that was hosted by 

His Honour the Hon. Dr. Gordon L. Barnhart, the Lieutenant 

Governor of Saskatchewan. 

 

They’re here to view the proceedings and later take in the 

celebration of Commonwealth Day where Robin will receive 

her cheque for $500. So I’d ask all members to please welcome 

them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you it is certainly my pleasure to introduce a couple of 

very special guests as well. They’re seated in your gallery, Mr. 

Speaker. I welcome Ms. Dayna Galger who lives within my 

constituency. Ms. Galger is a 17-year-old who attends 

Archbishop M.C. O’Neill High School here in Regina. Ms. 

Galger is here to receive an award for her essay “Enhancing 

Changes in Youth” as part of our Commonwealth Day 

recognition. 

 

The essay question that was posed to the writers asked them to 

describe changes that their country could make that would 

enhance the lives of young people. I would like to highlight 

some of Ms. Galger’s suggestions that were contained within 

the essay because they were good ideas — the need to address 

gang violence and prevalence, noting the need for our 

community- and school-based enriched opportunities and 

supports; needed support for continued advances in technology, 

specifically medical technology; concern around our 

consumeristic society; the need for environmental action; a 

challenge to create a more affordable and accessible 

post-secondary environment; the importance of addressing 

obesity and health concerns; a rationale for a more welcoming 

democratic environment for our youth; and the need to ensure 

that Canada has respectful relations within the international 

community. 

 

I found Ms. Galger’s essay, Mr. Speaker, to be engaging, 

mature, and it reaffirmed the optimism that I have for youth 

within our province and their contributions that they’ll make to 

our country and to our Commonwealth. 

 

Accompanying Ms. Galger is her very proud grandmother, Mrs. 

Audrey Warner, and I also recognize Mrs. Warner. And I’d like 

to bring to the attention of all within this Assembly that this is 

the daughter of Ms. Betty Lynn Galger, who we all know 

through member services who serves our Assembly. 

 

I ask all members to provide a very warm welcome and to thank 

her for her role within our Commonwealth. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I stand 

today to present a petition in support of the government’s policy 

on green vehicles. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government ministers named in this petition to follow 

their own platform and government policies and trade in 

their Jeep Libertys for vehicles that are on SGI’s 2008 list 

of recommended fuel-efficient vehicles. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray, [Mr. 

Speaker]. 

 

And the people who signed this petition are from the great 

community of North Battleford, Mr. Speaker. 



2182 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2009 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 

petition on behalf of Saskatchewan seniors, and it includes the 

concerns over housing and the major impact on Saskatchewan’s 

senior citizens that our growing economy and housing market 

have had. And what it’s translated into is challenges for many 

renters, and that includes senior citizens. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to act as quickly as possible to expand 

affordable housing options for Saskatchewan’s senior 

citizens. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 

petition calling for wage equity for CBO [community-based 

organization] workers. We know this is a big issue when it 

comes to retaining workers in our communities who provide a 

very important service. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the development and 

implementation of a multi-year funding plan to ensure that 

CBO workers achieve wage equity with employees who 

perform work of equal value in government departments. 

 

And these people come from communities throughout the 

province including Regina, Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, Dundurn, 

Wynyard, and Nipawin. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to present 

a petition on behalf of rural residents of Saskatchewan who 

again feel like they’re being left behind by this government. 

And this has to do with respect to quality and affordable 

drinking water, Mr. Speaker. The prayer reads as such: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to financially assist the town of Duck Lake 

residents for the good of their health and safety due to the 

exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency and that this government fulfills its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is under signed by the very good 

residents of Duck Lake, Saskatchewan. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise again 

today to present a petition in support of a new Saskatchewan 

Hospital. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners note that Prairie North 

Regional Health Authority has indicated the construction of a 

new Saskatchewan Hospital at North Battleford is a priority and 

have committed resources to develop preliminary facility and 

site plans. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners ask: 

 

. . . that the Legislative Assembly call upon the 

Government of Saskatchewan to immediately recommit 

funds and resources for the continued development and 

construction of a new Saskatchewan Hospital at North 

Battleford and provide the Prairie North Regional Health 

Authority with the authority necessary to complete this 

essential and much-needed project. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by residents of The 

Battlefords. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 

stand and present a petition in support of expansion of the 

graduate retention program. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately expand the graduate retention 

program to include master’s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are 

students from the University of Regina, students from the 

University of Saskatchewan, as well as a number of health care 

professionals in Saskatchewan who hold graduate degrees. I so 

present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf and in support of this government 

addressing the challenges with the education portion of property 

tax. This is needed by Saskatchewan families and business who 

are being hit especially hard by the implications of reassessment 

here in 2009. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to stop withholding and to provide 

significant, sustainable, long-term property tax relief to 

property owners by 2009 through significantly increasing 



March 9, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2183 

the provincial portion of education funding. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are signed by the good folks 

and concerned citizens of North Battleford. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

International Women’s Day 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

International Women’s Day, recognized annually on March 8, 

is a time to pay tribute to past achievements and reflect on the 

future political struggles for better pay, working conditions, and 

fairness for women. There were many events that took place 

this past weekend to recognize this occasion, and I’d like to 

highlight a few of them that several of my colleagues and I 

were pleased to attend. 

 

The Prairie Lily Feminist Society hosted an event which 

featured Dr. Lynda Haverstock as the keynote speaker. Lori 

Whiteman of Saskatchewan Sisters in Spirit gave a short 

presentation and was grateful that some of the proceeds from 

the evening were being provided to their grassroots 

organization that supports the families of missing and murdered 

women. 

 

Grandmothers 4 Grandmothers Regina presented the Sisters for 

Sisters benefit concert featuring Brittany Kraus, Bev Zizzy, 

Louisiana Jane and the Zydeco Hurricane, and Little Miss 

Higgins. All proceeds raised are being donated to the Stephen 

Lewis Foundation. 

 

The Humboldt and District Labour Council held an 

International Women’s Day tea. Speaking to residents, I 

recognized the work of unions in advancing the status and 

economic security of women through better pay and benefits 

and also advocating on behalf of women. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at a time of systematic ideological attacks on the 

rights and economic well-being of women by 

conservative-minded governments, New Democrats reaffirm 

our vision of a firm and caring society where women have equal 

access to societal rewards and receive support instead of 

barriers from their governments in securing a better quality of 

life for women and their loved ones. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Kinsmen Telemiracle 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For 33 years the 

Kinsmen Telemiracle Foundation has raised money to improve 

the quality of life and the independence of hundreds of 

Saskatchewan residents. This weekend Saskatchewan people 

helped Telemiracle raise more than $3.8 million. All the money 

stays in Saskatchewan to assist people with special needs and 

those that require assistance in accessing medical treatment. 

 

The annual telethon truly reflects the Saskatchewan spirit, Mr. 

Speaker. From Saturday night to Sunday afternoon, the phones 

rang non-stop as Saskatchewan people opened their hearts. It’s 

a testament to the generosity of Saskatchewan people. In these 

trying economic times we still found the capacity to give to 

those that need it most. In the words of Telemiracle 33 

chairman, Lorne Steinke, “This gives me a real different 

perspective on life and how people live it, and where people’s 

hearts are.” 

 

Saskatchewan Crown corporations have been supporting 

Telemiracle since its inception, and I’m pleased to announce 

that both SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance] and 

SaskTel made generous donations this year. SGI staff 

contributed 13,000 and the corporation matched that amount, 

making their total donation 26,000. SaskTel raised 3,000 from 

staff and 30,000 from the corporation. 

 

Telemiracle is a very worthy cause and I’m proud of SGI and 

SaskTel’s staff commitments to the people of Saskatchewan, 

and I’m proud the Crown corporations’ commitment to the 

people of the province and their needs. I’m proud of the people 

of Saskatchewan for their answer to the call of those in need. 

I’m honoured to be a member of this government representing 

the people of this province, and I’m both honoured and proud of 

the Kinsmen of this province, and to be one of them. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Women with Disabilities Luncheon 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My colleagues from 

Saskatoon Massey Place and Saskatoon Fairview and I had the 

pleasure of attending the ninth annual Women with Disabilities 

Luncheon on Friday, March 6. Held in recognition of 

International Women’s Day, this luncheon celebrates the 

wonderful contributions women make, including those living 

with a disability. 

 

This year’s guest speaker, Tannis Hancock Stang, a teacher in 

the Greater Saskatoon Catholic Schools system, inspired us all 

with her message of living a full and balanced life. Tannis 

sustained a spinal cord injury in her grade 11 year, causing 

quadriplegia. This did not stop her living her dreams or 

accomplishing her goals. 

 

She’s become a teacher and is very active in wheelchair racing. 

She firmly believes we have choices in life and it is what we do 

with those choices that determine where our lives lead us. It 

was indeed a very powerful message for all of us. 

 

[13:45] 

 

This year the winner of the Woman of Distinction award went 

to Bea Short. In 1960 Bea contracted polio, but with therapy 



2184 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2009 

and persistence she achieved independence. She has three 

children and entered the workforce in 1972. She started driving 

in 1975. She continues to live in her own home and does her 

own shopping. She won’t use a motorized scooter, as she firmly 

believes in fitness. It was noted that in all of this adversity, she 

was a role model for all of us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 

North Saskatchewan Independent Living Centre for hosting this 

very wonderful event. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Martensville. 

 

National Association for Stock Car Auto Racing 

Comes to Martensville 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Thursday, 

March 5, I joined the Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and 

Sport at a very special announcement. Representatives from the 

Canadian Tire NASCAR [National Association for Stock Car 

Auto Racing] series, as well as representatives from NASCAR 

in the United States, were in Saskatoon to announce that 

NASCAR is coming to Saskatchewan. 

 

On July 29, NASCAR will be making a pit stop at the Auto 

Clearing Motor Speedway, located just south of Martensville. 

The NASCAR Canadian Tire series makes stops in places like 

Montreal and Edmonton and now Martensville. 

 

The Auto Clearing track is an excellent facility, and it’s the 

result of hard work by so many dedicated people. Herman 

Hordal is in charge of marketing and business development for 

Auto Clearing Speedway, and Trent Seidel is the president of 

the Saskatoon Stock Car Racing Association. Both of these men 

and so many other volunteers have worked tirelessly to build 

and improve the track as well as to promote racing within 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The mayor of Martensville, Giles Saulnier, has also been a great 

ambassador for Martensville, Saskatchewan and the track. He 

has found a sister city in Martinsville, Virginia, the home of 

Martinsville Speedway, a track that draws up to 80,000 

spectators. 

 

The benefits of having NASCAR at our Martensville track are 

many. Tourism will benefit as spectators are drawn to 

Saskatchewan for the race. New people will discover our 

fabulous province. Local businesses, hotels, and restaurants will 

see an economic benefit as people come to Saskatoon and 

Martensville. 

 

I’m very proud of all the hard work of the folks on this team 

like Herm, Trent, and Giles, and everyone else involved in 

getting NASCAR to Saskatchewan. They dreamt big and made 

sure that their dreams are realized. I welcome everybody to 

Martensville this summer for the races. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

Shevchenko Honoured on Ukrainian Literature Day 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker: 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Ukrainian.] 

 

Gain knowledge, brothers! Think and read, 

And to your neighbours’ gifts pay heed, 

Yet do not thus neglect your own . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are the words of Taras Shevchenko, 

Ukraine’s most famous poet. Not only do we honour this poet 

and painter on March 9 but, Mr. Speaker, March 9 has also been 

proclaimed Ukrainian Literature Day in Canada. Taras 

Shevchenko was born on March 9, 1814 and died on March 10, 

1861. Shevchenko, though born into serfdom and experiencing 

extreme hardship in his life, still produced some of Ukraine’s 

most lasting poetry. His poetical source of inspiration was the 

peasant traditions of his boyhood. He chose to write of his love 

for the underprivileged, the peasant farmers, an independent 

Ukraine, and human rights for all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yesterday I attended a concert sponsored by the 

Ukrainian Canadian Congress to commemorate Shevchenko. 

All those in attendance were treated to fine music, poetry, 

songs, and speeches on Shevchenko’s life. I want to especially 

thank the congress, but also the following who participated in 

the event: Cecilia Kachkowski, Larry Balion, Dibrova Choir, 

Katya Khartova, George Hupka, the Holosy Choir, Anna 

Patarova, and the Dibrova Mandolin Ensemble. 

 

I ask all members to join me in congratulating all the 

participants who made it possible to remember Ukraine’s poet 

and artist. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Prince Albert Citizen Inducted into Hall of Fame 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday, as the world celebrated 

International Women’s Day, the member from Prince Albert 

Carlton and I were able to take part in honouring one of Prince 

Albert’s finest. Every year the Prince Albert Council of Women 

celebrates International Women’s Day by hosting a reception to 

honour that year’s inductee into the Prince Albert Hall of Fame. 

 

Donna Strauss is the executive director of Family Futures in 

Prince Albert and is this year’s very worthy inductee. Donna is 

an advocate for both young children and young parents. 

Through her job and other volunteer activities, she has impacted 

the lives of many teen mothers. One of her main focuses is to 

see improved and increased services in the Prince Albert area 

for children and their families. 

 

What touched me the most about Donna was her humble 

acceptance of this award. She said, and I quote, “I have done so 

little compared to all there is that remains to be done.” And 

while there is a lot more to be done for the children and families 

of Prince Albert, Donna is making a real difference each and 

every day. 



March 9, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2185 

So, Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join in with me today in 

congratulating Donna Strauss on receiving this incredible 

honour and thanking her for her investment in the lives of so 

many individuals in the Prince Albert area. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mennonite Leaders Honoured 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, on Friday I had the pleasure of 

being invited to attend a Mennonite Historical Society event at 

Valley Christian Academy in Osler. The event focused on the 

history of the Bergthaler Mennonites and paid tribute to Bishop 

Abram Buhler and Bishop John D. Reddekopp. Leonard Doell 

and Reverend Abe Buhler presented the remarkable history of 

the Bergthaler Mennonites, a people who came here to flee 

persecution and to have the freedom to live out their faith as 

pacifist Christians. 

 

Reverend David Buhler paid tribute to his father, Abram 

Buhler, who led the Bergthaler Mennonites from 1949 until 

1975. John D. Reddekopp, who served as bishop from 1975 

until he retired in 1996, was honoured by his daughter, Frances 

Saggs, and grandson, Linsay Martens. Bishop Buhler and 

Bishop Reddekopp led their faith community with great 

distinction, and their legacy lives on. 

 

Bishop Buhler helped establish the Warman Mennonite Special 

Care Home. Bishop Reddekopp founded Valley Christian 

Academy, a kindergarten to grade 12 school that educates 

hundreds of students each year. And both bishops had a 

profound impact on their communities. 

 

While listening to their stories, I was reminded of our provincial 

motto: “from many peoples, strength.” Our province is great 

because of the strength and resilience of our people, people like 

Abram Buhler and John D. Reddekopp. I ask all members of the 

Assembly to join me in acknowledging the exceptional 

contribution of these bishops and the Bergthaler Mennonites in 

making Saskatchewan a better place. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Drinking Water 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, safe, 

clean, affordable drinking water is a fundamental right, but 

hundreds of people in Duck Lake are paying more for water 

these days, with bills increasing from $32 a month to $167 a 

month or more. Some are being forced to choose between clean 

drinking water or eating nutritious food, and some have already 

been threatened with loss of water service as of today, Mr. 

Speaker. Many seniors live on fixed incomes and are finding it 

difficult to find the extra money. Single-income families are 

also affected. 

To the minister: does she believe that all Saskatchewan people 

and all Saskatchewan communities have a right to safe, clean, 

and affordable water? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. I am the minister in charge of SaskWater, and I 

believe that question pertains to SaskWater and my 

responsibilities, although I’m somewhat surprised by the 

question because in the example given, the contract that was 

entered into was done so by the previous government. We 

follow the parliamentary fashion of allowing those contracts 

that are entered into to be honoured, and indeed that’s what 

SaskPower has done . . . or I mean SaskWater has met with the 

community of Duck Lake on several occasions to ensure that 

they get safe, reliable drinking water. 

 

SaskWater put forward a proposal. It was deemed unacceptable 

by the community of Duck Lake. That proposal was withdrawn 

and Duck Lake has decided to pursue services elsewhere. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Abandoning responsibility for the rural 

residents of Duck Lake is going to be a very cold comfort to the 

people that are being cut off from their water services today. 

Anyways we’ll go on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in a statement on SaskWater website reads, 

“Communities offering quality water are able to retain and grow 

their populations; attract business and industry; expand 

community services; and assure resident health and 

well-being.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, Duck Lake is a town of approximately 600 people. 

It certainly can’t retain and grow its population by jacking up 

people’s water bills, but that’s exactly what the town of Duck 

Lake has been forced to do since being ordered to build 

upgrades to its water system by the provincial government. The 

government that’s currently in place should be the ones to take 

responsibility. 

 

Since the member from Batoche hasn’t been able to get action 

on this file, I’ll ask the question on his behalf. To the minister: 

what assistance is she prepared to offer Duck Lake families 

who are paying more for water? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, under our government we 

have set aside billions of dollars for infrastructure money. The 

federal government has a Building Canada fund which 

communities can access as well, and in part that money can be 



2186 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2009 

used for water infrastructure projects. 

 

I would point out, Mr. Speaker, that over the years there are . . . 

If the member’s concerned about water quality in communities, 

there are many communities in this province that have well 

systems that are private wells. 

 

The NDP [New Democratic Party] did a little bit of sampling on 

that on an ad hoc basis, but nothing really secure or letting 

people know exactly what their water was like. So this year we 

did free water testing for 120 wells in the town of Hepburn to 

ensure that they have quality water, and we’re working with 

them to make sure that they’re aware of those results. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are doing everything that is within our 

responsibility to allow communities know what their water is 

like and to assist them in making upgrades where necessary. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, the residents of Duck Lake would 

like an answer. The residents of Hepburn, I’ll ask their 

questions on another occasion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, communities are under enormous pressure these 

days, particularly in rural Saskatchewan. There are limits to 

what they can do with the property tax base they have. They’ve 

been waiting in vain for the education property tax relief the 

Sask Party has promised for years but has not delivered. 

 

And water system upgrades are expensive. Communities are 

asking for help to provide clean, safe, and affordable water. At a 

time when the Sask Party is funding other infrastructure, why 

are Duck Lake residents facing such big increases in their water 

bills to pay for water system upgrades? Why isn’t the Sask 

Party stepping up to the plate? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party 

government has made the assurance that the Crown 

corporations will provide the best possible service for all 

Saskatchewan residents. That’s indeed what SaskWater has 

done in this instance. They’ve provided the service there and 

provided a contract that was done under the previous 

administration. That contract was honoured by this government. 

Costs have increased, and Duck Lake has chosen to look 

elsewhere for that provision of services. In Saskatchewan it can 

be done by the private sector or SaskWater comes in. 

 

SaskWater operates on a commercial basis, on a break-even 

basis. They lost a little bit of money under the NDP every year 

and they continue to be in that break-even system. That’s 

exactly what we’re doing. 

 

What we can do — and my hon. colleague has alluded to it — 

is provide infrastructure funds for communities to decide if it’s 

an important thing for their community to access those funds. 

And that has been done, more so than ever before by 

governments, including that one opposite. And that’s how we 

address the issue, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — It’s too bad that the two ministers that have 

gotten up to answer the questions so far wouldn’t actually meet 

with the residents of Duck Lake when they were asked to do so. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Duck Lake is building water system upgrades, and 

residents are faced with huge increases in the cost of water — 

increases that many of them simply can’t afford. 

 

But Duck Lake is not the only town facing concerns with the 

quality of its drinking water. Other small communities are faced 

with a similar challenge — how to replace water supply and 

treatment systems while keeping water bills affordable. As of 

March 6, there are more than 140 precautionary drinking water 

advisories and 54 emergency boil-water orders currently in 

effect in Saskatchewan, according to the Environment website. 

 

Again to the minister: when will the Sask Party step up to the 

plate and provide communities like Duck Lake with the help 

they need to keep water safe, clean, available, and affordable? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, it’s obvious that the 

member opposite isn’t actually listening to the answers. This 

government has set aside billions of dollars for infrastructure. 

The federal government has money in place through Building 

Canada. We have given municipalities $100 million in per 

capita funding to take care of projects that couldn’t have 

otherwise been met. There is money on the table, Mr. Speaker, 

and communities are stepping up. Approximately 75 per cent of 

the 569 municipal waterworks have met the December 2008 

upgrading timeline for compliance on turbidity standards. 

 

And if we go back to the NDP’s record on any of this, Mr. 

Speaker, I think Yens Pedersen, NDP leadership candidate, said 

it best about the NDP on any topic: 

 

Does the NDP have a plan? Do we even know where we 

want to go? We have not identified any measurable goals 

. . . So it should come as no great surprise that we don’t 

have a plan . . . This is a frustration shared by many in . . . 

[my] party . . . 

 

We need some measurable goals, and we need a plan. 

 

I couldn’t agree more. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 



March 9, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2187 

Coronation Park. 

 

SaskTel Services 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Thursday the 

Deputy Premier was asked to confirm to the House that the 

government had in fact snapped off another piece of SaskTel 

and outsourced the teleconferencing calling. We received no 

answer, so I’ll try today with the minister responsible here. Will 

the minister confirm today that this government has snapped off 

another chunk of SaskTel and outsourced conference calling? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. The Hon. Deputy Premier did take notice of that 

question. I was prepared to answer that question today, and I 

will do so as part of my answer to the hon. critic. 

 

Today the members raise a couple of important points about the 

outsourcing policy that has existed in SaskTel for a number of 

years. First policy is regarding communication, and certainly in 

communication we want to communicate as best we can with 

Saskatchewan companies, and that’s what we’re undertaking to 

do. I’ve met with SaskTel and asked them to ensure that they 

communicate with companies in the best way they can by 

providing that information on the website and using other best 

practices such as requests for qualifications because that’s 

where we want to go with this particular instance. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it would be nice to get an 

answer. We know that the conference calling function is being 

outsourced. We know that. What we don’t know is the name of 

the company that it’s being outsourced to. 

 

In January we asked for the name of the company and nobody 

had any idea who it was. Last Thursday the Deputy Premier 

was asked for the name of the company, and he danced around 

the question. Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan, the very 

shareholders of SaskTel, have every right to know. It’s a simple 

question that deserves a straightforward answer. To the 

minister: will he drop the secrecy and tell the people of 

Saskatchewan the name of the company that the conference 

calling function has been outsourced to? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I’m glad that the hon. 

member asked that question because it’s time that we had a 

debate on this right now. And I hope he indulges the Leader of 

the Opposition, that we can continue through the whole 

question period because, Mr. Speaker, that’s how important 

SaskTel is to this government and to this province. 

 

SaskTel is an innovation company. Do you know what 

innovation companies do, Mr. Speaker? They outsource 

because things become routine in innovation companies. So 

they outsource what becomes routine so they can reinvest those 

savings into innovative aspects. That’s what we’re doing in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — That’s what the good people at 

SaskTel are doing — the managers and the board of directors. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I may offer, that’s where that government 

got into trouble when they started directing the corporation into 

things that they shouldn’t have been into, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, it’s not much of a debate when you 

get nothing but spin from the government. The Sask Party is 

weakening SaskTel by snapping off pieces one at a time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, lets talk about DirectWest, which has always been 

a profitable company. Yet we learned this government has 

decided to sell off EZ Finder phone books, a piece of 

DirectWest. Whenever the NDP disposed of an asset, an 

independent business analysis was done. 

 

To the minister: did the Sask Party government have an 

independent analysis done before they chose to chunk off the 

EZ Finder phone books portion of DirectWest, or did they make 

this decision all on their own? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I want to keep 

talking about the outsourcing policy because we haven’t 

finished that debate. But I will answer the member’s question, 

opposite. 

 

EZ Finder, the Alberta phone book portion of DirectWest 

Canada, has been losing money for a number of years. Yes, it 

was one of those operations by the previous government that 

lost money year after year, where money had to be diverted 

from other profitable sources within SaskTel to subsidize that 

company. An offer was made to SaskTel’s board of directors 

and an offer was accepted. That’s good news for people in 

Saskatchewan because we no longer have to subsidize that 

operation. 

 

Again what we will do in SaskTel and in Saskatchewan is the 

Sask-first policy, where we will use that money in 

Saskatchewan to ensure that we provide that service across the 

province. That’s what this government’s commitment has done. 



2188 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2009 

That’s what we’ve been doing in spades. And that’s why people 

across this province are very pleased with what this 

government’s doing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the lack of an independent 

analysis demonstrates a lack of transparency and, frankly, 

responsible management on the part of the Sask Party. 

 

Mr. Speaker, EZ Finder phone books is a portion of 

DirectWest’s expansion division and a piece of SaskTel, and it 

was sold to Canpages. And once again, the people of 

Saskatchewan, the shareholders of SaskTel, left absolutely in 

the dark as to the process that was used. 

 

To the minister: the people of Saskatchewan have a right to 

know the buyer of a piece of their company, how the buyer was 

chosen. Was the sale an open process? Was it publicly 

tendered? Or was it simply by invitation only? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, a news release was 

issued. All kinds of buyers were sought. But what happens 

when you have a company that’s losing money? It’s not very 

interesting to many corporations. There were many . . . 

Companies that do a similar business were consulted. Canpages 

came forward with an option, and we felt it was necessary to 

stop the bleeding, stop the red ink, stop what was started under 

that government. And we stopped that, and we communicated 

that well to Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what’s more important . . . And we have the 

SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] 

convention coming up in Saskatchewan. One year ago at my 

first SARM convention people in Saskatchewan said, what is 

SaskTel doing for rural Saskatchewan? We need more Internet 

service. We need more cellular service. For 17 years the NDP 

did nothing. What did the Saskatchewan Party government do? 

What did the Saskatchewan Party do? We provided that service, 

Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we provided that service. And that’s 

what we’re doing, and that’s what we’ll continue to do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

SaskTel’s Investments 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve seen tops with less spin than 

that minister just tried. At the same time this government was 

selling a piece of SaskTel’s phone directory service off, they 

were acquiring almost $4 million worth of preferred shares in 

another phone directory company — Canadian Phone 

Directories holdings Inc. The holding company appears to be 

directly related to Canpages. 

 

To the minister: directly or indirectly, does SaskTel now own 

preferred shares in Canpages, the company that bought EZ 

pages phone books? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, that’s indeed 

the case. This wasn’t a totally cash deal. It was a situation 

where when you have a money-losing company — and the 

members opposite will know all about entering into many of 

those — that’s what the situation was. You have to get creative 

with the financing, and that’s what they did. Mr. Speaker . . . 

Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Minister 

Responsible for Crown Corporations. Order. I recognize the 

Minister Responsible for Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, in this particular 

instance, this company was scheduled to lose $13.4 million 

because of the actions of the previous government, Mr. 

Speaker. That did not sit well with me; that did not sit well with 

this government, Mr. Speaker. Any dollar that we can recoup, 

any dollar that we can save in this instance for the people of 

Saskatchewan, for the shareholders of SaskTel, that’s indeed 

what we will do. That’s why I tasked the board of directors and 

senior management to come up with any deal possible to ensure 

that we have the taxpayers of Saskatchewan’s best interests in 

mind. That’s what we did, Mr. Speaker, and we saved the 

taxpayers some money in this instance. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The last time this 

group of men and women in government got creative with the 

financing, this province ended up $16 billion in debt. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, this is all very, very interesting. 

The very same day that SaskTel announces publicly the sale of 

EZ Finder phone books, the government gives authorization to 

SaskTel to acquire almost $4 million, $3.7 million of preferred 

shares in Canadian Phone Directories holding company which 

is, Mr. Speaker, essentially the same company — Canpages. 

 

So my question to the minister: was one of the conditions of the 

sale of EZ Finder phone books that the province acquire this $4 

million, or $3.7 million of preferred shares? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 



March 9, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2189 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, if nothing was done 

in this instance, this company would have lost $13.4 million — 

the entire investment that was made, Mr. Speaker. This is 

exactly, exactly the situation. As I explained in the previous 

question, we ensure that we save every dollar we can for 

Saskatchewan residents, whether they’re in a bad deal or not. 

We’ve taken over that bad deal that was entered into. And yes, 

we’ve asked for any type of funding arrangement that would 

benefit the Saskatchewan people, and that was creative, yes, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know what else was creative, Mr. Speaker? When it comes 

to financing budgets in Saskatchewan, when it comes to the 

debt in Saskatchewan, paying off 40 per cent in the first year — 

that’s creative. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — That opposition said it couldn’t be 

done. They lack that creativity. And, Mr. Speaker, that is why 

they are sitting there and that’s why they will sit there for a very 

long time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, when the sale of EZ Finder 

phone books was announced to the people of Saskatchewan, the 

shareholders of SaskTel, the public announcement said it was 

for “an undisclosed amount.” Well, now we know, Mr. Speaker, 

without public announcement that the people of Saskatchewan 

now have preferred shares in Canpages, the company that 

bought EZ Finder phone books. What we don’t know is what 

percentage of the sale is reflected in those preferred shares, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And so to the minister: will he just drop the secrecy, be open 

with this legislature and the people of Saskatchewan, and tell us 

today, did you receive any cash for the sale of EZ Finder phone 

books? Or was the sale entirely these preferred shares which 

now you have the government and the people of Saskatchewan 

investing in? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Well I am happy to provide the 

answer for the member opposite, the Leader of the Opposition. 

There was cash and there was shares involved; it was a 

combination. And I’m happy to say that because every dollar in 

cash, every dollar in those shares, when they are liquidated, will 

save money for Saskatchewan people. That the times of losing 

$13.4 million we all know about — that tappedinto, the 

dot-coms that the members opposite . . . Retx, and others like 

that — we all know that they lost substantial amounts of money 

for Saskatchewan people. We don’t even have to touch the 

Navigata story, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What we’re doing today here is making the best out of a bad 

situation that was entered into by those members opposite and 

ensuring that we get as many dollars as we can back for 

Saskatchewan shareholders, the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, mine was a very direct question 

to which we did not receive an answer. The question is how 

much, how much in cash did the shareholders of SaskTel, the 

people of Saskatchewan get for EZ Finder phone book or how 

much in preferred shares? Why won’t the minister just answer 

the question? They were very quick to put out a news release 

telling us that they had sold this asset. Why, Mr. Speaker, won’t 

they tell us how much they received for it and how it’s been 

received? 

 

This is an example, Mr. Speaker, one more example of the 

secrecy and spin that we get from this government and the 

complete lack of transparency. We discover in January that 

they’ve created a P3 Secretariat. Didn’t announce that. We 

discover they’ve cut funding for the First Nations University of 

Canada. We didn’t know about that. We find out find now 

they’ve outsourced conference calling. We find out now, 

without announcement from this government, that in fact they 

are outsourcing the email services of Tel. What’s next, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

My question is not to the minister. My question is to the 

Premier: when will he change this pattern of spin and secrecy 

and become transparent to the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I was very clear in 

my previous answer. We had a decision to make. We could 

write off $13.4 million because of a losing corporation that that 

government entered into or we could try to preserve as much 

capital as possible. We entered into a cash and share deal. 

Indeed we did, Mr. Speaker.  

 

That was in the best interest and that decision was made at the 

board level and by senior management, the same senior 

managers for the most part — the obvious examples were 

removed — but for the most part that were there under the NDP 

government. Those are the very best people that made that 

decision. They made that decision, and if the members opposite 

know of somebody better, then they should tell me about that, 

that’s for sure. 

 

[14:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, the outsourcing, the outsourcing debate is 

something that we have to have here in this legislature, Mr. 

Speaker, because if the members opposite, if the Leader of the 

Opposition opposite is telling me that he is against outsourcing, 

then he has to look in the face of every small-, medium-, and 

large-sized business in this province because that’s what they 

do, Mr. Speaker. They provide those services the best they can. 

They take out services and outsource them. That’s what . . . 

 



2190 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2009 

The Speaker: — Minister’s time has elapsed. I recognize the 

Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Transparency in Government 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Here is a government 

that will not address the concerns of the residents of Duck Lake 

which are brought to this legislature. They will not answer one 

question in question period. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, they like to be the government that attaches 

first to everything. I have a little list here: ForestFirst, Children 

First, patient-first, Sask-first. What comes last with this 

government, Mr. Speaker, is transparency. What’s coming first 

now is spin and secrecy. 

 

So again to the Premier: will he try something new? Will he put 

transparency first? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan should be able to expect transparency 

from their government. I think they should be able to expect to 

know when transactions have occurred in the Crown 

corporations, Mr. Speaker, and certainly that’s the case. There’s 

a public policy process in place we’ve inherited from the 

previous administration on significant transactions. We follow 

that same process today. There’s obviously processes in this 

Legislative Assembly with respect to transparency. We’re also 

following that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What’s very transparent is that we’ve reduced the debt of this 

province by 40 per cent in the first full budget year of the 

government. What is transparent is that we have moved like no 

other government in the history of this province to fund 

infrastructure, Mr. Speaker. What is transparent is that we’ve 

provided the largest single-year income tax break for the people 

of the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. What is also 

clear is the days of six years of cover-up under SPUDCO 

[Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company] are over, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — What is also clear is that the days of losing 

of millions of taxpayers’ money on out-of-province investments 

in the Crowns is over. We’re investing in building in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education, Deputy 

Premier. 

 

Improvements to Education Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last month 

the Premier announced government’s plan to address the 

potential economic downturn by advancing $500 million from 

the ready-for-growth initiative. Mr. Speaker, on February 9 I 

visited Balfour Collegiate in Regina to announce what this 

economic booster shot would mean for Saskatchewan schools. 

 

Nearly $142 million is being advanced so that projects planned 

for the next few years can get started now. This means, Mr. 

Speaker, this means that the 18 major capital projects we 

announced for 15 communities across the province last year 

will be jump-started with this financial boost. 

 

Getting a head start with the design may make the difference of 

starting construction this summer or next spring, instead of late 

in 2010. This means projects such as those in Hafford, Elrose, 

and St. Mary’s in Saskatoon will be fully realized sooner than 

earlier planned. 

 

Twenty-three million dollars of the 141.7 million is being 

moved forward to this year for school maintenance projects. For 

schools this means improvements that may not have been 

completed until late this year or into 2010, they may now be 

finished before fall. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this means seven school will be more accessible to 

people with disabilities; 10 schools will have new or improved 

relocatable classrooms that respond to the ebb and flow of 

student population; 31 schools will be renovated to improve 

learning environments and expand services such as daycare 

spaces in two Saskatoon schools; and 44 schools will have their 

roofs repaired. The benefits are far reaching and will improve 

learning environments for over 35,000 students enrolled at 102 

schools in 64 communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was pleased to be joined at this announcement 

by Mr. Roy Challis, president of the Saskatchewan School 

Boards Association. President Challis said, and I quote, we 

have consistently vocalized the view that in many areas new 

schools are desperately needed, and that many of the 730 

schools in which our children and youth live, learn, and grow 

are in dire need of attention. We are extremely pleased that the 

government has listened and demonstrated their commitment to 

including the needs of Saskatchewan’s young people in their 

stimulus/infrastructure plans. The money will indeed be put to 

good use in communities across the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This funding is part of government’s effort to ensure that any 

signs of economic doom and gloom will not affect our progress. 

Our education, community, and business partners can be 

confident that government is committed to seeing these projects 

through to completion. 

 

We recognize the importance of schools that are in good 

condition, accessible, and responsive to the needs of students, 

teachers, and the community. We also recognize how these 

projects stimulate local economies and build pride in our 

communities. With this record capital funding, we are securing 

the future of our youth and our communities by investing in 

them today. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 



March 9, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2191 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I thank 

the minister for providing the brief of his minister’s statement 

before session started here today. 

 

Certainly any chance the opposition and this critic has to 

provide the opportunity to impress upon this government and to 

the people of Saskatchewan the importance of investing in our 

education infrastructure deficit, we’ll take that opportunity. 

 

I think it’s noteworthy to mention right now, Mr. Speaker, that 

it’s argued that we have close to $2 billion in deficit in our 

infrastructure here right now, Mr. Speaker. We have 

construction inflation that has been a very challenging and 

concerning environment. If that’s 15 or it’s 20 per cent, for 

example, Mr. Speaker, we’re accruing that deficit at $400,000 a 

year. So $140 million, yes, let’s welcome those dollars to the 

education sector. Certainly we have roofs to fix and new dollars 

that are needed. But let’s also make sure that we understand 

those in the context of how big our deficit is and how big that 

deficit’s growing. So we want to see continued progress on this 

file, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We look forward to having the opportunity this afternoon, Mr. 

Speaker, in estimates, to detail this spending a little bit more. 

And I do note that of the 18 major capital projects, 11 of those 

were ones that were already announced in the spring budget, 

specifically within spring spending. So the only reason those 

must be reappearing, Mr. Speaker, are cost overrun and new 

estimates that are far beyond what was initially in place. So 

again we have questions around cost overrun and construction 

inflation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I know the minister spoke here that the reason for this 

announcement was this big booster shot, as he puts it. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, this side of the House is interested in what sort of an 

analysis has been put forward by his ministry to be able to 

detail what this actually means in terms of jobs and how it’s 

going to be put forward. This announcement is two months 

early for many of those other projects that already were 

committed to next year. I don’t believe, Mr. Speaker, that that 

brings these projects online in a significantly more expedient 

fashion. However, the minister might be able to clarify that in 

estimates. 

 

We do, Mr. Speaker, articulated by our Finance critic, have 

significant concerns on this side of the House when we see a 

booster shot that could quite possibly simply be painting a 

picture of revenue concerns for next year — taking dollars that 

were supposed to be committed next year, spending them this 

year out of our insurance fund, and next year paints a picture 

that there might be some concerns around revenue. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the proof in the pudding will be what’s put 

forward in the education budget that’s going to be released here 

in a mere couple of weeks, Mr. Speaker. And if we see an 

incredibly bold and continued push by this minister and this 

ministry, at that point we’ll have good words to share. 

 

At this point, we’re concerned why spending that was supposed 

to occur next year is happening now; how concerned should 

Saskatchewan people . . . about our revenues next year. And 

let’s continue to move the line on this file because the schools 

and the children in our province deserve it, Mr. Speaker. Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

MESSAGE FROM 

HER MAJESTY QUEEN ELIZABETH II 

 

The Speaker: — Members, I would invite members and the 

guests who have joined us this afternoon to rise for a message 

from Her Majesty the Queen, Head of the Commonwealth. 

 

This year the Commonwealth commemorates its 

foundation sixty years ago. The London Declaration of 

1949 was the start of a new era in which our member 

countries committed themselves to work together, in 

partnership and as equals, towards a shared future. 

 

We can rightly celebrate the fact that the founding 

members’ vision of the future has become a reality. The 

Commonwealth has evolved out of all recognition from its 

beginning. It has helped give birth to modern nations, and 

the eight original countries have become fifty-three. We 

are now home to nearly two billion people: a third of the 

world’s population. Across continents and oceans, we 

have come to represent all the rich diversity of 

humankind. 

 

Yet despite its size and scale, the Commonwealth to me 

has been sustained during all this change by the continuity 

of our mutual values and goals. Our beliefs in freedom, 

democracy and human rights; equality and equity; 

development and prosperity mean as much today as they 

did more than half a century ago. 

 

These values come from a common responsibility 

exercised by our governments and peoples. It is this which 

makes the Commonwealth a family of nations and 

peoples, at ease with being together. As a result, I believe 

we are inspired to do our best to meet people’s most 

pressing needs, and to develop a truly global perspective. 

That is why the modern Commonwealth has stood the test 

of time. 

 

But as we reflect upon our long association, we should 

recognize the challenges that lie ahead. Nearly one billion 

people of today’s Commonwealth are under 25 years of 

age. These are the people that this association must 

continue to serve in the future. It is they who can help 

shape the Commonwealth of today, and whose children 

will inherit the Commonwealth of tomorrow. To help 

them make the best of their opportunities, our young men 

and women therefore need the opportunity to become 

active and responsible members of the communities in 

which they live. I am pleased that the Commonwealth 

recognizes this, and is determined to continue to put 

young people at its centre. 

 

The call that brought the Commonwealth together in 1949 

remains the same today. Then we joined together in a 

collective spirit — built on lasting principles, wisdom, 

energy and creativity — to meet the great tasks of our 

times. As the Commonwealth celebrates its sixtieth 

birthday, its governments, communities and we as 



2192 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2009 

individuals should welcome that achievement. Together, 

we should continue to work hard to deal with today’s 

challenges so that the young people of today’s 

Commonwealth can realize their aspirations. In that way 

we can look to the future with confidence. 

 

Elizabeth R 

 

Please be seated. 

 

Again I want to extend a special thank you to the Canadian 

Club and members of the Royal Commonwealth Society who 

have joined us today for this message from Her Majesty, and 

our essay winners. And I extend an invitation to members of the 

Chamber, to our guests who have joined us in the gallery, and 

to legislative staff to join the Speaker and his staff in the 

Speaker’s office, room 129, at your leisure for cake and tea 

following the business of the Assembly. 

 

TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — Also I would like to lay on the Table before 

orders of the day that, pursuant to section 67 of The Legislative 

Assembly and Executive Council Act, 2007, I hereby inform the 

Assembly of the membership of the Board of Internal Economy 

effective January 28, 2009: the Hon. Don Toth, Chair, Speaker; 

the Hon. Dan D’Autremont, Executive Council representative; 

the Hon. Christine Tell, Executive Council representative; Ms. 

Doreen Eagles, MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly], 

government caucus representative; Mr. Glen Hart, MLA, 

government caucus representative; Mr. Len Taylor, MLA, 

opposition caucus representative; Mr. Kevin Yates, MLA, 

opposition caucus representative. Signed by the Lieutenant 

Governor, Dr. Gordon Barnhart. 

 

I as well lay on the Table the report of the Information and 

Privacy Commissioner regarding The Traffic Safety Amendment 

Act, 2008, Bill No. 72. 

 

[14:30] 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 79 — The Education Amendment Act, 2009 

(No. 2)/Loi n
o
 2 de 2009 modifiant la Loi de 1995 

sur l’éducation 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

rise today to move second reading of The Education 

Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2). Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to 

introduce changes that lengthen the time a school may be 

designated as a school of opportunity from two years to three 

years. This change will better ensure the impact of the changing 

Saskatchewan economy can be more fully realized in the 

community before the effect on school enrolments is assessed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government recognizes that schools are 

important to rural communities when there are opportunities for 

economic growth on the horizon. As members know, the 

schools of opportunity designation was introduced last year to 

make sure that the potential for future economic growth is 

considered before changes are made to a school. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to say that we also worked with 

education sector partners to develop a new process for 

reviewing schools in school districts. The amendments to the 

school review process have lengthened the legislative 

consultation and review process, more fully engaged the 

community in the review process, and formalized public 

communication as the school review progresses. 

 

Education partners raised no objections when they were again 

consulted on the lengthening of time a school may be 

designated as a school of opportunity to three years. In the 

event that submissions are received prior to enactment of the 

change to the term, a transitional provision has been included in 

the amendments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, because of this change to schools of opportunity, 

communities will have additional time to assess the potential for 

economic and population growth. This additional time also 

provides a measure of security for our students, families, and 

communities. I am pleased to move therefore that The 

Education Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2) be now read a second 

time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Education has moved second 

reading of Bill No. 79, The Education Amendment Act, 2009. Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? I recognize 

the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — With permission to introduce a guest, with 

leave. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave to introduce 

guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In your 

gallery today is someone who has recently, over a year ago, 

moved to Saskatchewan from France. His name is Alfons 

Shoshi. He came here under the immigrant nominee program, 

skilled worker category, and he’s now a permanent resident of 

Canada. He loves our weather. He loves the cold weather, and 

he comes from Nice, Mr. Speaker, which is in the warm part of 

France, the French Mediterranean. I would ask all of my 

colleagues to welcome Mr. Shoshi to our legislature and 

welcome him to Saskatchewan and Canada. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 



March 9, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2193 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 79 — The Education Amendment Act, 2009 

(No. 2)/Loi n
o
 2 de 2009 modifiant la Loi de 1995 

sur l’éducation 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

pleased today to rise on Bill No. 79, An Act to amend The 

Education Act, 1995 at second reading. Mr. Speaker, I 

appreciate the explanation provided over the last couple of 

minutes by the Minister of Education, Mr. Speaker, in regards 

to the legislation in front of us. I have just a few comments 

today in response, Mr. Speaker. However I think that there 

should be, for the record, some description, some explanation in 

my remarks, Mr. Speaker, as to what the Bill itself actually 

says. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I refer to some explanatory notes provided by 

the ministry, Mr. Speaker, with regards to the Act, and I will 

quote from that right now, Mr. Speaker: 

 

A school of opportunity may be designated by the 

Minister for up to three years during which time the 

school would remain open as the community implements 

its plan to increase enrolments. 

 

In late 2008, Cabinet directed that schools of opportunity 

should be allowed to continue for an additional year (from 

two to three years) so that the impacts of the changing 

Saskatchewan economy could be more fully realized in 

the community before the impact on school enrolments is 

assessed. The increase to three years will allow the 

community that additional year. 

 

Given that some submissions to designate a school as a 

school of opportunity may be received prior to the 

extended period of three years being enacted, the ability of 

the Minister to extend the period from two to three years 

for these submissions is required. 

 

That’s the explanation, Mr. Speaker, provided by the ministry. I 

do find it interesting, Mr. Speaker, that the ministry — and 

more importantly the minister — has chosen to bring forward a 

new Bill, Bill No. 79 as opposed to amending in committee, Mr. 

Speaker, The Education Amendment Act which is currently 

before this place. Mr. Speaker, an expansion of this limit by a 

year, Mr. Speaker, could’ve been done and could’ve been done 

much more quickly, Mr. Speaker, on the Bill that’s currently in 

front of the House, instead of introducing this brand new piece 

of legislation. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the only reason that I can think of as to why 

the government would want to introduce a new Bill, as opposed 

to amending a Bill in front of the House, Mr. Speaker, is to 

bring to the attention of the people who would be interested in 

this, Mr. Speaker, the fact that this change is being brought 

forward, Mr. Speaker. An amendment, as practical as that might 

be, does not highlight the change as much as an independent 

Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Therefore, given that, what the government is doing with this 

Bill is simply highlighting a matter they could do in another 

way, Mr. Speaker, simply tells me that this Bill in front of us 

today is no more than a political exercise, Mr. Speaker. A 

political exercise that indeed is meant to alert the public to a 

direction that the government wants to take, without taking into 

account sort of the practical we-can-do-this-more- 

quickly-another-way method of achieving the same goals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, so given that the government has chosen to take 

matters in a new Bill as opposed to an amendment, Mr. 

Speaker, they are in fact almost setting this up to take longer 

than would be practical, Mr. Speaker. A new Bill doesn’t 

necessarily get passed in this sitting of the legislature, Mr. 

Speaker. An amendment to the existing Bill, Mr. Speaker, has a 

better chance of being passed in this sitting, Mr. Speaker. And 

therefore I think that the government has to take that criticism 

into account when they are speaking to their stakeholders, Mr. 

Speaker, about why they wish to pursue this matter. 

 

The other question that this legislation raises, Mr. Speaker — 

since it’s not an amendment to an existing Bill, but rather a new 

Bill, Mr. Speaker — the question that it begs to be asked is, 

what’s the long-term strategy here? Mr. Speaker, an 

amendment, you’d easily see that as being dealing with current 

circumstances. A Bill, Mr. Speaker, greatly expands what one 

would think of as the reasons behind why the Bill is being 

brought forward in this way or why this change is being brought 

forward in this way. So there must be a long-term strategy, Mr. 

Speaker. Or if there isn’t, why isn’t there a longer term strategy 

here, Mr. Speaker? 

 

For example, you know, the question that the stakeholders are 

probably asking is, how do you put a time frame on an 

opportunity? Why do you put a time frame on an opportunity, 

Mr. Speaker? If it’s timely to support communities that are 

growing, why is it two or three years? That’s the bottom line, 

Mr. Speaker. Why isn’t it another number? Why isn’t it an 

infinite number, Mr. Speaker? 

 

If a community is growing or a community can prove that it’s 

growing, why doesn’t the legislation take that into account? 

Certainly, Mr. Speaker, that’s something that the Bill — a 

stand-alone Bill — should take into account. As opposed to 

what the government, as I said earlier, could be doing, 

amending a Bill to provide some additional opportunity, 

especially to some communities that are maybe in this process 

of dealing with school of opportunity and more importantly, 

Mr. Speaker, economic growth within that community. So of 

course, Mr. Speaker, some communities are going to ask that 

simple question and also the question about why limit this 

period of time. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, although the minister indicated in his remarks 

that they have consulted with stakeholders, Mr. Speaker, and 

stakeholders are generally supportive of this legislation, I don’t 

believe, Mr. Speaker, that all the information was on the table 

when stakeholders were discussing this explanation that the 

minister brought forward. 

 

We have seen, as a result of question period in the last few 

days, that this government is lacking in transparency in the way 

in which they manage the information coming out of this place. 

Mr. Speaker, because there are other ways of doing the same 

thing, because there are needs to examine long-term plans — 



2194 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2009 

not only of this ministry, Mr. Speaker, but of all activities of 

this government, Mr. Speaker — the opposition is going to have 

to spend a considerable amount of time explaining all of the 

circumstances to the stakeholders, Mr. Speaker, and getting a 

reaction back from the stakeholders that is specific to having 

access to all the information, not just the pieces that the 

government wishes to release. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, at this time, knowing that we have a 

considerable amount of work to do, and numerous members 

whose ridings may contain schools that could be considered 

schools of opportunity, Mr. Speaker, I would move that debate 

on Bill No. 79, An Act to amend The Education Act, 1995 be 

now adjourned. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from The Battlefords has moved 

adjournment of debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 

facilitate the standing committees on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice, as well as Human Services, I move that this House 

do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — Before placing the motion, just a reminder 

again to invite members and legislative staff to join the Speaker 

for tea. If you’d like tea and cake and extend a congratulations 

to our essay winners for the Commonwealth Day, join us in 

room 129. 

 

The Government House Leader has moved that this House to 

now adjourn in order to facilitate the work of committees. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. This Assembly stands 

adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 14:43.] 

 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2181 

  Allchurch ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2181 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2181 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2192 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2181 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2182 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2182 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2182 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2182 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2182 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2182 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 International Women’s Day 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2183 

 Kinsmen Telemiracle 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2183 

 Women with Disabilities Luncheon 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2183 

 National Association for Stock Car Auto Racing Comes to Martensville 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2184 

 Shevchenko Honoured on Ukrainian Literature Day 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2184 

 Prince Albert Citizen Inducted into Hall of Fame 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2184 

 Mennonite Leaders Honoured 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2185 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Drinking Water 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2185 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2185 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2185 

 SaskTel Services 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2187 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2187 

 SaskTel’s Investments 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2188 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2188 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2188 

 Transparency in Government 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2190 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2190 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Improvements to Education Infrastructure 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2190 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2191 

MESSAGE FROM HER MAJESTY QUEEN ELIZABETH II 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2191 

TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2192 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 79 — The Education Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2)/Loi n
o
 2 de 2009 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2192 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2193 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 


