




















































Hansard: March 24, 2009


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 38B  TUESDAY, MARCH 24, 2009, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2497 

 March 24, 2009 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Gantefoer that the Assembly approves 

in general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 

proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. Van 

Mulligen.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The time being 7 p.m., this House is 

now in session. Government orders, special order. I recognize 

the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 

privilege to rise and participate in the budget debate. Usually 

when people do these things, they usually give a little bit of 

background about what’s been happening in their constituency 

or in their personal life. I did that at some length with the 

Speech from the Throne, but I would like to give you a brief 

update on both my mother and my mother-in-law. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, my mother is now 88 years old and is in 

relatively good health. And I think when you reach that age, 

you don’t need to be as sensitive as you might be when you 

were younger, and she often has a good way of keeping her 

children humble. We were over there for a supper a week or so 

ago. And I was complaining that every time the newspaper put 

my picture in the paper that it was usually with my mouth open 

or usually not looking what I thought particularly appropriate. 

And I was complaining that these pictures were not really 

flattering. And she listens, and I’m not sure how much she 

always hears because sometimes she doesn’t have her hearing 

. . . [inaudible] . . . She just turns and she says, I’ve seen them; 

they’re quite flattering, I think. 

 

So anyway my mother-in-law is a great . . . [inaudible] . . . and 

is able to keep me humble as far as how I look. My 

mother-in-law, sort of as to how I sound, my mother-in-law 

mentioned the other day that she saw me on television. And I 

asked my mother-in-law, did I sound like I know what I was 

talking about? And she said, I don’t know; I just pressed mute. 

So I sort of realized that things have different priorities for 

different folks. 

 

My mother-in-law lives in Rosetown and is a wonderful person, 

one of the nicest people I know. And to the little bit of chagrin 

of my wife, she has now developed a romance. And not so 

much the fact that she’s developed a romance that causes my 

wife concern; I think it’s the fact that my mother-in-law’s 

dating a now retired lawyer. So she’s seeing Morley Asselstine, 

a retired Rosetown lawyer and a fine gentlemen. And I would 

like to say hello to them with your leave, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to make some 

comments before I sort of go into what I want to say about the 

budget. I’ve listened to the members opposite talk about this 

budget. And I heard the member this afternoon, just before we 

broke for supper, ask the question, why don’t you ask 

yourselves if you’re better off now than you were 16 months 

ago. I can understand, Mr. Deputy Speaker, somebody on this 

side of the House asking that question and asking it with a lot of 

pride and enthusiasm. But when the members over there ask 

that question, I sort of have the Dr. Phil question: what are you 

thinking? How’s that working for you? 

 

You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 16 months ago, we were 

talking about elections, election speeches. And the election 

slogan at that time was hope beats fear. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

we’ve now gone past hope beats fear. Hope is now giving way 

to pride and confidence and people taking an enormous amount 

of passion about this province. 

 

This is a wonderful place, and people here are realizing it and 

are incredibly thankful to be living in the great province of 

Saskatchewan. And that pride and that enthusiasm is now 

growing and that confidence is growing throughout the business 

community. We should all be happy. I listened, Mr. Speaker, 

and I’ve been listening on the radio to the global meltdown, to 

the collapse, and what’s happening in the rest of the financial 

market. And I’ve been watching what’s been happening with 

the AIG [American International Group, Inc.], and I’ve listened 

to some of the members opposite and frankly, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, if those people worked for AIG they wouldn’t even get 

a bonus. 

 

In any event, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s my pleasure to rise and 

enter into the budget debate. I’m proud to be part of a 

government that is keeping its promises and making life more 

affordable for Saskatchewan people. Mr. Speaker, the budget 

presented last week by the Minister of Finance keeps money in 

the pockets of ordinary people across our province. This budget 

will reduce education property taxes by $103 million in the 

coming year. That is the largest education property tax cut in 

the history of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Overall this government is putting more 

than $700 million back in the hands of Saskatchewan people 

this year. I’d like to give you just a few examples. In 2009 a 

single person earning $25,000 a year will pay 35 per cent less in 

provincial taxes than they did in 2007, and that does not include 

the property tax relief, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In 2007, before the 

Saskatchewan Party was elected, a family with an income of 

$50,000 paid more than $3,300 in provincial tax. This year that 

family will pay only about $1,300, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a 

reduction of some 61 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is no secret that the world economy is in deep 

trouble. So far Saskatchewan has managed much better than 

many other parts of this country. Some might say we got lucky, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, but building a strong economy doesn’t 

have much to do with luck. It’s a matter of sound management 

and prudent planning. This budget is designed to keep 

Saskatchewan’s economy strong and steady despite the current 

global crisis. It is a balanced budget at a time when other 



2498 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2009 

provinces are running deficits — not just small deficits, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, but some of them are running huge, massive 

deficits. 

 

In addition to the largest education property tax cut ever, this 

budget delivers nearly $170 million for municipal 

infrastructure. That is in addition to the $1 billion announced in 

the ready-for-growth plan and the $500 million economic 

booster shot announced last month. This budget provides new 

operating grants for municipalities, increased funding for 

agriculture, new child welfare initiatives — something that’s 

close to my heart as Minister of Justice — and funding for safer 

communities, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like now to turn to the budget for 

my own Ministry of Justice and Attorney General. I want to 

thank some of my key staff, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In my own 

office, I’ve got some wonderful people working for me. I’ve got 

Jean Watts, Michelle Chyz, Lara Zaluski, Judy Langford. And 

today is her birthday so I want to say happy 42nd birthday for 

her. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s not appropriate to say ages, 

but I will. And of course, my chief of staff, Denise Batters. 

 

I have some people working in the ministry that I would like to 

mention as well. I have some new people, and I want to 

recognize one person who has retired. Al Dwyer had for 35 

years worked in various aspects of the ministry. He started in 

1973 in the budget bureau in Finance. He moved to Consumer 

and Commercial Affairs in 1975 as director of administration. 

He became the acting deputy superintendent of insurance in 

1989, and in 1990 was named director of the consumer 

protection branch. He retired earlier this year. Mr. Dwyer had 

worked for the Saskatchewan government for some 35 years 

and was one of the main pillars of my ministry. 

 

He has now been replaced by Eric Greene, a new person who 

has come on board, and I’m pleased to say he is doing very well 

and is going to be a great asset to the ministry. 

 

In the preparation of the budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I had 

some great assistance from Gord Sisson, who is the executive 

director of corporate services, and I thank him for that. 

 

We are now dealing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with some issues of 

courts’ capital and expansions and new courthouses — one in 

Meadow Lake and an expansion in the Court of Queen’s Bench 

in Saskatoon. Mr. Deputy Speaker, that courthouse in Meadow 

Lake, I’m pleased to say that the contractors are working well 

through the winter months. It’s going to be a wonderful addition 

to the community of Meadow Lake. I want to recognize the 

member from Meadow Lake, who lobbied hard and effectively 

to get that courthouse, and we’re very, very pleased that that 

courthouse is going forward. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I also would like to thank Linda Bogard 

who is the director of court services, who has seen to it that all 

of those pieces came together when we were doing all of the 

expansion and everything else that is taking place. 

 

We’ve also gone through a lot of work with new legislation and 

work that we’ve done to try and ensure that this House is ready 

to go ahead with legislation, and I would like to thank and 

recognize Susan Amrud who is the executive director of the 

public law division. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would also like to recognize at this time 

my constituency assistant, Rita Flaman Jarrett. I think earlier in 

the fall I had mentioned her son, Brennan Jarrett, who was 

struggling with cancer. Sadly, on December 23 of last year, he 

lost his struggle. And it’s, Mr. Speaker, my hope that her faith 

will give her and her family the strength that they will need as 

they face this terrible ordeal. It’s something that is the worst 

thing a parent can face. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the capital budget of my ministry is over 

$22 million. We are making substantial investments in new and 

expanded courthouse facilities so that everyone who uses the 

courthouse can do so safely and have access to the facilities that 

they need. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are investing one and half million dollars this 

year in the first phase of replacing the maintenance enforcement 

office computer system. I cannot exaggerate how much 

custodial parents appreciate the work of our maintenance 

enforcement staff. I’m pleased that they will be getting the 

up-to-date tools they need to have so that they can do their jobs 

well.  

 

In a joint initiative with the Ministry of Corrections, Public 

Safety and Policing, we will begin work on the replacement of 

the courts’ and corrections’ computer system. 

 

We will also expand video conferencing facilities for courts. 

This is a program that saves time and money for the court 

system, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And it can come through in the 

face of unexpected events. Just recently, Mr. Speaker, a court 

party was unable to reach all of the communities they were 

scheduled to visit because of bad weather. They did make it to a 

courthouse equipped with video conferencing however, and a 

judge conducted court via video link. Cases that otherwise 

would have been postponed have been able to be dealt with on 

schedule. 

 

Those are the highlights of our capital budget, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, but we are also making other investments as well. As 

you will know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government will be 

funding 30 more new police officers this year as we work 

towards our goal of 120 new police officers by 2012. 

 

With additional police officers, comes additional pressure on 

the courts. That is why we are adding three new prosecutors to 

help deal with the additional caseload, and to crack down on 

violent crime. We are also investing $270,000 for an additional 

judge and deputy sheriff to increase the availability of court 

time. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Ministry of Justice will be taking on 

some programs previously administered through the Ministry of 

Social Services. Details are currently being communicated to 

the community-based organizations that provide those services. 

 

Our belief, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that family violence 

programs, sexual assault centres, and transition shelters fit very 

well with existing programs that Justice administers now, such 

as victim services. Our intention, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is to 

offer well coordinated services that meet the needs of victims of 



March 24, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2499 

violent crime. 

 

Additionally we are increasing funding for community-based 

organization operations budgets by 3 per cent. 

 

With the Ministry of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing, 

we will begin implementation of the seizure process set out in 

The Seizure of Criminal Property Act. This allows the seizure of 

property that is an instrument of crime or has become the 

proceeds of crime. 

 

Additionally our fine collection program will be enhanced with 

an investment of over $200,000, and a program will be 

developed to better assist victims of crime collect money owed 

to them by offenders through restitution orders. As well, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, the Saskatchewan Financial Services 

Commission will become a special operating agency which will 

enhance enforcement and compliance activities. A well 

regulated financial system is essential if we are wanting to 

continue to grow our province’s economy, especially in times 

of global crisis. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to turn to some of the items this 

budget offers in my home city of Saskatoon. As MLA [Member 

of the Legislative Assembly] for Saskatoon Southeast, I am 

truly proud that this government is investing $200 million over 

two years for a new children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, this government will 

invest nearly $100 million in a new bridge running across the 

south part of Saskatoon, right across the bottom boundary of my 

constituency — Mr. Speaker, something that’s long overdue 

and much needed and something that was done in co-operation 

with the federal government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, St. Paul’s Hospital in Saskatoon will also receive 

funding for MRI [magnetic resonance imaging] renovations. 

Oliver Lodge long-term care facility will receive $4.7 million 

for capital improvements. The Saskatoon Police Service will be 

able to hire four new officers including an additional officer to 

help track high-risk offenders. 

 

We will also be investing $5 million towards renovation and 

expansion of the Queen’s Bench Court House in Saskatoon. 

This, I might add, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the first stage of 

planning for a significant improvement and expansion in that 

courthouse. 

 

The government is investing $23.3 million to accelerate 

twinning on Highway 11, to complete twinning from Saskatoon 

to Prince Albert in four years. And I understand there’s been 

some additional top-up from the federal government. We are 

also contributing $15 million to create 400 new on-campus 

resident spaces at the University of Saskatchewan. And I cannot 

fail to mention once again the funding for the new south bridge, 

Mr. Speaker. Saskatoon is the city of bridges and we definitely 

need this one. 

 

[19:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, the opposition would have people believe that this 

government is spending our province into a hole. Members of 

the opposition have called this budget runaway spending. On 

several occasions last week, the media asked what items they 

would cut from the budget, what things they would not speak. 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they couldn’t come up with a single 

thing that they didn’t want to spend on or that they wouldn’t do. 

They didn’t remove a single thing. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I call 

on those members opposite to vote for and support this budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, in addition to that, 

in the previous year, this government has paid down the 

provincial debt by some 40 per cent. No one can say that this 

government is not fiscally prudent, careful, cautious in handling 

the money of this province in a very appropriate and careful 

manner. The members opposite would not only be well-advised 

to vote for this budget; they should be proud to vote for this 

budget. This budget should pass, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

unanimously. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, to talk for just a moment 

about the members opposite, on CTV [Canadian Television 

Network Ltd.] news recently, one opposition member stated, 

“Well I think some of the government’s initiatives are good 

initiatives in terms of property tax reduction.” 

 

The opposition has questioned our economic forecasts, 

particularly in relation to potash royalties. Mr. Speaker, I do not 

wish to insult anyone, so let me just say there are some people 

on that side of the House who need a course on how the royalty 

structure works. 

 

The opposition have derided this budget, Mr. Speaker. They 

have raised the spectre of a previous provincial government and 

forecast a terrible future for Saskatchewan based on a balanced 

budget, and a balanced budget in the previous year that not only 

was balanced but also paid down a substantial amount of debt 

— debt that was incurred under that administration — and in 

addition to that made major commitments to capital. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they have not presented any alternative, 

reasonable or otherwise, and I can only conclude that they are 

going through the motions of opposing this budget that in their 

hearts they know this is a prudent, forward-thinking budget. 

And once again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would urge them to do 

the right thing and vote for it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — This is a budget that will help 

Saskatchewan weather the economic storm. This is a budget 

that invests in much-needed infrastructure and capital projects. 

This is a budget that will make life more affordable for 

Saskatchewan people. Mr. Speaker, I am proud to support this 

budget. I will not be supporting the amendment, Mr. Speaker. I 

am proud to choose optimism, hope, courage, and strength over 

pessimism and decline. Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



2500 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2009 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for CIC 

[Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan]. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is 

indeed a pleasure to rise in this House and to respond to the 

budget, and it’s especially a pleasure to follow my colleague 

and good friend, the member from Saskatoon Southeast, who 

gave us a lot of good food for thought here as far as we look 

towards the budget. The 2009-2010 budget is indeed an historic 

document. 

 

I’d like to begin by thanking those individuals that help me do 

my job each and every day. I’ll begin with my wife, Trish, and 

she takes on a large part of the parenting responsibilities when 

I’m here in Regina. She has a tremendous, she does it . . . all of 

them. That’s what members on this side of the House say, and 

I’d have to agree with them about that. 

 

It’s a tremendous load making sure that kids do their 

homework, get to music lessons, and indeed take part in the 

many activities that they do. My children, Carter and Paige — 

Carter is 11; Paige is 9 — and I thank them for always listening 

to mom and dad, and just because you’re watching tonight, 

doesn’t mean that you can’t get your homework done. That’s no 

excuse. The report cards were very good, and that’s something 

that makes parents very proud. 

 

I also want to thank those individuals that make my job easier 

during the day: my fantastic constituency assistant, Beth Epp; 

my super chief of staff, Marlin; and the fabulous four in my 

Regina office, Karen, Jacquie, Luanne, and Tamarha. Thank 

you all for all that you do each and every day. 

 

It’s a real privilege to listen to the concerns of my constituents 

and to represent the people of Saskatoon Silver Springs. 

Saskatoon Silver Springs is a growing part of our province. It’s 

an area that has welcomed many immigrants to Saskatchewan. 

It’s an area that welcomes those that want to make 

Saskatchewan their home. Neighbourhoods like Willowgrove 

are growing very quickly, filling up very fast. It won’t be long 

before we’re welcoming residents to the new neighbourhood of 

Evergreen in Saskatoon as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget speaks volumes of where 

Saskatchewan is today. It speaks volumes of the attitude of 

today’s government. This budget belongs to and is an 

investment in the future of the great province of the people of 

Saskatchewan. As MLAs, my colleagues and I have had the 

honour and privilege to represent the views of the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our Premier, the Premier of Saskatchewan, is a 

true leader. Our Premier reminds us regularly not to lose touch 

with the people that elected us to serve. Our Premier believes 

that everyone deserves to be listened to and everyone’s hopes 

and dreams are important. He reminds us what we all witnessed 

in November 2007 what happens to a government that fails to 

listen, Mr. Speaker. And I trust that the opposition members 

will be comfortable in their seats for a long period of time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate the Minister of Finance for 

doing a stellar job in reflecting the hopes and dreams of the 

people of Saskatchewan in this current budget. This however 

shouldn’t be a surprise to anyone, as he accomplished almost 

the same level of excellence as he did in last year’s budget by 

going forward this year and surpassing last year’s 

accomplishments. 

 

I want to acknowledge and congratulate two other people that 

were key to this budget: the Deputy Premier, the member for 

Canora-Pelly; and the MLA for Rosetown-Elrose. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, the Deputy Premier 

and the MLA for Rosetown-Elrose have worked tirelessly for 

over a year on the property tax election promise — the promise 

that was to increase rebates and by year four to have a 

long-term solution to the property tax question. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government has kept the promise of a 

long-term solution on the education portion of property tax, and 

it did it two and a half years early, Mr. Speaker. It is 

particularly meaningful work with a group of government 

colleagues who feel as I do, that it is important not only to listen 

to the people of Saskatchewan but also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 

listen to their concerns and to act upon it. 

 

We have not only listened, Mr. Deputy Speaker; we have also 

delivered. On March 18 our government presented a budget 

titled Saskatchewan: Strong and Steady. And, Mr. Speaker, 

that’s indeed what this budget is — strong and steady. Unlike 

the provinces that are experiencing economic decline, 

Saskatchewan is experiencing economic growth. While other 

provinces in the country are presenting deficit budgets, here in 

Saskatchewan we not only presented a balanced budget, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker; we have presented a budget that has a surplus 

of $424.5 million. 

 

While we’ve maintained a balanced budget, we have also 

announced major commitments to the people of Saskatchewan. 

Mr. Speaker, infrastructure is addressed again in this budget in 

a historic fashion, both on the GRF [General Revenue Fund] 

side, Mr. Speaker, and through the Crown corporations. 

 

Last Friday, Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity of announcing 

that our government, through the Crown Investments 

Corporation, will not take a dividend payment from SaskPower 

in 2009. The money is being reinvested in SaskPower’s 

infrastructure. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the previous government chose to hold off 

on necessary infrastructure upgrades. This has led to the same 

infrastructure deficit in the Crown corporations that we have 

seen in our highways, in our schools, in our hospitals in this 

province, Mr. Speaker. The previous government neglected 

aging equipment in order to fulfill a commitment to keep the 

lowest cost bundle. I understand the desire to keep costs down. 

No one wants to see costs increase, but we all know what 

happened when our roads were neglected for many, many years. 

 

The same is true for power generation and distribution in our 

province. A responsible government makes the infrastructure 

investment necessary to ensure that people have safe, reliable, 

and sustainable power at the lowest possible costs. In order to 

make that investment, SaskPower needs capital. Mr. Deputy 



March 24, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2501 

Speaker, this government is showing a true commitment to our 

Crown corporations by delivering the capital that they need. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we campaigned on many promises, most that we 

have already delivered on. Over 100 promises made, over 100 

promises kept in 16 short months in government, Mr. Speaker. 

Something that I and all members on this side of the House are 

very proud of. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — One promise was to correct the 

property tax system in Saskatchewan that has long been 

ignored. I am proud to say our budget delivers the largest 

property tax cut in Saskatchewan history. 

 

Under this new system, the province will cut and cap, cut and 

cap, Mr. Speaker, education property tax rates for each of the 

three major property classes — residential, commercial, and 

something that members opposite never even thought to do, 

agricultural. Mr. Deputy Speaker, this property tax cut totals 

$103 million in education property tax savings for 

Saskatchewan property owners in 2009, a 14 per cent reduction 

across the board. And, Mr. Speaker, I will say it again: this 

represents the largest education property tax cut in a single year 

in the province’s history. A promise made, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

a promise kept. 

 

As well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, $53 million in further education 

property tax savings for next year. The people of Saskatoon 

Silver Springs will save approximately 10 per cent on the 

education portion of property taxes in 2009 as a result, as a 

direct result, of this budget. And they will pay even less, Mr. 

Speaker, next year. By 2010 the savings will be about 16 per 

cent. And if you consider the rebates that we’ve offered in 

2008, the Saskatoon Silver Springs residents will be 

approximately 26 per cent better off. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, members of this House, specifically the 

member from Saskatoon Nutana, is complaining that the 

property tax will be increasing in Saskatoon. In reality, even 

with the increase in assessment that has taken place in our city, 

the education portion of property tax will still be decreasing. 

This means not only will property owners in my constituency of 

Saskatoon Silver Springs pay less in education tax, it applies to 

the vast majority of property owners in Saskatchewan. 

 

Not only did we announce the largest property tax cut in 

Saskatchewan history, we also announced, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

our government is increasing its share of funding to school 

divisions by $241 million this year to a record $990.5 million. 

Something to be proud of, something that all members on this 

side of the House and all members who vote in favour of this 

budget will be very proud of. 

 

The province will now fund 63 per cent of the operating costs 

of pre-kindergarten to grade 12 education, up from last year’s 

funding of 51 per cent — increasing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 66 

per cent next year. It doesn’t stop there. $23.5 million to enable 

universities to limit tuition increases to an average of 3 per cent. 

$23 million to attract and retain nurses and other hard-to-recruit 

health care professionals in Saskatchewan. $7.5 million to 

continue training seat expansions announced last year for 

nurses, physicians, and medical diagnostics. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is what a government that listens and cares for 

the people of Saskatchewan does. We don’t make up promises 

and then make up excuses why we can’t follow through on 

them, Mr. Speaker. We make promises we have every intention 

of keeping and then, Mr. Speaker, we keep them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to spend considerable time discussing 

another plank in this historic budget — a $200 million 

commitment for the new provincial children’s hospital in 

Saskatoon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — The announcement of the new 

children’s hospital in Saskatoon is fantastic not only for 

Saskatoon, but for the entire province of Saskatchewan. Our 

children won’t have to travel to other provinces to get the health 

care they deserve. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a group of individuals have worked tirelessly for 

years to make this dream a reality, and if you will bear with me 

for a moment, I want to publicly thank them. The Children’s 

Health & Hospital Foundation board of directors consists of the 

following people: Brynn Boback-Lane, CHHF [Children’s 

Health & Hospital Foundation] president and CEO [chief 

executive officer]; Bryan Richards from the Yanke Group of 

Companies, the Chair of the board of directors; Jim Yuel from 

PIC Investment Group; Rod Bell from McFaull Consulting; 

Marsha Martin from Paul Martin Communications; David 

Katzman, principal, John Lake School; Joe Vidal, Bioriginal 

Food and Science Corporation; Dr. Bill Bingham, RUH [Royal 

University Hospital] department of pediatrics; Dr. Shirley D.D. 

Maltman, family physician; Debra Wiegers, Wiegers Financial 

and Benefits; Mr. Grant Kook, Golden Opportunities Fund and 

Chair of the board, SaskTel; Gene Gerspacher, Bioriginal Food 

and Science Corp.; Lyle Chutskoff, TD Canada Trust; Dr. 

Laurentiu Givelichian, RUH department of pediatrics; Robert 

Hawkins, University of Regina; and Jean Morrison, Saskatoon 

Health Region. 

 

Ladies and gentlemen, a group of people that need 

congratulations, that need to be thanked for their tireless effort 

over the last 10 years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[19:30] 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, Ms. Brynn 

Boback-Lane, the CHHF president, CEO, had this to say about 

the budget: 

 

It’s going to make a world of difference in the pediatric 

health-care environment. It’ll be family focused and [all] 

about the children and their unique needs. 

 

Saskatoon Health Region CEO Maura Davies said: 

 

We’re just thrilled. We’ve been waiting for this day for a 

long time and I think the people of this province have been 

[as well]. 



2502 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2009 

Mr. Speaker, Ms. Davies even said on that day in the legislative 

rotunda that it’s not often that she wants to hug a minister of 

Health but today she wanted to do it. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health sits in front of me. 

There’s often times that I’ve witnessed his eloquence in this 

House, but I don’t think I’ve ever wanted to hug him. But I tell 

you he’s done work, and I tell you in the days that we saw this 

announcement there were many tears, there were many cheers 

when the Finance minister stood up and talked about this 

announcement. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, in all seriousness, this announcement goes 

beyond politics. It’s not about the Sask Party. It’s not about the 

NDP [New Democratic Party]. It’s why we are here — to make 

this place a better province. It’s about why we come to this 

wonderful institution and do the work we do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, 10 years ago, the Children’s Health & Hospital 

Foundation started being very vocal about the need. In 2003 I 

had the opportunity to bring petitions to this legislature. At that 

time I heard members talk about the doubt that they had, that 

this would be duplication. I don’t think, Mr. Speaker, that 

members were against the hospital; they just didn’t understand 

fully the need. 

 

In 2005, our 100th anniversary of our province, the 

Saskatchewan Party came out with a document entitled 100 new 

ideas for a new century. This was a forward, responsible 

looking document. It was one that talked about many ideas that 

the Saskatchewan Party had in opposition, and right there, right 

out front was a commitment to a provincial children’s hospital 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it was frustrating to hear, year after year, 

people would say that Saskatchewan and Prince Edward Island 

were the only jurisdictions in Canada that didn’t have a 

children’s hospital. We took no pride in that comment 

whatsoever, Mr. Speaker. Something we wanted to change very 

quickly when we were in opposition and something we did 

change very quickly when we became government. 

 

Within 16 months of assuming office, we made the necessary 

$200 million commitment. No corners were cut, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker — an amount sufficient enough to build a children’s 

hospital that we can all be proud of. I know that one day, once 

this hospital is built, it will specialize in a certain area, and 

probably welcome children from across the country that will 

come to Saskatchewan for that special medical care that they 

need. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s why we work so hard in Saskatchewan to 

grow our economy, to encourage more people to move here, to 

encourage immigration, to encourage the students to stay in our 

province — so we can afford a better health care system, a 

better quality of life. So that we can fulfill the promises that are 

important to our standard of living in our province, so we can 

indeed build a children’s hospital. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget benefits everyone in our province. 

There are too many investments to name them all, but I want to 

highlight a few: $57.8 million for early learning and child care 

spaces; $24.9 million for the first instalment of a multi-year 

strategy to make improvements in the child welfare system; $18 

million for the active families benefit; $1.6 million to hire 30 

additional police officers, consistent with the election 

commitment for 120 new officers over the four-year period. I 

know my seatmate, the member from Prince Albert Carlton, has 

worked very hard to ensure that we not only meet but exceed 

that commitment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, $1 billion capital programs to schools, hospitals, 

roads, and other infrastructure to make sure that infrastructure 

deficits in this province are a thing of the past, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, we promised to keep 

life affordable for everyone, which is why our government will 

begin an ambitious project to renovate government-subsidized 

rental housing. And we’re building on our promise to help 

senior citizens by increasing the monthly support to help them 

cover rising costs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and I don’t want to overlook municipal revenue 

sharing. We announced that there would be $167.4 million in 

operating grants for municipalities. This is in addition to a $100 

million infrastructure booster shot for municipalities announced 

in February. 

 

We said we would announce a new revenue-sharing deal that 

would provide municipalities with funding tied to our 

own-source revenue. Mr. Speaker, we have indeed kept that 

promise. The new municipal operating grant will provide 

funding equal to 90 per cent of one point of the PST [provincial 

sales tax] this year, and it will be 100 per cent next year. This 

will provide a reliable and predictable revenue stream for 

municipalities which will help them plan for the future. It will 

help them plan for the long term. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, again this shows we are listening. We are 

listening to SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities]. We are listening to SUMA [Saskatchewan 

Urban Municipalities Association]. We are listening to the 

people of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, here’s what the 

people of Saskatchewan are saying, and I quote: 

 

We asked for predictability. We asked for an increase, 

something that was tied to growth. That’s exactly what we 

got. We didn’t get 100 per cent [this year] but we got a 

promise that we’ll get that next year. We’re extremely 

happy with that. 

 

City of Saskatoon comptroller, Kerry Tarasoff. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Alan Thomorat, CEO of the Canadian 

Homebuilders Association, had this to say, and I quote: 

 

“The Provincial Government is fostering job creation that 

will benefit our families and our communities, as well as 

contribute to the future economic growth of our province 

for generations to come. Ensuring that all people in 

Saskatchewan have access to quality careers will help 

sustain the economic momentum that our province is 

experiencing . . . These investments into our province not 

only support and encourage . . . growth, they contribute to 



March 24, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2503 

a strong housing industry and a sustainable housing 

market as well” . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have been listening to the people of 

Saskatchewan We have been listening to what the people want. 

And through this budget, in the city of Saskatoon as well as 

across the province, there are many examples of how people 

have done well in this budget. 

 

NewsTalk Radio reported, and I quote: 

 

Saskatoon’s mayor Don Atchison is very happy with the 

numbers and initiatives announced today. Mr. Atchison 

went on to say it’s “. . . been a huge step, truly 

monumental in the sense of provincial government 

acknowledging what cities have been asking for and so 

this has been very, very good news for us.” 

 

Don Atchison, mayor of Saskatoon, March 18, 2009. 

 

Again to quote: 

 

Atchison also says the $200 million announced for the 

new Saskatoon children’s hospital will be a huge benefit to 

many, many families. 

 

Another quote, Mr. Speaker, from the Saskatoon police chief, 

Clive Weighill: 

 

The Saskatoon Police Service will deploy . . . [more 

officers] this year to deal with the city’s most dangerous 

. . . [criminals] thanks to a bump in funding in the 

provincial . . . [government]. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Weighill went on to say: 

 

“We’re very pleased . . . We . . . have a growing 

population . . . in our community, so we want to make sure 

that we have the resources to keep an eye on what’s going 

on.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, my home city, the city of Saskatoon, has done 

very well in this budget. Saskatoon has done very well indeed 

by this Saskatchewan Party government. 

 

I just want to highlight some of the things that have happened in 

Saskatoon in 16 short months. I’ve spoken already about the 

$200 million for the children’s hospital; $23.3 million to 

accelerate twinning of Highway 11, completing the twinning 

from Saskatoon to Prince Albert in four years; $15.7 million for 

the international vaccine centre at the University of 

Saskatchewan; $5 million towards a $27 million total cost of 

the renovation, expansion Saskatoon Queen Bench’s Court 

House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on. There’s many, many areas 

that I would like to talk about. We can talk about the extra 

funding for the Queen Elizabeth power plant that I had the 

chance to announce a few days ago. $15 million for 400 new 

on-campus residence spaces at the University of Saskatchewan. 

That was a great announcement, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It was 

fantastic to be there to join the Minister of Social Services, to 

join the Minister of Advanced Education, to talk about 

something that was long overdone. The need was there for a 

long period of time, and we certainly have addressed it. 

 

I’d like to go on and on, but in order to give everyone an 

opportunity to talk about this historic budget, I will just leave it 

for another speech at another time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in speaking to constituents, and whether it’s in the 

coffee shops throughout Silver Springs, in the grocery stores, at 

the hockey rinks, at the soccer centres, there’s one thing that, a 

common theme that people have told me. They’ve said, your 

government, our government, the Saskatchewan Party 

government has the fortitude to make decisions, and we’re 

getting things done. Not only do we talk about ideas and goals 

and set the goals that we want going forward, we also, we also 

have the ability to make those decisions in a quick and concise 

manner. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in closing I want to refer to the title of the budget 

again, Saskatchewan: Strong and Steady. This title 

encompasses what we delivered in the 2009-2010 budget. 

Today our government has set a course, a strong and steady 

course, for Saskatchewan. We’ll stay strong and steady through 

the meaningful tax reductions, the largest education property 

tax reduction in Saskatchewan history. 

 

We’ll stay strong and steady through meaningful infrastructure 

projects which keep our province working and keep our 

economy moving forward, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

We’ll stay strong and steady through meaningful investments in 

all Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, in families and students, 

in children and seniors, in First Nations and Métis people, in 

those from rural, and in those from urban Saskatchewan. 

 

I want to end with a quote from a news release from the 

Canadian Homebuilders Association. And I quote: 

 

The Canadian Homebuilders Association — Saskatchewan 

commends the Provincial Government for their foresight 

and initiative in providing property tax relief which will 

benefit . . . Saskatchewan residents who wish to work and 

remain in our province, or move to Saskatchewan to enjoy 

our wonderful quality of life. The Association applauds 

the Provincial Government for the support and efforts to 

address housing needs in our province and looks forward 

to increased partnership with the Government of 

Saskatchewan so that we continue building homes, 

building communities, and building our province. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this has indeed been a ringing 

endorsement for the Minister of Finance. It’s been a ringing 

endorsement for members on this side of the House and, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, it’s been a strong and steady beacon for those 

who call Saskatchewan home. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll be voting in favour of the budget. 

I’ll be voting against the amendment. And I thank you for this 

opportunity to address the budget today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 



2504 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2009 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege to 

stand tonight and be able to enter into the debate on the budget, 

Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to be able to speak this evening. 

I often do get the chance, Mr. Speaker, to have the opportunity 

to speak in the legislature, something that I know every MLA 

enjoys and truly does see as a privilege. 

 

But I think too often in the busyness of the day, the busyness of 

the months as they go by, we forget to pause and thank those 

that support us and truly do contribute in very meaningful ways 

in terms of how we as MLAs end up in this legislature, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

On that note, I would like to take a moment to thank my wife, 

Ruth, who is a wonderful person, very strong and supportive 

and kind — someone who’s not overly partisan most of the time 

but someone who is guided by common sense and who I truly 

rely on. 

 

I also want to thank my family, Mr. Speaker, my parents and 

my siblings. I’m very fortunate to be in a family that I like, and 

they like me most of the time. And also with my 

brothers-in-law, also my in-laws as well — a great group of 

people who I really do value. 

 

[19:45] 

 

I was very fortunate, Mr. Speaker, when I was elected, to in a 

sense inherit the existing constituency assistant that had been 

serving Massey Place for some time. And I would like to say 

thank you to Donna Rederburg who is the daily face of who I 

am in the constituency so often, as constituents come in and 

seek assistance and guidance on issues. And she serves them so 

well in a very patient and knowledgeable way. 

 

I also want to thank Ruben, Bev, and Keli — casual 

constituency assistants who help out from time to time when we 

need their assistance. 

 

Friends are also a very important part for anyone in political 

life, Mr. Speaker. And I want to take a moment to thank my 

good friend, Linsay Martens, who provides me with a lot of 

support, guidance, friendship, and advice, and someone whose 

comments I truly do appreciate and treasure. 

 

Last group I’d like to thank, Mr. Speaker, are the constituents of 

Saskatoon Massey Place, some who are my neighbours and 

friends and others who I know only through being an MLA. 

I’ve truly enjoyed being a Member of the Legislative Assembly, 

Mr. Speaker, and having the opportunity to get to know these 

individuals better. And I look forward to working with them for 

many years to come, I hope. 

 

Looking at the budget, Mr. Speaker, I’d first, before I get into 

some specifics, I’d like to talk about some of what I see as the 

troubling signs around this budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I know that in a time of global economic uncertainty, the 

constituents of Saskatoon Massey Place want to know that there 

is a government on their side and working for them. And 

unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, my constituents are not reassured of 

that at this point in time. 

 

What we’ve seen in this budget, Mr. Speaker, is an emphasis 

and a focus for short-term gain with what I see, Mr. Speaker, as 

potential long-term pain. When we look at the approach that the 

Sask Party government has taken on this budget, there are a 

number of concerning aspects to this budget, as I would see it, 

that I know in speaking with constituents and speaking with 

people outside of my constituency, there’s been a number of 

concerns that they’ve voiced to me in what they have seen in 

this budget that we’re discussing tonight. 

 

The one aspect, the first aspect I’d like to speak about, Mr. 

Speaker, is growth projections that I see as overly optimistic. 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s not my opinion alone on this matter; it’s 

really the opinion of many people in Saskatchewan and in 

Canada. 

 

If we look at the growth projections that the Sask Party 

government used for this budget, we see a Ministry of Finance 

projection, Mr. Speaker, of 2.1 per cent growth for 2009. So 2.1 

per cent, Ministry of Finance, Mr. Speaker. So we ask 

ourselves, well this is what the ministry’s estimate is, and there 

are certainly many talented individuals working in the ministry, 

Mr. Speaker, and they provide a great deal of good advice. 

 

It’s important though, Mr. Speaker, to always balance one 

group’s opinion with other individuals’. And in this instance, 

Mr. Speaker, I think it would be appropriate to look at what the 

private sector average is; their projection for growth during the 

same period of time. And for this what we see, Mr. Speaker, is 

that the private sector average of eight institutions is 1.0 per 

cent. So we see a difference right away of more than double as 

to what the average of the private sector institutions are saying. 

 

At the time that the budget was developed and this document 

was developed, Mr. Speaker, events in the world continued to 

unfold on a daily basis, and changes continued to happen. Since 

the point in time where the average from the eight private 

institutions was taken, Mr. Speaker, of 1.0 per cent growth, 

there have actually been revised projections for growth by these 

eight institutions. And that revised amount as of March 18, Mr. 

Speaker, was 0.63 per cent. 

 

So what we see is a revised private sector average of 0.63 per 

cent, and we see the Sask Party basing growth projections for 

the economy based on 2.1 per cent, more than three times 

higher than what the most recent private sector average would 

indicate as being an appropriate approach for going forward. So 

this is one of the first troubling aspects, Mr. Speaker, that I see 

about the budget. 

 

Coupled with the aspect of what I see as overly optimistic 

growth projections, we see spending going up considerably, Mr. 

Speaker. We see spending in this budget going up 12.4 per cent. 

Twelve point four per cent in this proposed budget combined 

with 10 per cent in the previous budget, Mr. Speaker, is a 

pattern that I know many people, in speaking with them, have 

voiced to me some questions about the sustainability of that 

approach. 

 

In voicing those concerns, those same individuals used 

examples from our province’s past when there have been 



March 24, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2505 

administrations that have pursued that type of spending at the 

same time when we’re experiencing concerns about growth 

projections. And it’s a deadly combination, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we’ve looked at the overly optimistic growth projections of 

the government, using projections three times higher than the 

private sector average. We’ve looked at spending, which was 10 

per cent increase last year and 12.4 per cent in this budget. 

What we also see is debt increasing by nearly $1 billion, Mr. 

Speaker, and clearly taking on that kind of debt has serious 

implications for the province in the years to come, something 

that needs to be considered. 

 

We see public debt increase by 36 per cent over the next four 

years. So when we’re looking at the aspects of the budget, I 

think it’s very useful and helpful to keep these initial points in 

mind. 

 

With the increased spending that we have seen, Mr. Speaker, 

this pattern over the last couple of years, it is curious when 

looking at many of the projections for spending increases that 

have been suggested by the Sask Party in years past, this is a 

deviation from remarks that were earlier made. In many ways, 

Mr. Speaker, not unlike what we’ve seen in other parts of the 

country where we’ve seen the federal government with the 

Harper Conservatives, where they have in recent months gone 

away from positions that they have held for many, many years, 

Mr. Speaker, leaving many to wonder, what are the core 

principles operating in the party? What is the guiding measure 

that the government is using at the point in time? Leaving many 

to scratch their heads wondering if in fact the government has 

the best interests of the people, of the province, and the country 

in mind. 

 

In ignoring what I see, Mr. Speaker, as reliable projections by 

the eight private sector institutions, Mr. Speaker, by 

disregarding those numbers and that average and instead relying 

on one average that is out of sync with what the majority of 

private sector individuals are saying, so relying on the private 

sector is certainly an approach that the Sask Party does not 

criticize in general. They can understand the merit of relying on 

more individuals with coming from different backgrounds. 

 

But this ability to suspend advice, suspend advice that they are 

receiving and to not pay attention to it, Mr. Speaker, reminded 

me of another parallel with the Harper Conservatives when we 

saw the complete denial, Mr. Speaker, of Minister Flaherty in 

admitting that the economic situation in Canada was troubling, 

that there were problems, that we were going to be affected by 

happenings around the world but to the south of us as well, Mr. 

Speaker. It was to me a parallel and a similar situation, that 

where we see an ignoring of private sector averages for 

projected growth. So, Mr. Speaker, those are some of what I see 

as the troubling points about the budget. 

 

In a time of global economic uncertainty, Mr. Speaker, I was 

listening to a science documentary a few months ago in the car 

as I was driving down to Regina on some given day. And this 

science documentary was talking about an island in the South 

Pacific, a beautiful location with beautiful resources, clean 

water, many positive things going for it, with a good group of 

people living on the island. 

 

Despite, Mr. Speaker, the good resources that it had and the 

beautiful location and the many things going for it, Mr. 

Speaker, what they’ve been experiencing on this island over the 

past years is, because of the ocean currents, the garbage that 

ends up in the ocean, the position of this island is bringing a 

number of ocean currents and bringing the garbage on to the 

beaches of that island, Mr. Speaker. So while it is in many ways 

a paradise and has many things going for it, it now finds itself 

to be, its beaches filled with litter which is now contaminating 

the environment, affecting the wildlife. 

 

In the past months, Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard the Sask Party 

talk about how Saskatchewan is an island and how we are an 

example for the rest of the world and, Mr. Speaker, there are 

certainly many true aspects about that. While, Mr. Speaker, we 

do not have coconuts and palm trees here in the province, we 

have beautiful prairie, we have pristine lakes, we have talented, 

quality people that live here and are building their lives. 

 

In the same way though, Mr. Speaker, while we have many 

things going for us just like this small island in the South 

Pacific, we cannot ignore the fact that there are global currents 

at play that will have an influence and impact on where we live. 

It will have an impact, an influence on our economy, on our 

social environment, and certainly an influence on the 

happenings of this legislature. And my fear, Mr. Speaker, is that 

while there are certainly many great things going on in the 

province right now, and while we have been a place of great 

momentum, my fear, Mr. Speaker, is that the members opposite 

are not cognizant of the global currents that will inevitably have 

an influence in our province. 

 

So when we look at when we’re in a time of global economic 

uncertainty, Mr. Speaker, when we see the Fiscal Stabilization 

Fund — or whatever it was renamed by the Sask Party, the 

Growth and Financial Security Fund — when we see that a fund 

that was at about $2 billion depleted to about $1 billion, Mr. 

Speaker, as these global currents are swirling around us, to me, 

Mr. Speaker, and to my constituents, that is a concerning issue. 

That at the same time as the ramping up of spending, one has to 

ask, one has to question as to whether or not the approach 

outlined is sustainable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the midst of this economic uncertainty, we’ve 

also seen some recent comments that would cause me to pause 

and wonder as well. I think it was last week or maybe earlier 

this week, when the Ag minister was commenting on the 

budget, and he used the expression open for business. 

 

Well certainly on this side of the House no one can doubt the 

official opposition’s commitment to growing a strong province 

and growing a strong economy in co-operation with the people 

of Saskatchewan. You can look at the implementation of the 

Vicq report and so many other examples. But that phrase, open 

for business, Mr. Speaker, harkened back to a time when I was 

not directly involved in politics, but was certainly paying 

attention. 

 

And I know when we’re talking about flags, that phrase brings 

back certain memories for the people in this province, to a time 

when advice from private sector forecasters was not heeded, a 

time when spending was being ramped up, Mr. Speaker, a time 

when the actions of government were not in fact in the best 



2506 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2009 

interests of Saskatchewan people. So I found the use of that 

expression, Mr. Speaker, open for business, to be a little 

curious. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’ve talked about some of the initial troubling 

signs I see about this budget. I’ve talked about the current state 

of global economic uncertainty that we as Saskatchewan people 

find ourselves in. 

 

Another area I’d like to talk about, Mr. Speaker, is the area 

where it affects perhaps the people of my constituency the most. 

And, Mr. Speaker, that’s the area where sadly many of my 

constituents are paying more and getting less. 

 

We can look at a number of examples. One example in coming 

off of one of the coldest and longest winters that we’ve had in 

this province for some time, Mr. Speaker, when furnaces were 

cranked up and houses were trying to be kept toasty warm, Mr. 

Speaker, we saw very expensive utility rates over this winter. 

And I know for many of my constituents that has been a 

problem. For them, what life under the Sask Party government 

has meant for them is the fact that they’re paying more and 

getting less. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to back up the experience of my constituents, we 

can look at what the daily from Thursday, March 19, 2009, 

states about the consumer price index in Saskatchewan. And it 

says, “Consumers in Saskatchewan paid 2.6% more on average 

in February . . .” The highest rate increase in the country, Mr. 

Speaker. And explaining why there was that increase, Mr. 

Speaker, it says, “In Saskatchewan, a major factor was a 22.4% 

rise in natural gas prices.” So, Mr. Speaker, what we see, when 

it comes to utility rates and when it comes to how it affects 

Saskatchewan people, we see that they’re paying more and 

getting less. 

 

[20:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also see some proposed changes in this budget 

on the issue of fairness, what I see as a lack of fairness in 

property tax changes, Mr. Speaker. The changes that the Sask 

Party has brought in on property tax do not affect people in this 

province the same. And the member from Silver Springs was 

talking about this not too long ago, Mr. Speaker. But we can see 

how the proposed changes in this budget will affect people 

differently in different parts of the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This example that this chart and table that I’m reading off of, 

Mr. Speaker, I pulled off of the ministry’s own website this 

afternoon. Individuals who are watching at home are welcome 

to go to the ministry website, look at the PDF [portable 

document format] and see this for themselves, Mr. Speaker, and 

the name of the table is example of education property tax 

savings, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So let’s start with one of the first examples. The property is 

listed as Canora residential, so I believe this would be in the 

constituency of the Education minister, Mr. Speaker. The 

change in tax levy percentage for a Canora residential home, 

according to this sheet, Mr. Speaker, that is provided by the 

ministry, is a decrease of 48.0 per cent, 48.0 per cent on a 

residential home in Canora. 

 

So let’s continue looking at some examples here. We look at a 

Swift Current residential home in the Premier’s constituency. 

It’s not 48 per cent reduction, Mr. Speaker, but it’s a 14.2 per 

cent. So not as high as Canora, but 14.2 per cent. When we look 

at the ministry’s own chart that I pulled off of the website this 

afternoon, Mr. Speaker, we see Saskatoon residential, a 

reduction of 3.3 per cent, Mr. Speaker. So not 48 per cent, not 

14.2 per cent. According to the ministry’s own chart that I took 

off the website this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, a reduction of 3.3 

per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for my constituents, if you factor in the municipal 

increases that they may be experiencing this coming year, I’m 

not convinced, Mr. Speaker, that individuals will see a 

reduction in taxes. Moreover combined with aspects of 

reassessment — particularly as it affects individuals in 

Saskatoon Massey Place where we have seen an increase in 

value of homes compared to other neighbourhoods — we 

combine that, Mr. Speaker, reassessment with this, I’m not 

convinced that individuals will see a significant change. So 

clearly, in terms of paying more and getting less, when it comes 

to fairness and property tax changes, Mr. Speaker, not everyone 

— especially people in Saskatoon, especially people in 

Saskatoon Massey Place — not everyone is treated the same, 

Mr. Speaker. I know that is a concern for my constituents. 

 

That affects individuals who are low income living in my 

constituency. That affects the many renters who, their rental 

rates are increased because of property tax changes. That affects 

seniors living on a fixed income, Mr. Speaker, who one time 

were perhaps able to buy the home because it was a much lower 

value. They’ve managed to maintain that home over the years, 

but now they’re on a fixed income and they’re struggling. 

Combined with paying more and getting less for the utilities 

that they’ve experienced over this winter, combined with an 

unfair application of property tax changes, Mr. Speaker, for 

many of them it means they’re paying more and getting less. 

 

If you’re a single mother making less than $25,000 per year, the 

government’s intercity comparison indicates that you are worse 

off under this budget, Mr. Speaker. So these are some of the 

major and the larger issues that we’ve seen with this paying 

more and getting less theme. 

 

There have been other examples, Mr. Speaker. We also see 

under this Sask Party government the issue of camping fees. 

Now someone might say, well that’s a minor issue; it’s not the 

most bread and butter issue. But, Mr. Speaker, people care 

about camping in this province. The fact, Mr. Speaker, that this 

Sask Party government would justify increases to their camping 

fees, and the minister using the most bizarre rationale 

imaginable, that somehow this would allow individuals in the 

province to appreciate their parks more, Mr. Speaker, I know to 

my constituents is more than puzzling. 

 

But we’ve also heard discussions, Mr. Speaker, in terms of 

paying more and getting less, with the issue of the possibility of 

removing actual people, actual SaskTel operators for dealing 

with directory assistance, Mr. Speaker. It’s sometimes these 

little issues, Mr. Speaker, that most annoy constituents. And I 

know many of my constituents are frustrated or are concerned 

about that prospect. For them, it’s paying more and getting less 

service, Mr. Speaker, not to mention the important jobs here in 



March 24, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2507 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Another example, Mr. Speaker, that is a current topic that we 

have been discussing in the news, there has been some 

discussion about an enhanced driver’s licence. And the Sask 

Party, once they were, once it was identified that this was a 

problem, reversed their position, Mr. Speaker, but they were 

absolutely clearly going ahead down this path. They had spent 

over $700,000 on this prospect, Mr. Speaker. More than kicking 

tires, I would suggest, Mr. Speaker. When you spend close to 

$1 million on a plan, there was clearly an intent to implement it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, think about in the same days as we have heard, 

we’ve heard announcements about HIV [human 

immunodeficiency virus] rates in the Aboriginal population in 

this province. When we’ve talked about overcrowding in the 

Westside Community Clinic, Mr. Speaker, think how far almost 

$1 million would go in addressing some of those issues, Mr. 

Speaker. And instead what we see is the Sask Party reversing a 

policy once they, in a sense, once they are caught in going 

down a path that may not be appropriate for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I want to touch on a couple areas of my critic duties, Mr. 

Speaker, where clearly individual students, constituents are 

paying more and getting less. We look at the area of tuition, Mr. 

Speaker. For many years, there’s been a fully funded NDP 

tuition freeze in this province that’s supported by students. 

We’ve seen a retreat from that position, Mr. Speaker. We’ve 

seen a decision by the members opposite to insist that students 

pay more for education. We see, on an average, a 3 per cent 

increase in tuition. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that 3 per cent — in the same way that 

property tax is being applied unevenly to people in this 

province — that 3 per cent is going to affect students in 

different ways. It might affect some, the 3 per cent. Others, Mr. 

Speaker, may be affected a lot more. Individuals in professional 

colleges might be dealing with increases far beyond 3 per cent. 

As individuals are looking at summer employment, looking on 

making arrangements for acquiring more debt to pay for a more 

expensive education, Mr. Speaker, they deserve to know how 

much their education is going up. 

 

Another area with my critic duties, Mr. Speaker, is the grad 

retention program. What I’ve seen, Mr. Speaker, when the Sask 

Party brought in this program to replace the previous NDP grad 

tax exemption, we saw two serious blunders that the Sask Party 

made. First one was excluding people from out of province. 

They realized their error, Mr. Speaker, and they changed that 

program to expand it to all people. And now we see the Premier 

and the minister going out to other provinces and touting this 

plan — which was effectively doing the same thing that the 

NDP plan was already doing — as a great way and a great 

reason to come to the province. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, when they go to other provinces, they need 

to tell the people that they’re talking with to read the fine print, 

Mr. Speaker. Because if they’re talking to certain people at job 

fairs in Toronto, if they’re talking to a physiotherapist who has 

a master’s degree, if they’re talking to a nurse practitioner who 

has a master’s degree, if they’re talking to a recent M.B.A. 

[Master of Business Administration] graduate, Mr. Speaker, 

those individuals will not get the rebate. The Premier and the 

minister need to be very clear when they’re talking to people 

out of province that there is a problem. They need to fix the 

problem at home with their own program, and then they can 

shop it around if they think that’s appropriate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s a sad irony when we talk about our knowledge economy, 

when we talk about needing individuals to fuel our economy to 

provide much-needed services, to exclude some of the most 

talented and trained people from all over the country and from 

right here in Saskatchewan, to exclude those people from a 

program, Mr. Speaker. It is a sad irony and it is a mistake. And 

the Sask Party government needs to reverse that position. 

 

As I conclude, Mr. Speaker, I want to once again thank the 

many, many people in Saskatoon Massey Place who over the 

past months have provided me with guidance and support — 

the people who are friends and the people who aren’t friends 

but still provide me with guidance and advice along the way. I 

truly do appreciate it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Because of the conversations and my relationships with these 

people, Mr. Speaker, I know that in times of economic 

uncertainty, my constituents want prudent and wise fiscal 

managers in government. Sadly what we see in this budget is 

runaway spending and overly optimistic projections — 

projections, Mr. Speaker, that are out of sync with the average 

of eight private sector institutions. That’s concerning. 

 

Given the nature of the times we live in, that causes me to be 

concerned and that causes individuals in Saskatoon Massey 

Place to be concerned. At the same time as spending is being 

ramped up, we see more and more expenses being forced on 

Saskatchewan people. We see uneven property tax with 

Saskatoon being treated unfairly, especially people in 

Saskatoon Massey Place. We see utility rates going up. We see 

Saskatchewan now having the highest rate of inflation. We see 

tuition fees being hiked. We see park fees being raised. We see 

a graduate retention program that continues to leave many 

people out. 

 

Sadly we see the opposite of what our province needs right 

now. In times of global economic uncertainty, people want to 

know that their government is on their side and working for 

them. Mr. Speaker, that’s my commitment to the good people of 

Saskatoon Massey Place. And because I’m on their side and 

working for them, I will not be supporting this budget. 

 

This budget does not recognize the global economic uncertainty 

we find ourselves in, and it forces too many of my constituents 

to pay more and get less. For this reason, I will not be 

supporting the budget motion, but I will instead be supporting 

the amendment. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Moose Jaw North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It certainly is 

a pleasure to be here tonight to address some of the issues of the 

budget, especially in prime time. And now that we’ve got the 

new lights in here, it makes it a lot brighter, so the people at 



2508 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2009 

home can enjoy this a lot more. But you know, Mr. Speaker, we 

really didn’t need the lights to know that there’s a lot more 

brightness on this side of the House than there is on that side of 

the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget is a very important. It’s a very 

worthwhile, a very good document. And I want to, I want to just 

comment and commend the people on this side of the House for 

the guidance that the caucus has done, the ministry that have 

put all this work into this document and made it what it is. And 

I want to especially thank the Minister of Finance who has put 

this together. 

 

In fact the Minister of Finance and myself went to Moose Jaw 

this morning for a couple of presentations to the good people of 

Moose Jaw to just clarify some of the budgets. And the reports 

we got from the constituents of Moose Jaw and the people of 

Moose Jaw was, it was a very favourable document and a lot of 

good, positive comments. 

 

When I look at the budget, Mr. Speaker, I can’t help but think 

it’s much like what the province was like when it was first 

becoming a province, a little better than 100 years ago, when 

the people came from all over the world to make Saskatchewan 

their home. 

 

They were coming from a place where life wasn’t as good, and 

they wanted to change what they had. They come with their 

dreams, Mr. Speaker, their determination, their enthusiasm, 

wanting a better life for them, for themselves, and their 

children. It was a new beginning, a new start, an opportunity — 

an opportunity to work and to grow and to realize the wealth of 

a new nation and a new province. It was a huge step for many 

of them, yet they could see a bright future. It was a new 

beginning and they didn’t want to go back. 

 

This is much like prior to the provincial election in 2007, when 

people wanted change from what they had. They had their 

dreams. They had — they were determined — their 

determination and enthusiasm. They wanted a better life for 

them and their children, a new start, a new beginning, an 

opportunity. And it was a huge step for many of them as they 

could see a bright, new future. It was a new beginning, and 

we’re not going back. 

 

No, Mr. Speaker, we’re not going back. The people of 

Saskatchewan are enjoying richer and more fulfilling lives now 

than they did 16 months ago, and we’re not going back. Mr. 

Speaker, there’s more optimism in the province than there was 

16 months ago, and we’re not going back. 

 

Just after the election I talked to some of the CBOs 

[community-based organization] and they sit down with me and 

they said, Warren, we need help here. We’re sitting here and 

we’re losing staff because we can’t afford to pay them what the 

going rate is. We are forced to feed our people, the people that 

we’re trying to look after, for $4 and change a day to feed them. 

They weren’t looked after, Mr. Speaker. This government 

looked after them and they adjusted the rates. And, Mr. 

Speaker, they don’t want to go back. 

 

Seniors are now being dignified after 16 years of neglect — 

seniors that have worked the land and have developed this 

province in so many ways. They’ve put a lot into it. And with 

the senior income plan where we doubled the amount of money 

these seniors were getting. Mr. Speaker, they don’t want to go 

back. 

 

Our youth and our graduates in schools and secondary 

education institutions no longer have to leave this province for 

their future. But you know, Mr. Speaker, they are coming back. 

Our young people are now realizing that the opportunities are 

here. The benefits for a positive future can be attained right here 

in their home province. 

 

[20:15] 

 

This province is leading the nation in growth in all economic 

forecasts. Just last Wednesday, the wholesale trade numbers 

were released, and Saskatchewan had the highest percentage 

increase in the nation. From January 2009 compared to January 

2008, we were up by 14 per cent on a seasonally adjusted basis. 

This was the highest increase among the provinces, surpassing 

the 7.8 decline reported for the rest of the nation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are more investment opportunities for 

business and more employment opportunities in this province. 

The attitude for people is becoming more enthusiastic than it 

has been for decades. And, Mr. Speaker, we don’t want to go 

back. We don’t want to return to a poor attitude with doubtful 

thinking and a tired, old, negative government that had made 

poor, costly investments — costly investments like Navigata, 

$43 million loss; SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility 

Development Company], $35 million loss; and Retx.com was 

$26 million loss. 

 

And yet we’ve got a member on the opposite side of the House 

from Massey Place, just before me, that said, and I quote, how 

far 1 million dollars could go. And he’s talking about needle 

exchange. And that’s the money that they lost in their . . . 

[inaudible] . . . Mr. Speaker, we don’t want to go back to that. 

 

In fact their record is a dismal record of bad decisions and poor 

judgment, millions of dollars lost in failed ventures with 

Saskatchewan people’s money, and a mindset of fear. That’s 

right, Mr. Speaker. Fear is really all what they had. And they 

attempted that in the last election. Yes, they did. And they 

haven’t learned yet because they still think this fear factor is 

going to rejuvenate them. We’re not going back there, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

They’re saying revenue is unsustainable; it’s unrealistic. Mr. 

Speaker, I’d like to suggest that those 20 people on the other 

side of the House, if they really think that the revenues are out 

that much, let’s take their refund from the income tax that we 

have provided for the lower income tax and return it to the 

treasury if they’re that . . . 

 

When we did these estimates, we did it from the best estimates 

from the potash industry. We went around the province, and we 

went to industries all over and said, what are the forecasts? And 

this is what the best estimates were. And we can trust these 

people because this is their business. In fact, Mr. Speaker, the 

potash industry is investing, ready to invest 7 billion — $7 

billion in potash expansions in this province. We don’t want to 

go back. This is a realistic government, Mr. Speaker. And if for 



March 24, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2509 

some reasons revenues didn’t come up to what our expectations 

were, obviously we’d have to make some adjustments. But 

we’re not going back there. 

 

Our government has and is working hard for the people of this 

province. And the people of the province are seeing the positive 

results, and we’re not going back. All of Canada is noticing 

this, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan is doing this on a balanced 

budget. And they’re looking at us as the leaders — the leaders 

where we should be. We’re leading in most economic sectors. 

 

In fact just two weeks ago I was listening to the Roy Green 

Show — it’s a national radio show through the Corus Radio 

network — and listed our Premier as, and I quote, “a bright, 

young, articulate politician that gets it.” And I thought that 

really hit the nail on the head, and that’s going coast-to-coast. 

So there’s a lot of respect for this province, a lot of respect for 

our Premier and what we’re doing in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for Saskatchewan to grow economically, our 

infrastructure needed to be improved. Our government started 

to repair roads and highways to get products to markets and to 

get supplies to our farms and our village and our manufacturing 

plants. We needed road systems to get people to market centres 

and to schools and to hospitals. We needed schools to educate 

our children. 

 

And it’s funny, when we look at prioritizing the needs for 

repairing the schools, the one way you can do it is count the 

buckets in the hall when it rains to see which one needs it the 

most. That’s how bad the infrastructure has been. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we need a health system that looks at the needs of 

the sick, and the social system to care for the underprivileged. 

 

Now we’ve got leadership. We’ve got foresight. We’ve got 

enthusiasm. And we’ve got positive thinking. This new 

government has . . . and provided a better living for all 

Saskatchewan people. And we don’t want to go back, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Through debt reduction paydown, we’ve paid $2.6 billion. 

That’s 40 per cent of the debt in one year, Mr. Speaker, saving 

millions of dollars in interest payments. And we’re not going 

back there. 

 

We’ve made historical tax cuts, the largest personal income tax 

cuts in provincial history. We’re not going back. Enhancement 

of social programs by raising personal exemptions, increasing 

child tax credits. This government took 80,000 people off the 

tax roll, and we’re not going back. 

 

For those that have low-income jobs, we increased the 

Saskatchewan employment supplement as well as the income 

levels for those who qualify. And they don’t want to go back. 

We’ve addressed shelter rates and rental supplements for 

low-income people in our province. We’ve doubled the seniors’ 

income plan within the province, something that hadn’t been 

looked for for 16 years, and those seniors don’t want to go 

back. 

 

Mr. Speaker, by doing more for the people, we’re seeing 

population increases and strong employment, and Saskatchewan 

is expected to continue leading the country in economic growth 

this year. It’s a great time to be in Saskatchewan. So much has 

been improved in 16 short months, and we’re not going back. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is not immune to the economic 

turmoil. Fortunately this province is now positioned to 

withstand economic insecurities. This is being accomplished by 

investing in infrastructure, lowering taxes, and doing it with a 

balanced budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Michelson: — We’re looking after the people of 

Saskatchewan. At a time when others are experiencing 

economic decline, we’re forecasting economic growth. We’re 

looking for workers and showing an increase in employment 

figures. And so, Mr. Speaker, we move on forwardly, 

optimistically but cautious. 

 

This budget is balanced with a forecast supplement of $424 

million while improving the benefits for Saskatchewan people. 

 

After a record year of infrastructure investment, our 

government will dedicate another $1 billion for infrastructure in 

schools, health care facilities, highways, agriculture, and 

affordable housing. At last after 60 years of property owners 

funding a disproportionate high share of education costs, a new 

solution is being implemented. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Michelson: — It has been said before but it’s worth saying 

again, this is the largest education property tax cut in a single 

year in our province’s history, and children are still going to 

receive proper education. In fact in my home constituency of 

Moose Jaw, we will receive anywhere from a 15 to 30 per cent 

discount in property taxes. And we’re not going back. 

 

At last a municipal revenue-sharing deal has been developed, 

something the municipalities have been asking for for years. 

And this is a huge benefit for municipalities, on top of the 

economic booster shot of $108 per resident. The new revenue 

sharing will be tied to the province’s own-source revenue. 

 

We’re supplying 30 more police officers. We’re expanding and 

creating more spaces for those with disabilities. Additional 

funding for community-based organizations — $27 million, Mr. 

Speaker. One thousand new child care spaces in Saskatchewan; 

$12 million for programs and training for learning and child 

care workers. Twenty-three million dollars to enable 

universities to limit tuition increases. Training seats expansions 

for doctors and nurses. Supporting for farmers and ranchers — 

$100 million to fully fund AgriStability and AgriInvest 

programs. A strong and steady Saskatchewan future keeping 

life affordable. And we’re not going back. 

 

Moose Jaw is another very aggressive community, which I’m 

very proud to reside in, Mr. Speaker. And we’re keeping on 

moving. We recently passed a referendum that will clear the 

way for a brand new downtown multiplex. There’s a substantial 

investment proposed for the revitalization of a development on 

River Street, as well as plans for Temple Gardens and other 

ideas of major development in Moose Jaw. The economic 



2510 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2009 

booster shot will positively assist improvements to my city of 

Moose Jaw. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the $450,000 investment announced last week is 

taking the next step in upgrades to the Union Hospital. Now 

capital planning can take place. This funding will allow the Five 

Hills Health Region to look at options to address deficiencies 

and to determine what services the new facility would need to 

provide. 

 

It would also address the scope and estimated cost with various 

potential options. The planning process will involve gathering 

information on service flows, population trends, and includes 

stakeholder discussions to determine services needed and 

facility requirements. From there additional planning will be 

completed on the facility layout, which includes site planning 

and facility design. The process will include research and 

assessment of the best practice in acute facility design. 

 

By taking the necessary steps to do this important work, our 

government will ensure a state-of-the-art facility is designed for 

the people of the Five Hills Health Region. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve read the amendment. I’ve looked at it. I’ve 

studied it as hard as I could. And to me, the amendment is 

somewhat meaningless. The amendment lacks vision and lacks 

direction. 

 

When I look at this budget, this budget provides more money 

for health care, more money for health professional training. It 

provides more money for municipalities and social programs 

and schools, more money for agriculture producers, and money 

in the pockets of the people of Saskatchewan. It’s a budget 

designed to keep Saskatchewan’s economy strong and steady. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I look at this, I urge everyone in the House 

to grow Saskatchewan and to support the budget as presented. 

We don’t want to go back. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to stand in my place tonight and participate in this 

budget debate. I’m seeing it’s 8:30. I don’t know, it’s quite a 

number of months since I’ve had an opportunity to address the 

House on any topic, and I don’t know how I’m possibly going 

to get all of this material into a 20-minute speech. But I’m 

going to try, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because we’ve got some 

important things to say tonight, particularly as this budget 

affects the people of Saskatchewan, and more specifically how 

it benefits the people of Cypress Hills. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m going to reflect a little bit. I might be a bit 

nostalgic as I do this, but I went home for supper tonight — I 

live close enough in session that I can walk back and forth — 

and as I was coming back to this grand old building after a 

break at suppertime, I was thinking about how very fortunate I 

am, how fortunate we are as individuals, to be able to 

participate in this type of activity in this great hall of tradition. 

 

This building is a wonderful facility. It’s got tremendous 

history, and there are only a very few of us, over the life of this 

province, that have had the benefit of standing in their places 

and addressing the issues of importance to the people of 

Saskatchewan. And for that reason we are blessed and 

fortunate. 

 

And I had somebody comment the other day — I believe it was 

a constituent who actually came to the legislature for the budget 

presentation — when he commented again about the 

importance of this building, this institution to the democratic 

tradition of this great province. And I’m very pleased and proud 

to have been here now a decade. I can’t believe how fast that 

time has flown, but it will be 10 years this June that I was first 

elected on behalf of the people of Cypress Hills to come here 

and represent their interests. 

 

[20:30] 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to recognize a few people tonight. I 

want to recognize the Minister of Finance and his staff and 

those who helped craft this budget. I want to recognize my 

colleagues because, you know, we are a family and we really 

enjoy each other’s company. We spend a lot of time together 

and we work together. And I want to salute each of my 

colleagues who contributes in his or her own way to the success 

of the Saskatchewan Party government and to our daily 

achievements in this legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to also just talk briefly about this budget, 

and then I’m going to go digress slightly and talk about my 

constituents and the people who I represent, and some people 

who work with me. But I want to say this at the outset about 

this budget. It lays the foundation for a bright and prosperous 

future for the people of Saskatchewan. It addresses age-old 

inequities in education funding by taking the property tax issue 

and the burden of that issue off of the individual property 

owners, and the onus now falls largely to the provincial 

government. 

 

It addresses municipal revenue sharing which I think has been 

an issue for at least a decade, maybe longer, that we’ve had 

successive governments and successive administrations say that 

it needed to be attended to; something needed to be done to 

share our resources with the municipal sector. And it wasn’t 

done until this budget, and I’m proud of that. 

 

This budget produces fundamental tax relief for individuals, not 

just for the years ahead but in this instance retroactively, 

because it addresses tax relief for the year, the calendar year 

2008, and that was achieved through the increase of personal 

exemptions. And people see the benefit of that retroactive 

application of that tax relief in their returns as they come back 

from Revenue Canada this spring. 

 

This budget has addressed the needs of low-income citizens. 

It’s addressed the needs of seniors in our province. It’s also 

addressed in a dramatic way and a significant way the needs of 

disabled and the disadvantaged. We’ve got record spending on 

highways and other related infrastructure in this budget, and it’s 

the highest single-year expenditure for agriculture and related 

programs. 

 



March 24, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2511 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is many other things in this budget 

that we’re going to talk about as the evening progresses. Many 

of my colleagues have already touched on a variety of topics, 

but that fact that agriculture has been addressed in such a 

significant way in this particular budget speaks volumes to the 

importance of agriculture to this government, this political 

party, and also our recognition of that industry as a very, very 

important player in our long-term economic success in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to say a few things about my 

constituents. I have benefited tremendously, personally from the 

support of my constituents. I’ve had the privilege of running in 

four elections now and every year I’ve seen a little growth in 

the popular support, and that has been very gratifying. And I go 

home on weekends and I visit with friends and colleagues who 

surround me at coffee time, and we talk politics and we talk 

weather, we talk farming, we talk international issues. We cover 

a lot of ground. And I feel the support and the encouragement 

from my constituents in those times when we get together. 

 

There is a very strong level of support for the initiatives of this 

government, as I can tell from the comments of my 

constituents. But I personally have felt their support at an 

increasingly greater level. That doesn’t mean they always agree 

with me, but that means that they have been very outspoken in 

their recognition of my role on their behalf. And so I’m grateful 

for that, and I want to say so and put that on the record tonight. 

 

There is one other group though, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I 

want to specifically single out tonight. And this is a bit personal 

and sometimes it might be a bit difficult, but there’s a group of 

people in my constituency who say to me, Wayne, I’m praying 

for you. You know, Mr. Speaker, that comment means an awful 

lot to me. It is a sustaining comment. It is an encouragement. It 

is a comment that gives vitality and life to my efforts on behalf 

of my constituents. 

 

You know all that prayer — and I know most of the people who 

have said that are very sincere and I’m sure that it’s true of 

people I haven’t even met — but that prayer doesn’t make me a 

perfect man. It may not even make me a better politician, but it 

is an element that sustains me when decisions are tough, when 

you get discouraged, when you feel overworked, when you’re 

tired, when you’ve spent too much time away from your family, 

those comments, those prayers offered up for me have been a 

godsend. And I really want to acknowledge that support and 

thank my constituents for that very personal level of 

encouragement that they have provided. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at this point I can’t go on any further without 

acknowledging the love and support of my wife who has always 

played a bit of a background role. She says frequently, politics 

is Wayne’s job, you know; I iron his shirts. She’s pretty 

self-deprecating and underestimates her value and her role in 

my life. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wouldn’t be here tonight if 

it wasn’t for the support of my wife, who might be watching 

tonight by the way — I’m not sure. But I’m putting this on the 

record publicly because she needs to know and others need to 

know how important she has been over the many years that 

we’ve been together. 

 

I’d like to acknowledge my constituency office staff — Beth, 

Carol, and Glenna. All three women work diligently to provide 

support to my constituents and to help me represent those 

constituents in a very practical and pragmatic way. And I want 

to recognize our ministerial staff here in the office: Clay who 

works tirelessly and reads more than anybody I know; April 

who organizes my life and keeps our office running effectively 

and efficiently; Alison who does our communications and 

public relations stuff — she writes a lot of my speeches and 

helps me out in that respect; and Scott who does our casework. 

That team of four people here in Regina have been invaluable to 

me. 

 

You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as a minister having an 

opportunity to serve at this level, you know, we get a lot of 

comments and often we get credit for things that we have 

achieved. And I’ve had the good fortune of having many of 

those kind of comments directed to my office and to me 

personally. But I want to say as well that we could never at any 

level achieve the kind of successes we achieve without the very 

effective and conscientious support of our senior administration 

people in the various ministries. 

 

In my case, I’m fortunate to have John Law as my deputy 

minister, and assistant deputy ministers George Stamatinos, 

Terry Schmidt, Ted Stobbs. And they are supported by about 

1,500 employees in the Ministry of Highways and 

Infrastructure. And I have all the faith in the world that these 

people are doing not just their job to the best of their ability, but 

they are committed to the success of this ministry. 

 

You know, I’ve said from time to time that my goal as minister 

is to make sure that the Ministry of Highways and Infrastructure 

is the best transportation ministry, not just in Canada, but in all 

of North America. It’s a lofty goal, but when you challenge 

people with that kind of objective, you’d be surprised how they 

stand up and salute, how they take that as an endorsement and 

an encouragement to them to achieve even better things. And 

I’m certain that we have seen that in our ministry this year. 

 

I am very proud of the ministry and how they’ve responded to 

the challenges that we have placed before them. We put them 

under a great deal of pressure this last year by giving them the 

largest budget they’ve ever had to work with. We stretched 

them. We pushed them. We prodded them. They achieved some 

outstanding results, and I think it’s because this government 

believes in their ability to perform well on behalf of the people 

of Saskatchewan, and we are thrilled with what we’ve seen so 

far. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in this budget, what do we have? We have 

$630 million that has come to the Highways and Infrastructure 

ministry. That is the largest budget that has ever been seen by 

this ministry in the history of the province — $630 million as 

compared to $513 million last year at this time. That $630 

million represents 224 million for maintenance, which is a 10 

per cent increase year over year, and $358 million which is the 

largest amount ever for capital projects in our ministry. We’re 

going to have the busiest construction season yet. 

 

Last year we got work done on 1500 kilometres. In some 

instances, it was a complete rebuild. It might’ve been a brand 

new highway. In some areas it was maybe a repaving project or 

maybe it was sand sealing or crack filling, but we did work on 



2512 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2009 

1580 kilometres, I believe, was the exact number. And because 

we were able to reach that — and that again was a milestone; I 

don’t think we’ve ever seen that kind of work, that volume of 

work accomplished before — but because we set that record of 

achievement, we’ve used that as our benchmark this year and 

going forward, given the projects we’ve got on the books, we 

anticipate doing another 1580 kilometres of improvements or 

maintenance work on our highways as a benchmark. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re going to see so much work as 

a result of this budget and the initiatives of our ministry and the 

support of our contracting and road building industry in 

Saskatchewan, that people are going to be amazed when they 

see the volume of work all across the roads of the province. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have a $45 million program for 

bridges this year. Now we have in this province about 1,000 

bridges and 800 culverts on the provincial highway system. 

Most of those bridges and culverts date back to, oh the late 

’40s, early ’50s, maybe some into the ’60s, but they’re all at 

that 40-, 45-, maybe 50-year time frame, and they have actually 

outlived pretty much their reliable usefulness. And because of 

that, we’ve had to intensify our spending and our programs to 

upgrade those bridges, replace them where necessary, and 

certainly have a replacement program for the culverts. And 

we’ve contributed $45 million to that undertaking this year. 

 

Ten million dollars this year is going to go to a brand new 

project that I’m sure my friend from Batoche and people who 

live along Highway 2 south of Prince Albert are going to 

appreciate, and that is the first stage of replacing the St. Louis 

bridge. This is a bridge that is almost 100 years old. 

 

And I want to tell you a little story, Mr. Deputy Speaker. About 

a week after I was appointed to this job, I got an email from a 

fellow who said, this new government isn’t doing very much. I 

just drove over the St. Louis bridge. There’s a big hole in the 

deck. I almost lost my wheel in it. When are you going to fix 

this? Well I emailed the fellow back and I said, did that hole 

just appear in the last week? I don’t think so. That bridge has 

been around for 96 years, and I don’t think it would probably 

pass many more inspections before it would be condemned. 

 

The problem with that bridge now is that while it handles 

routine commuter traffic, it can’t handle primary weight. It 

can’t handle heavy traffic. And because of that, that primary 

weight corridor, Highway 2, which runs from Assiniboia in the 

south of the province to La Ronge in the north, has a big hole 

when that traffic comes to crossing the North Saskatchewan 

River. That’s the St. Louis bridge. And that gap in that corridor, 

which is so crucial to economic growth and prosperity along 

that stretch of road, that gap has prevented the full realization of 

the economic potential of the region. And over the next three 

years, we’re going to completely replace the St. Louis bridge at 

a cost of 30 to $35 million. 

 

Because of the spending we’ve allocated to Highways in this 

budget, we’re well on our way to not just meeting our election 

promise, but exceeding it. Our election promise was to spend a 

minimum of $1.8 billion over four years. Well in our first two 

years now, we’re at $1.1 billion, and at the rate we’re going, 

we’re going to exceed our promise significantly. 

 

Keeping the promise of the establishment of a five-year rolling 

plan for the province’s road construction and maintenance 

program was key to our success last year. We finally had a 

chance to get all the roads in the province evaluated. We created 

the plan, announced it back in December of this last year. And 

now the people of the province have a very clear idea how 

we’re going to accomplish our road repairs, what the timetable 

will be, what roads will be fixed in what priority, and there is 

some certainty associated with our rolling plan. 

 

I think that that’s a very great improvement to the way we deal 

with infrastructure issues in this province. In fact it was so well 

received that even the critic for the opposition commented 

about the importance of a plan like that and why they could 

support that initiative. 

 

[20:45] 

 

What else have we done? Well we’ve developed a 

transportation centre of excellence at the University of 

Saskatchewan. And we have high expectations for that 

operation. We just got it up and running. There’s a board of 

directors who met in December. They’ve got two objectives, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. The one for the centre is to provide 

educational opportunities for employees from the Ministry of 

Highways who want to upgrade their technical skills, who want 

to go back and take some specialized coursework, who might 

want to pursue a master’s or a Ph.D. [Doctor of Philosophy] in 

engineering. 

 

The other objective of that centre of excellence is to fund and 

develop projects that will enhance our ability to develop 

infrastructure in this province that will be sustainable, 

environmentally sustainable, will have a longer life expectancy, 

and will produce a better product for a lesser cost. 

 

That’s a huge undertaking but it has immense potential for our 

province and we think it’s a venture well worth undertaking. 

The University of Saskatchewan has come on as a very willing 

partner on this project and we’re excited about what’s going to 

be happening there over the next number of years. 

 

You know, the interesting thing about that centre of excellence, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that if we can produce a better quality 

road building material or a better design for roads overall, we 

have the perfect laboratory to test that new technology right 

here in Saskatchewan. We have some of the most extreme 

climatic conditions — the hottest summers, the coldest winters, 

expansion and contraction. 

 

We’ve got heavy truck traffic. We’ve got a real serious issue in 

this province with aggregate. We’re losing the best sources of 

our aggregate. In fact, people will tell you, engineering people 

will tell you that the best source for gravel in the province of 

Saskatchewan today is what’s in the road right now And when 

you look at the environmental sensitivities that are facing our 

province and so much of the rest of the construction world, we 

would be well served to come up with technology where we can 

reuse the gravel in the existing roads and reapply it in new ways 

to provide better road surfaces. 

 

And we think that if we can achieve those goals, those 

technological goals through some of the research at the centre 



March 24, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2513 

for excellence, we will have a product that not only will benefit 

Saskatchewan; it will benefit virtually every jurisdiction in the 

world because what we will have will be unique technology and 

proprietary technology that is exportable. And there are nations 

all around the world looking for new and better ways to build 

highways — sustainable, environmentally sound ways to build 

highways. We think that we have an opportunity to develop that 

technology right here. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in this budget there’s a $100 million dollar 

investment to rebuild our rural highways. That includes 250 

kilometres of brand new work or work-in-progress for the 

upcoming construction season. That includes 300 kilometres of 

repaving work that is going to be undertaken around the 

province. 

 

We have four separate programs available for funding in the 

municipal sector. We’ve got funding for road and bridge 

improvements through the municipal resource roads program, 

the heavy-haul, high-volume program, Clearing the Path, and 

the municipal bridge program. Those four programs now are 

moving from the Municipal Affairs ministry to the Highways 

ministry so that we can provide a strategic and streamlined 

approach to transportation and infrastructure across the 

province. 

 

We’ve doubled the funding for these programs. Last year we 

supplied about $20 million to rural RMs [rural municipality] 

that wanted to undertake initiatives under these various 

programs. This year we’re contributing $40 million to that 

program. That’s intended to address a really significant 

backlog, a huge deficit in infrastructure in rural Saskatchewan 

at the rural municipal level. 

 

I talked about the 1,000 bridges that we have in the provincial 

system. The RMs around the province have double that. 

They’ve got closer to 2,000. And I think their culverts number 

in the range of 1,200 to 1,500 — I don’t recall that just off the 

top of my head. 

 

But they are facing the same kind of pressure that our provincial 

highway system is facing for a couple of reasons. First of all, 

the truck traffic has expanded enormously. The volume of 

trucks, just the sheer number of heavy trucks on the road has 

increased significantly. But the other issue, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is the fact that those trucks are carrying an ever greater 

weight. And the impact on our infrastructure that was built in 

the ’50s, designed for 2- or 3-ton trucks, simply can’t 

accommodate the wear and tear and the beating that this larger 

and heavier traffic volume produces. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re running out of time, I think. But we 

have some exciting opportunities that exist in northern 

Saskatchewan. And I really want to pay some attention to this 

because I know it’s an issue for some members opposite, 

especially those who represent northern constituencies. They’ve 

said, why aren’t you doing more about roads in northern 

Saskatchewan? 

 

You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, since I became the minister 

I’ve been very candid about this issue. I believe — we believe 

as a government — that so much of our future economic 

opportunity and potential resides in the North, that we know 

we’re going to have to provide an adequate transportation 

system to help us develop and expand those economic 

opportunities, not just for the benefit of the province 

economically but for the social benefit of the people who live in 

the North. 

 

And so, given the success of our road strategy, our rolling 

five-year plan for infrastructure in southern Saskatchewan, 

building on what we’ve learned as a result of that initiative, we 

want to undertake a similar process in northern Saskatchewan 

and come up with a very strategic plan to address northern 

infrastructure, based on transparent criteria, based on similar 

criteria from place to place, comparing the two different 

projects on a points basis and priorizing them on that level. 

 

So northern infrastructure is going to be a very important 

feature of our upcoming year. Although we didn’t identify it as 

such in our budget, that is the one area that we’re planning to 

undertake. 

 

I can tell by the sound to my right here that some of my 

colleagues are getting impatient with the length of my speech. 

And you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve got at least 10 or 12 

pages here I haven’t even touched yet. And I was going to ad 

lib a bunch of material yet this evening. 

 

I want to just talk a little bit more about some of the things that 

we have already identified as urgent in the North in terms of 

work. All-weather roads are very important because they will 

not just support the individual communities up there; they will 

support economic development. And the other thing that’s 

important about any project we would undertake in the North is 

that we want to develop capacity among the people of the 

North. So we will have a 60 per cent requirement for northern 

participation in any of the contracts that we undertake up there, 

if at all achievable. 

 

And we’re also going to work aggressively to secure federal 

and private sector funding, especially for the roads in the 

Athabascan Basin. We have some roads that need attention, 

from Points North up to Stony Rapids, from Stony Rapids to 

Fond-du-Lac, and the Wollaston Lake Road. Those are roads in 

particular that we are trying to develop a partnership to see 

those roads built to an all-weather, all-season standard, and help 

us access northern communities in a more safe and reliable 

manner. 

 

We’ve got some gravel crushing that’s scheduled for this year 

on Highway 155. We’ve got paving planned for 2010 for about 

20 kilometres from Green Lake to just south of Beaver River 

and approximately 15 kilometres north of Beauval. 

 

So when I hear members opposite complain about nothing 

being planned for the North, Mr. Speaker, I’m here to say that 

it’s simply not the case. We have already undertaken some 

initiatives. We’re doing exploratory work on ways to finance 

and move forward on some of these projects, but we’ve already 

committed a number of contracts for work-in-progress in the 

North. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk briefly about the short-line rail 

program that we’ve introduced. You know, last year we put 

together a program for short-line rails. There wasn’t a lot of 



2514 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2009 

money in it; it amounted to about $500,000. But it was so well 

received by the members of the short-line fraternity here in the 

province that they put it to almost immediate use. And one of 

their concerns was that that program wouldn’t continue. I’m 

pleased to say that in the budget this year, not only have we 

continued it, but the uptake on the money on the part of the 

various short-line operations in this province is pretty 

aggressive. And we’re pleased to see that. 

 

And as a matter of fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, my constituency 

is home to the newest short-line railway that just went into 

operation, I believe, a week ago. And it’s called the Great 

Sandhills Railway. It runs from the area around Swift Current 

up to the community of Leader, over to the community of 

Burstall. It is primarily grain dependent, but they do have the 

benefit of some gas shipments that come out of Burstall, and 

it’s going to help the long-term economic viability of that 

railway. But it will serve a very important purpose to the 

producers in that region. And I’m happy to see that that rail line 

is up and running because I think it has the potential to be a real 

success story. 

 

You know, we’ve generated some interesting comments from 

people around the province as a result of this budget. I’ve been, 

as I said earlier, in this House for 10 years and I don’t think I’ve 

ever seen a budget that is well regarded as this particular 

budget. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you don’t have to take my 

word for it. The viewers at home don’t have to take my word 

for it. We don’t have to take anybody else’s word for it in the 

House. But there are important third party spokespersons who 

have attested to their support for this particular budget. 

 

And I didn’t bring it with me, but if one of my colleagues did, 

we have a compilation of about, oh, comments that are about an 

inch and a half thick in any collection of paper, of third party 

respondents who are saying, this budget works well for us and 

it’s the right thing to do, and it helps us in this area and that 

area. 

 

But I have a couple of comments from my own constituents. 

And I just want to read these for the record because I think it’s 

important to show that the support for this budget isn’t partisan. 

And the reason I can say that is twofold, and I’ll give you an 

example. I want to read from an email that came to me from a 

couple of constituents who I know personally, who have always 

been supportive of the New Democrats. They have always 

voted that way; they’ve always supported that political party. 

And over the years I’ve got to know these people because I 

arranged to bring them to the legislature from time to time for 

the budget. 

 

Oh, this is the short list. This is the more impressive list of third 

party accolades that the budget garnered. And I want to show 

this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because none of this is comprised of 

comments from my colleagues. None of this is comprised from 

party supporters. This documentation is coming from people, 

third party, independent people who said this budget is 

important. 

 

But getting back to this email from a couple of constituents who 

I know have been long-time NDP supporters, let me just read 

this into the record: 

 

Thank you very much for the invitation to the budget 

address yesterday [I’ve done this for this couple over a 

number of years]. It was a pleasure to see democracy in 

action. I think your direction [and I’m quoting here now, I 

think your direction] in the budget cannot be faulted. It 

seems to be following along the lines of prudent 

government, which is good to see. 

 

And then it goes on to say, and I’m quoting again: 

 

I am very proud to be a citizen of this province. It has 

provided me and the ones I love an excellent living. It 

needs to be cherished and honoured. Like anyone else I 

like a taxcut. But if we slip into debt, and the civil service 

is subsequently decimated, or the crowns sold off, then my 

taxcut will come with a cost I could not bear. 

 

I’m here to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I share those 

concerns, and in fact this budget is a document that clearly says 

those things will not happen, because it sets this province on the 

right financial foundation moving forward. And because it does, 

we do not have to worry about this, slipping into debt, the civil 

service being decimated, or the Crowns being sold off. That 

would be too high a cost for us to pay and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

I just wanted to share those comments. 

 

I have another brief email from another constituent that says: 

 

Wayne, good budget, good work. With management like 

this you might be in government for a long time!!! Let’s 

hope so! 

 

I think that speaks volumes to the kind of support we’re getting 

for this particular initiative. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was at a public event in Regina on 

Saturday night. I shared a table with people who are supporters 

of the Liberal Party at the federal level. One of the gentlemen 

there is a labour lawyer. Not one person around that table had 

anything negative to say about this budget. 

 

[21:00] 

 

This is not a partisan document. It is a practical document. It is 

one that will serve the best interests of the people of 

Saskatchewan for many years to come. I’m proud to have been 

part of the government that brought this document forward. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, although I have much more to say, I 

am going to conclude by indicating that I will be supporting this 

budget; I couldn’t possibly support the amendment. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member from Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s not by design, 

it’s entirely by coincidence that I happen to follow the member 

from Cypress Hills. I listened carefully to all of his remarks. He 

hoped that he could fit everything he wanted to say within 20 

minutes and I’m afraid he didn’t make it. And I hope that I can, 



March 24, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2515 

Mr. Speaker, fit what I have to say within 20 minutes. 

 

But the member from Cypress Hills is certainly one of the 

people in this Chamber for whom I have a considerable 

personal respect, although we’ve disagreed on many things and 

I imagine we’ll disagree on many things in the future. But I was 

interested in his opening comments about the privilege of being 

able to speak in this Chamber. And I often think about that as 

well. 

 

I haven’t had the privilege as long — about half as long as the 

member from Cypress Hills. I hope to have it for some time 

longer, as long as the spirit holds out and the voters of 

Saskatoon Meewasin or whatever seat might be drawn in 

Saskatoon where I run will have me. 

 

But in the morning I don’t just read the local news, Mr. 

Speaker. I often read news out of Burma or Madagascar or 

watch Russia move further and further away from the 

democracy which it seemed to be approaching at one point in 

time. And I think that we are very fortunate to live in this place. 

And we’re also, I think, very fortunate to live in this time. 

 

I was reading a short biography of Alexander Hamilton, and I 

think everybody in this House will know the story. After a long 

political career in which he was a very valuable founder of the 

new democracy, the United States of America, he came to the 

very strong opinion that Aaron Burr should not be governor of 

New York — the state from which Alexander Hamilton came 

— and expressed this view through one of the New York papers 

which he helped found. And Aaron Burr did not become the 

governor of New York and wasn’t very happy about the result. 

And ultimately the two men fought a duel which Aaron Burr 

had challenged Alexander Hamilton to. And Alexander 

Hamilton shot in the air. Aaron Burr shot to kill and killed 

Alexander Hamilton. And that’s in a democracy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so as heated as debates get in here, and as divisive as 

politics can sometimes seem in Saskatchewan, it is a privileged 

time and place in which we live. And whatever respect or lack 

of respect the population has for politicians generally — 

whether it’s for the member from Cypress Hills or the member 

from Saskatoon Meewasin — it is still a privilege to represent 

them and a privilege to serve in a democracy and debate matters 

of public importance in a free legislature, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think Allan Blakeney said, and I hope I’m quoting him 

correctly, that it’s hard to spend $1 million without helping 

somebody. And $10 billion, as this budget spends, is 10,000 

times $1 million. And it’s even harder to spend $10 billion 

without helping somebody. 

 

So of course the budget is full of good measures and is helpful 

on a number of fronts and priorities that both sides of this 

House agree upon, in health care and education and highways 

and infrastructure and so on, Mr. Speaker. There’s no doubt 

about that. You could not spend $10 billion without helping 

somebody, Mr. Speaker. But the issue is really priorities: 12 

billion would even make more people happy, and 14 billion 

even more. 

 

But there are limits, Mr. Speaker, and governments have to 

make choices. And members of the government, in debating the 

budget, like to pretend that the opposition should have to make 

choices — that we should have to just decide what should not 

be in this budget or what should be in this budget — when in 

fact that’s not the case. That falls to the side of the House that 

has the confidence of the legislature, has the majority within 

this legislature to make a budget. 

 

It falls to the opposition to question whether the budget is 

sound, Mr. Speaker, and not to provide an alternative budget. 

Mr. Speaker, we don’t have the resources that the Ministry of 

Finance has. But we can raise some concerns, and we have 

raised some concerns, and actually we will continue to do so 

over the course of this debate. And I think these fall within 

three broad areas: that the budget is not realistic, Mr. Speaker, 

that the budget is not sustainable, and that the budget is not fair. 

And I’ll deal with each of those in order. 

 

First that the budget is not realistic, Mr. Speaker, is probably 

the most simplest and easiest of the propositions to argue for, 

and I’ll be very brief on it. Speakers have commented on, and I 

imagine will continue to comment on the discrepancy that exists 

within the budget document of the Ministry of Finance forecast 

— which doesn’t seem to have any basis or any explanation for 

it — of 2.1 per cent, and the private sector forecasts, none of 

which was as high as 2.1 per cent. It’s not like the government 

picked the highest of the private sector forecasts. None of them 

were as high as that, but the average was 1 per cent. 

 

So the Finance forecasts that the Minister of Finance puts 

forward as the core assumption of his budget for economic 

growth in the province of Saskatchewan, 2.1 per cent, is twice 

the private sector forecasts. Well the private sector forecasts 

have been downgraded since the budget came down and that’s, 

you know, we don’t expect the Minister of Finance to have a 

crystal ball, but we now are debating a budget that forecasted 

growth in the Saskatchewan economy at 2.1 per cent. We all 

hope that that’s correct, but the private sector forecasts are for 

point six three per cent on average, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the government’s forecast of budgetary growth is now three 

times what the average is for the private sector forecasts. And 

we question whether that assumption is realistic, when it is off 

the private sector forecasts by a factor of three, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There’s been some debate about the value of revenues from 

potash to this budget and to the assumptions of the budget, and 

that 18 cents on the dollar of revenue for this budget comes 

from potash — potash one way or the other, Mr. Speaker — 

and the government and particularly the Minister of Energy and 

Resources says that we do not need to be too concerned about 

cutbacks in production of potash. That that’s not where the 

money comes from; it’s based upon sales. 

 

Now you take that to its logical extreme and you stop producing 

potash at all; as long as we’re selling potash, it doesn’t matter if 

we’re actually producing any. But of course you have to 

produce potash to sell potash and ultimately production does 

matter at some point. It may not matter in the short term but it 

ultimately does matter. 

 

The strategy, as I understand it, Mr. Speaker, in relation to 

potash production is that there is a great deal of concern in the 

markets about the sustainability of the current price — that the 



2516 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2009 

Chinese want to buy potash but they don’t necessarily want to 

buy potash at the current price. Brazilians want to buy potash 

but not necessarily at the current price. And of course every 

economy in the world is strained and less able to purchase what 

they might want to purchase than they have been before. And so 

the strategy, as I understand it in the case of potash, is to hold 

up the price, sustain the price by cutting production actually, 

and therefore hold up the government revenues as well as 

company revenues. 

 

Now the winner, if the strategy works, is first of all the potash 

companies, Mr. Speaker, because the price doesn’t drop, and 

secondly the government because the price doesn’t drop. And 

as the minister points out, most of the revenue is based upon 

price and on the sale taking place at that price, that current 

price, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The only losers in this strategy, if it works, are the laid off 

potash workers. And, Mr. Speaker, because of course they’re 

not producing potash, they’re part of the strategy to cut 

production and keep the price higher by cutting supply, Mr. 

Speaker, in supply demand, keeping the price up. And that 

works for the company, that works largely for the government. 

It doesn’t work for the potash workers that are laid off and, if 

the strategy fails, Mr. Speaker, then it doesn’t work for 

anybody. 

 

And if the price drops anyways, Mr. Speaker, then 

unfortunately so do the revenues of the province and in a 

significant way. That may not be the case, Mr. Speaker, and the 

price of potash may stay at its current levels. The revenues of 

the province may stay at the current levels. But one has to admit 

that the government’s forecast on economic growth across the 

board are three times what the private sector forecast and that 

that alone gives the budget an air of unreality. 

 

Now secondly on the question of sustainability in the budget. 

The budget forecasts, and we will see, I expect, further 

spending — and I’ll come to why I believe that to be the case 

— further spending after this budget, for the budget forecasts an 

increase of 12.4 per cent in government spending following a 

similar increase in the last budget, the first Saskatchewan Party 

government budget last year. 

 

Well at an average of 12 per cent, and we’ve now had two years 

where we’ve had that kind of double-digit increase, government 

spending will double every six years. Well I think every 

member of this House knows that doubling government 

spending every six years isn’t sustainable. 

 

So the current increase in spending just cannot be maintained, 

Mr. Speaker; it just can’t be done. And the tough decisions that 

have to be made, that the government would like the opposition 

to make for them in some of their speeches, the tough decisions 

that have to be made, the government is putting off. And 

whether they’re putting it off until next year or the year after 

that, they’re putting those decisions off, Mr. Speaker. And 

they’re putting off their commitment to increase government 

spending 3 per cent annually. Over the last two years they’ve 

already spent seven years of government spending increases by 

their commitment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So they like to talk about the number of promises they’ve kept 

but they don’t talk very much about very substantial ones that 

they haven’t kept and aren’t very close to keeping, and one of 

them is their conservative commitment on increases in 

government spending. 

 

The reason that I say that 12.4 per cent is probably not going to 

be the end of the story is that the government seems to have 

held the line on health care spending. The increase in the budget 

is 3 per cent, which is remarkable and I don’t think realistic. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to go back to my first point, I expect the health 

regions will not be able to survive on the increase that has been 

provided by the Ministry of Health. I expect the government 

hopes that its estimates or revenues are actually conservative so 

that it can backfill those deficits at a later stage, Mr. Speaker. 

And if that’s the case, then spending will be over 12 per cent 

and if revenues aren’t higher than the government expects them 

to be, that will be the end of the balanced budget. 

 

And in respect to both the forecast, which seems to be drawn 

from thin air by this government, 2.1 per cent economic growth 

for the province, and we certainly hope they’re correct but I 

haven’t heard . . . I’ve heard a number of speakers. I haven’t 

heard anybody from the government explain where that number 

comes from, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And in respect to the increase in spending, the optimism that’s 

expressed in both those acts of what the Minister of Crown 

Investments Corporation would call creative financing, Mr. 

Speaker, that optimism is reminiscent of the early Devine years 

where after a while it did get a touch of unreality, Mr. Speaker. 

Where revenues would be forecast to almost meet expenditures, 

Mr. Speaker, but there was no basis for those forecasts and 

every year included not only overly optimistic forecasts but an 

explanation as to why last year’s forecasts were so far off the 

mark. So unrealistic, unsustainable, Mr. Speaker, and I would 

argue, in its effects, unfair. 

 

[21:15] 

 

Much touting of the change in the way that property taxes are 

assessed and applied in our province, Mr. Speaker. I represent a 

seat in Saskatoon. Almost a third of the people in my riding 

voted for the Saskatchewan Party. Many of them were people 

who usually don’t vote, Mr. Speaker, and I think it can be 

assumed came out, in an unusual act of civic responsibility for 

them, to throw out a government. In the case of Saskatoon 

Meewasin, they weren’t successful. The New Democrat MLA 

of course was returned. 

 

But I think they also voted for specific promises of the 

government. I’m not so sure about whether they voted for the 

promise to keep the government spending at 3 per cent 

increases annually. I’m pretty sure that many of them voted for 

a $450 property tax cut, Mr. Speaker. And they’re not going to 

get it, Mr. Speaker. As a matter of fact, according to 

government budget documents, a family of four, $75,000 

income, average house for that family, will pay $400 more in 

property taxes in 2009 than they paid in 2007, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, the members, the members from Saskatoon from the 

Saskatchewan Party caucus, Saskatchewan Party government 

will be pointing to all kinds of fine print about assessments, 



March 24, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2517 

about real estate values and such, Mr. Speaker. But they won’t 

be able to point to that fine print in their election pamphlets or 

any of the other material that was provided to the voters in 

Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

There weren’t any asterisks next to the promise. They didn’t 

say, well in fact we will decrease property taxes in Saskatoon 

by 3.3 per cent, which wasn’t going to be $450 anyways, over 

what they would otherwise have been if we had done nothing, 

Mr. Speaker. So if we had done nothing, you wouldn’t get a 

$400 property tax increase. You’d get an even larger property 

tax increase. 

 

So your $400 property tax increase, Mr. Speaker, is actually, 

according to the government, a decrease. But I don’t think my 

constituents are going to see it that way, Mr. Speaker. I think 

my constituents are going to look at the percentages that 

property taxes are going down in certain government members’ 

ridings and compare it to the increase that they are getting on 

their own homes and say, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if my 

MLA is correct about this budget being unrealistic; I don’t 

know if my MLA is correct about this budget being 

unsustainable; but I do know my MLA is correct about this 

budget being unfair, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now we now live in a province that has the highest inflation 

rate in the country. And that inflation rate is primarily under the 

control of the Government of Saskatchewan, which has decided 

to do nothing about it. 

 

That inflation rate is fuelled primarily by utility rate increases, 

Mr. Speaker, and the cost of natural gas went up 21 per cent 

when this long, cold winter started. And this government — the 

Sask Party government — refused to do what they said what 

they would do in opposition, which is to provide people with 

rebates. Refused to do what they do in Alberta — to provide 

people with rebates. Refused to do what previous NDP 

governments had done — to provide people with rebates as 

relief — and will hold on to that increase until this winter is 

over, until April 1, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that, and the SaskPower increase, and the government’s 

refusal to do with fuel taxes what they said they would do when 

they were in opposition — those are the matters, as much as 

anything else, that fuel the inflation rate in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And who is hurt by that, Mr. Speaker, the most? Low-income 

people and people on fixed incomes. And the budget documents 

show that it is people on low incomes that are now worse off 

after — after — the government’s much-touted tax decrease on 

income taxes, after the government’s much-touted changes to 

property tax, which are unfairly applied. After all that, because 

of matters under this Sask Party government’s control, because 

of the role the Crown corporations play in this province, they 

have the power to have made a real difference to the 

affordability of the poorest among us. Because of their failure to 

do that, Mr. Speaker, those people are worse off after the boom 

than they were before, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so a government, a budget, Mr. Speaker, that spends $10 

billion, as I said, it would be hard to do that and not do some 

good, and no one on this side of the House wants to suggest that 

no good will be done. 

 

But it’s a budget of an undisciplined government, unwilling to 

make tough decisions, unwilling to face the serious prospects, 

to look at sober third party forecasts; and so it’s a budget that is 

unrealistic; it’s unsustainable; and not connected to either of 

those, so even inexcusably, I would say, Mr. Speaker, unfair. 

And for those reasons I will not be supporting the budget. I will 

be supporting the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member from Saskatchewan Rivers. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, my fellow 

members, and members opposite. It’s with great pleasure that 

I’m able to address you today, and I thank you for this 

opportunity. After a long and busy winter — and it’s still 

winter— in each of our constituencies, it’s an honour to be back 

and attending a sitting of this Assembly, representing the 

interests of the Saskatchewan Rivers constituency. 

 

I’d like to thank my husband, Douglas, and our four children, 

Matthew, Brigitt, Lacey, and Markus for being so supportive. 

I’d also like to acknowledge several members, my colleagues 

and the members from Melfort, Canora-Pelly, and 

Rosetown-Elrose constituencies. They deserve an honourable 

mention for their hours of work towards a strong and sound 

budget. The rest of my colleagues also deserve praise for their 

input during a time of economic uncertainty. 

 

This budget will address the concerns of Saskatchewan people 

in many ways. Our government will ensure that all 

Saskatchewan people benefit. This takes a great effort by many 

dedicated people. The difficult is what takes a little time; 

however, the long unattainable is what takes a little longer. 

 

We have listened to our constituents’ requests and have 

delivered. We have committed to history-making tax cuts and 

record infrastructure investment — two very welcome concepts 

in Saskatchewan Rivers. We have also pledged to help our most 

important asset — people of all ages and especially our very 

young and our elderly. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, our government serves the needs of all 

strata of Saskatchewan society: low-income households, 

persons with disabilities, families with dependants, Aboriginal 

peoples, students, seniors, and youth at risk. Most importantly 

this budget will ensure that the most vulnerable among us, our 

children, will not be left behind. We need to do everything we 

possibly can to ensure that our children are healthy and active 

and they develop into responsible, capable adults. 

 

Responsible parents have the most important job in the world, 

and we as legislators must ensure that parents have every tool 

they need to form a responsible young adult from the mould of 

infancy. Therefore it’s imperative that we address the needs of 

children as early as possible. Our province’s children and youth 

are our greatest asset. And our provincial government 

recognizes this with investments in child care, child welfare, 

library funding, the active families benefit, and a new children’s 

hospital in Saskatoon. 



2518 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2009 

Saskatchewan Rivers has a large and growing young 

population. Therefore the $200 million dedicated to the new 

children’s hospital in Saskatoon is badly needed and will no 

doubt ensure a better life for all of our children. 

 

The smaller towns in my riding will also benefit from the $12.3 

million which will be invested in libraries. Libraries are one of 

the most important landmarks in our rural communities and are 

an investment for the future of our children. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, as jobs continue to open up 

province-wide, we must also ensure that we are producing a 

strong workforce here at home. Investing in education and skills 

training will ensure that the next generation will be readily 

poised to lead our province more capably than we have, because 

that’s the reason we work so hard, is to make life better for our 

children. 

 

We envision a Saskatchewan in which our children carry and 

propel the greatest ideals on earth — charity, volunteerism, 

pioneerism, and ingenuity. These ideas are what make our 

province strong and free. 

 

Saskatchewan people constitute a source of resources, insight, 

and gathered material that compels our attention and the need to 

change what is not working to a path of positive action and 

reason. Every law that we pass affects the lives of every citizen 

in Saskatchewan, and I welcome the necessary debate and 

amendment of Bills when considering legislation. 

 

As in our home constituencies, I have found the solution to 

most problems is our ability to listen, analyze, and decide which 

is the best route to resolution. From the newborn infant and the 

family that embraces him to our seniors and immigrants, our 

government’s philosophy is that no one will be left behind. 

 

The material in this budget will prove our government’s 

reasoning and analysis towards the issues faced by 

Saskatchewan people. While we as a province become stronger 

and more powerful in this country, it’s important that we do not 

become the most envied. Leading the country economically 

means leading the country with high social standards for all 

Saskatchewan citizens by providing a high quality of life for all. 

 

This budget also addresses the efforts made by the Government 

of Saskatchewan to keep our life affordable for all residents of 

the province, including taking steps to ensure our economy 

continues to grow in this time of global economic uncertainty. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan Rivers is a rural 

constituency with special needs which require attention. We 

will support an enterprise region program that encourages 

regional economic development. Our government will continue 

to support those who diversify our economy. We are 

encouraging entrepreneurship and new ideas. And I’d like to 

use this time to thank and acknowledge these rural folks for the 

contributions they make to our economy and our province. 

 

Our small businesses and trucking companies add a great deal 

to our economy. Rural farm families also fuel our economy 

while putting food on the world’s table, and I want to use this 

time to acknowledge their efforts. 

 

Increased funding will allow improvements in crop insurance 

programs and agriculture support programs to better suit the 

producers’ needs. I believe that rural communities have been 

left out of the limelight for several years and that it’s this time 

to celebrate. 

 

This budget addresses the concerns of rural constituents and for 

that I’m honoured to be the voice of the small towns across 

Saskatchewan Rivers. People who live in smaller rural 

communities in Saskatchewan Rivers are some of the best 

people I’ve ever known. We support each other economically 

and socially, and volunteerism is a way of life in small town 

Saskatchewan. We help our neighbours when in need, and 

much like our parents and grandparents who built this country, 

we come together to enthusiastically achieve community goals. 

 

The people who built this province are now seniors, and we 

must do everything in our power to honour and respect their 

dedication over the years. The provincial government has 

pledged to make life more affordable for seniors, for 

low-income, single seniors. We have raised the maximum 

monthly benefit from 90 to $190. These pioneers shaped our 

communities through volunteering and sacrificing their time to 

build the hockey and curling rinks dotted through the small 

towns of our province. Some even sacrificed their lives during 

wartime, making the ultimate sacrifice for their country and 

people. On that note I would like to thank the veterans who 

graced us with their presence on budget day. 

 

[21:30] 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Wilson: — I want to acknowledge their loyalty and 

commitment to us. We must thank them for the excellent 

quality of life we enjoy today. I’m sure that we all have a 

connection to a veteran who has touched our lives, and to these 

brave souls we owe a debt of gratitude as their efforts to uphold 

our values of democracy and freedom will never be forgotten. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan Rivers has been looking for 

property tax cuts, and our government kept that promise and 

delivered a long-term solution to that problem. The over 

amount of tax paid by Saskatchewan property owners to fund 

education will be reduced by $103 million in 2009. This 

represents the largest education property tax cut in a single year 

in the province’s history. 

 

Our government realizes the important role that these small 

towns and municipalities play in the province’s growth and 

prosperity. Therefore this budget fulfills the government’s 

commitment to a new revenue-sharing deal with municipalities. 

 

In addition to the increase in municipal operating grants, 

funding of $151.8 million for municipal infrastructure projects 

has also been secured through a combination of provincial and 

federal funding. Rural Saskatchewan has not been forgotten. 

Through the education property tax rate cut, agriculture and 

commercial industries will benefit through new revenue-sharing 

plans, providing a reliable source of revenue to Saskatchewan 

Rivers communities. 

 

Our government’s goal is to secure Saskatchewan as a safe 



March 24, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2519 

place to live and raise a family, where people are confident in 

their future, ensuring the people of Saskatchewan benefit from 

the growing economy. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would also like to acknowledge and 

thank those responsible for the twinning of Highway 11 to 

Prince Albert. This double-lane highway will unite the province 

and bring us as close together as any project in Saskatchewan’s 

history. The project has been many years in the making and I’m 

proud to announce that our provincial government has planned 

its completion. 

 

This highway is a gateway to the North and a gateway to the 

Saskatchewan Rivers constituency. I’m looking forward to the 

many benefits of this completed highway. This is great news for 

business, and I welcome the safety aspect of a twinned highway 

as well. Another important aspect is that it would be much 

easier for visitors to see what our constituency has to offer, such 

as Elk Ridge and Murray Point in the beautiful Lakelands area. 

 

2008 has been an exciting year for us in Saskatchewan Rivers. 

However, the most exciting thing to happen to me so far this 

year is the birth of my first grandson. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Yes, I have one more in my constituency and 

his name is Casey Wilson, born on January 20, 2009. He is fifth 

generation on our family farm and with the property tax savings 

I feel he will be there as well as I for a little while yet. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Wilson: — I would love for my grandson to enjoy the 

same quality of life in rural Saskatchewan that I was lucky 

enough to have enjoyed. I want him to be able to favour the 

flavour of the rural community life with close, friendly 

neighbours, safe roads, and quality education. And I believe this 

budget supports these ideals and is a step in the right direction. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we listened to 

President Obama’s speech on inauguration day of January 20, 

2009, we heard him say, “On this day, we gather because we 

have chosen hope over fear.” 

 

And as the member from Swift Current has stated, “That’s the 

road I choose. On that road and on no other, hope will win and 

fear will lose.” 

 

I too choose hope. I’d like to end my speech by quoting another 

elected official, Klas Arnoldson, a Nobel prize winner. And I 

think this exemplifies our new government stance which 

ensures that all Saskatchewan people will benefit and that hope 

is something we can all aspire to. 

 

Without confidence in a cause, there is no action. 

Ignorance may be enlightened, superstition wiped out; 

intolerance may become tolerant, and hate be changed 

into love; ideas may be quickened, intelligence widened, 

and men’s hearts may be ennobled; but from pessimism 

which can see nothing but gloomy visions nothing is to be 

expected. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in conclusion, I am honoured to be 

part of this government with a vision for change, and I’m 

pleased to be working with my esteemed colleagues in making 

Saskatchewan a strong province with steady growth. Most of all 

it’s been an honour for the past year and half to represent the 

fine constituents of Saskatchewan Rivers, and I thank them for 

their continued guidance and support in moving our province 

forward. 

 

I will not be supporting the amendment, but I’m honoured to be 

supporting the budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I’m delighted to stand here today to speak in 

favour of the budget presented last week by my colleague, the 

member from Melfort, on behalf of our government for the 

people of Saskatchewan. I’d like to thank him on behalf of the 

people from Kelvington-Wadena constituency for his work and 

his very focused determination to achieve the goals and the 

vision set out by our Premier and by our government. 

 

I believe this is a legacy budget. It has set a direction of 

cautious optimism that defines who we are as a government. It 

sets out clearly the understanding we have as a responsibility of 

being a government — the responsibility to provide health care, 

education, infrastructure, and a hand up, not a handout, for 

those who are struggling. It provides security and the 

knowledge that we have a savings account for the unexpected. 

 

And perhaps the most important signal it sends in these 

uncertain fiscal times is this — as a government we know 

families are also having to make decisions. Families and 

individuals have the right to make choices personally on their 

financial future. That’s why in this budget our government is 

focused on tax cuts, on taking less money from individuals, 

allowing them the choices to spend their own money. 

Individuals need the flexibility to make personal financial 

decisions. 

 

In this budget you do not see our government making 

investments in SPUDCOs or Navigatas or dot-coms. We do not 

take hard-earned taxpayers’ dollars and decide how to invest 

them because we believe as a government that we know better 

than the citizens. We know the citizens have the right make 

those decisions themselves. That’s not our job. 

 

This government, the Saskatchewan Party government, through 

this budget, will provide world-class education, health care, 

infrastructure, and security. We will continue to work to 

provide an investment climate and excited optimism to the 

investors that may come to our province. We’re sending the 

message: come to Saskatchewan, work with us, invest with us, 

be part of the best economy in North America. And, most 

importantly, see Saskatchewan as it truly is — the best place in 

the world to live. 

 



2520 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2009 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, less than a year and a half ago, the people 

of the province voted — in huge numbers — for change in 

government. People in Saskatchewan take their politics very 

seriously. They’re careful people. They work hard. Very few of 

them are more than two generations away from the world of 

agriculture. Their grandparents, if not their parents, farmed. 

And most of them know that success comes from natural 

resources that we are blessed with as a province. And they 

know, as did their parents, that you can’t take anything for 

granted with Mother Nature on one hand, and the dependency 

of the world markets on the other hand. You have to work hard. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, at the time of the last election in the fall of 

2007, things were looking up a little bit in our province. There 

were some people moving in. The population had moved 

slightly upwards from the low of January 2006 when we were 

down to 992,295 people. And the prices of oil had gone up 

somewhat — it was actually $95.93 at the time of the last 

election. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, during that election, the members 

opposite — the NDP — carried on using the same old lines, the 

same old lack of vision and planning they’ve used since the 

beginning of their time. They clung to the fear tactics, their 

view of the world as a monster that we must protect ourselves 

from and cement the world out. And that’s what they offered 

the people of Saskatchewan during the last election. They 

offered fear — fear of change, fear of tomorrow, and fear of the 

rest of the world. But it didn’t work. 

 

People of Saskatchewan voted for change and they voted for 

hope. They voted for optimism and vision and the right to reach 

for the opportunities with unlimited potential that they have 

personally, and that our province has collectively. And we have 

proven to them in the last 16 months that they made the right 

decision. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve listened for hours on end to the members 

opposite still clinging to their old mantra of gloom and doom 

and fear and despair as they talked about the budget. Some of 

them talked about too much spending. Some of them talked 

about not enough spending. Some of them talked about the fact 

that the projected growth of our province was too optimistic. 

 

The member last night from Weyburn-Big Muddy indicated 

that in 2003 they had forecasted a budget of 6.8 per cent 

increase. I remember, at that time, the Minister of Finance 

saying that was totally acceptable, you were going to be able to 

do it. But when the actual numbers came out in ’04-05, there 

was actually a 3.9 per cent increase, far below what they had 

anticipated. But I never once heard them talking about that. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s absolutely beyond me how any 

thinking people can find fault with a budget that’s the envy of 

not only every province in Canada but many nations in the 

world. Even before the Minister of Finance introduced the 

budget, the families, the men and women, the girls and boys in 

our province knew we were part of a very special happening. 

They know that we are unique in Saskatchewan. We had 

already introduced a number of measures to help low-income 

earners and those in need. 

 

In the 2008 Throne Speech, we announced tax relief — 80,000 

low-income earners no longer paid Saskatchewan income tax. 

Saskatchewan had new low-income tax credits. It put more 

money into the pockets of low-income people who paid no 

taxes — seniors and students and others — and low-income 

working families. Maximum tax credits provided to eligible 

families with children increased to $600 per year — twice as 

much as under the NDP. There was additional tax savings to 

over 300,000 lower income provincial residents. It eliminated 

the 2008 tax refund for many people that were on social 

services and the new income support program for people with 

disabilities. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 2008-2009 budget included a number 

of other tax changes. It doubled the amount of caregiver tax 

credit. It doubled the infirm dependant tax credit. It doubled the 

supplemental disability tax credit, and it increased the disability 

tax credit, and it increased support for seniors in our province. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this was all before the budget was 

announced just last week from our Finance minister. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the budget last week provided for the citizens of 

our province hope for tomorrow. We have a news release that 

talked about the highlights. And I’m sure that many of our 

citizens already know. And the members opposite don’t like to 

talk about it very much. 

 

They don’t want to talk about the fact that there’s $2.5 billion 

going to be spent on infrastructure over a year and a half. There 

was $167.4 million increase for operating grants for 

municipalities — an increase of $32.3 million or 24 per cent — 

step one of a two-year plan for the base for municipalities in our 

province. There’s $200 million towards a new children’s 

hospital in Saskatoon. We have $358.2 million for roads and 

highway across our province; $1.6 million to hire new police 

officers. 

 

We also have an opportunity for $108.1 million for additional 

funding for our farm families for the income stabilization 

program, which includes $102.1 million for crop insurance. 

This is one of the issues that our families have been waiting for 

in rural Saskatchewan for many years.  

 

My colleagues have had an opportunity over the last few days 

to announce many of the other savings and helps that we have 

for the people of our province. I’m very proud to be part of a 

government that understands that we have an opportunity to 

give back to the people of this province, not take. 

 

[21:45] 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the money that we spent that paid down 

the debt of our province, paid down $2.6 billion worth of debt, 

saved $900 million in interest savings. That $900 means a 

brighter and more secure future for people in our province when 

they’re in a world where there’s very much uncertainty. 

 

There may have been some mumblings from the members 

opposite, maybe some from the general public, and maybe a 

little disappointment if we’d done nothing more than just keep 

the status quo, if this budget had decided just to wait out the 

fiscal uncertainty that grips the markets today. But that’s not the 

message that this government, our Sask Party government 

wanted to send. We’re not climbing into a hole and pulling it in 



March 24, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2521 

around us. We’re sending the message that we’re ready to lead 

as the financial world makes its recovery. And more positively, 

we’re not just waiting to see what will happen; we will make 

things happen as much as possible. 

 

Saskatchewan under a Saskatchewan Party government is at 

least in part master of their own destiny. Saskatchewan, the 

province that we all love, is a shiny penny now and it’s our 

right to take joy at that fact. Some may find it hard to accept 

that we are in the spotlight. But it’s real and we worked very 

hard to get there. And let’s not spoil it by reaching for the 

downside. Being realistic is healthy, but being negative will 

only hurt us. 

 

I think we should speak about some of the positive aspects of 

our budget, where we see increases in areas that’s so important 

to the future of our province, and that starts with the Ministry of 

Education. School divisions have an increase this year of $241 

million. There is a record of $990.5 million going to school 

divisions in our province. As a result, the province will fund 63 

per cent of the operating costs for K to 12 [kindergarten to 

grade 12] education, up from last year’s provincial spending of 

51 per cent. 

 

The government will also provide over $3 million to support the 

work of the First Nations and Métis education unit and the 

innovation fund to school divisions. The Minister of Education, 

my friend and colleague from Canora, announced capital 

funding for schools in the Northern Lights School Division. He 

announced that there will be schools in La Ronge, La Loche, 

Pinehouse, Buffalo Narrows, Beauval — and that amounts to 

$31.294 million, Mr. Speaker. This is the type of money that 

needs to be spent not just in the North but right across 

Saskatchewan so we do understand and people know that 

education is a priority for our government and for the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in my view, education is a compass that will take 

us in the right direction for our future. This is true for everyone. 

Education helps find our way through the difficult times in our 

lives and makes it possible for us to build homes for our 

families and find the jobs we dream about. I am very thrilled to 

see this investment in education in our budget. 

 

And we can also look to the other ministry for improvements to 

education funding. Advanced Education, Employment and 

Labour is investing $23.5 million to enable universities to limit 

tuition increases to an average of 3 per cent. We’ll also see 

stable funding continuing to flow to the First Nations University 

of Canada and $2.5 million to support the excellent work of the 

Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies. We’ll also 

maintain direct support to the Gabriel Dumont Institute and 

support the northern teacher education program. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, returning to school is a daunting 

experience, but many more people will be able to do so because 

of the $2.3 million dedicated to over 450 on-reserve adult 

education seats. My colleague from Canora last night also 

indicated that the school that was going to be built at Turner 

Lake will also include day care spaces for 21 children on the 

reserve at Turner Lake. 

 

Advanced Education is also designating $5.9 million for the 

Aboriginal Workforce Development Fund that will help 

increase the workforce participation by First Nations and Métis 

people. This funding will be used for employment readiness 

programming and wage subsidies for First Nations and Métis 

people. 

 

In the interest of getting people to work and ensuring our 

province can handle the economic opportunities on the horizon, 

the budget also directs major funding towards infrastructure. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, economic development is one of the big 

priorities of our government. I believe if we can use 

infrastructure spending to help create a climate that enables the 

private sector to create more jobs, then we’ll be doing our job as 

politicians and as governments. That is why within the ministry 

that I have the honour of representing, the Ministry of First 

Nations and Métis Relations, we are launching the northern 

enterprise regions this year in our budget. But before we 

develop a plan of how that will roll out, we’re meeting with the 

northerners to see what they would like to see in their enterprise 

regions, and that consultation will begin in the next couple of 

weeks. 

 

We’re working with northern businesses and stakeholders. And 

these regions will increase business competitiveness and 

support the North to reach its economic potential and compete 

globally. Lessons that have been learned in the enterprise 

regions that were set up in the South can be learned, and we can 

avoid the pitfalls that may have happened in other areas. We 

want to make sure that northerners and First Nations and Métis 

people share in the growth of this province and the northern 

enterprise regions will help us make that possible. 

 

We also see other spending in the North through this year’s 

Highways ministry’s budget. The Minister of Highways spoke a 

few minutes ago about the money that was earmarked for the 

northern road maintenance and also $10 million for the 

Wollaston Lake all-weather road which is already under 

construction. The Minister of Highways is also going to 

develop a five-year plan for northern Saskatchewan roads. This 

is not part of the budget, but it will help us direct future funding 

to projects that need it the most. 

 

Northern municipalities will also benefit from the predictable 

municipal revenue-sharing agreements, announced in this 

budget, that puts 1 per cent of the PST in the coffers of the 

municipalities. Knowing how much money is coming to you 

helps you plan for the future instead of being forced to wait 

until the opportunities pass you by. 

 

I see many opportunities for us to pursue on behalf of the 

Saskatchewan people in the Ministry of First Nations and Métis 

Relations. My ministry continues to work towards strong and 

productive relationships with the First Nations and Métis 

people. We are working on reaffirming the FSIN [Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations]-Saskatchewan Bilateral Protocol 

agreement that outlines the principles and the mechanicals of 

our formal relationship. This relationship is very important to us 

as government, and we take seriously our role in listening to 

what the First Nations and Métis leaders tell us about their 

priorities. 

 

Right now we are also working on the draft consultation 

framework, and our new extended deadline is June 1. We are 

receiving feedback on the draft policy, and we continue to 



2522 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2009 

dialogue with the concerned parties about how best to improve 

it. I’m very much looking forward to getting to the exploratory 

phase of the consultation. 

 

We need to work together to address the issues of how First 

Nations and Métis people will benefit in the wealth of the 

province, and also to address capacity needs, the environmental 

considerations, and dispute resolution as we help develop 

resources in our province. The true success with First Nations is 

when we negotiate, when we work together to develop plans 

such as the TLE [treaty land entitlement] agreements and the 

gaming agreements. 

 

I really look forward to strengthening our relationship with the 

Métis Nation of Saskatchewan through the revised bilateral 

process, ensuring their voices are being heard. My ministry will 

be providing over $68 million to gaming benefits to First 

Nations and community economic and social programs. This is 

an increase of $17 million over last year. We’ll also be 

providing over $4 million for the five treaty land entitlement 

settlement agreements. 

 

We’ll provide $3 million of support to the First Nations and 

Métis to ensure they have the capacity to consult with 

government and develop . . . [inaudible] . . . that impact their 

rights. Our Consultation Participation Fund has been getting 

money out to the First Nations and Métis people on a regular 

basis over the past year so they can come to the table with the 

tools they need to meaningfully consult. This $3 million fund is 

again in place this year. 

 

The First Nations and Métis economic and development plan 

will invest $750,000 into First Nations and Métis business 

start-up and expansions this year. The Aboriginal employment 

development program will continue to build partnerships with 

private employers to increase the number of First Nations and 

Métis people employed. We’ll also continue the myth and 

misconception training through the AEDP [Aboriginal 

employment development program] program so workplaces are 

more welcome to the First Nations and Métis people. 

 

Jobs are important. But as we experience life, we all know how 

precious health is to our overall richness of our life. Knowing 

this, our government will continue to support the Métis 

Addictions Council of Saskatchewan, the Muskeg Lake 

long-term care facility, and the Prince Albert youth addictions 

facility. The Health ministry is also dedicating $250,000 in 

funding to develop a 10-year First Nations and Métis health 

plan to address the disparity in our First Nations and Métis 

health, compared to the rest of Saskatchewan’s population. 

 

The new children’s hospital will bring new resources to our 

province. This so our children have the best medical care 

possible. 

 

The basic necessities matter to all of us, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Ensuring that families have safe, accessible housing will 

continue to be a priority as the 150 First Nations housing 

projects involving $19 million announced in 2008 will continue 

to move forward. 

 

This budget also steps in to try and make the lives of many 

children better by making investment in child welfare to ensure 

that our foster care system is protecting our children. 

 

And despite the many difficult issues people are facing in this 

time of transformation in our province, our cultural lives must 

be fed with a life force to keep it strong. To this end, over 

$600,000 will be allocated toward the urban Aboriginal grants, 

through Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Budgets are only one tool we have as government to make the 

lives of our citizens better, but they are a powerful tool. I 

believe our work is only just begun, but our budget tries to 

make change and assure support for what we are working for, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. The voices of Saskatchewan people are 

our guiding force. And I believe we have listened, and the result 

is a budget which will make the lives of Saskatchewan people 

better. This is why I will not be supporting the amendment, but 

I will be supporting the budget brought forward by the Minister 

of Finance. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Before I 

begin my remarks I want to make a couple of comments. The 

first comment that I’d like to make is I want to thank the people 

who are in the Department of Finance that worked with the 

government’s Treasury Board and the Minister of Finance in 

putting this budget together. Having been on Treasury Board 

during our days in government, I know how incredibly hard all 

of the Treasury Board staff work, along with all of the other 

people in Finance, and I want to thank them for the work that 

they’ve done on behalf of all citizens of the province. 

 

The second comment I wanted to make, I wanted to thank the 

woman who is the constituency assistant to myself in Saskatoon 

Nutana, Judy Gossen, along with Darcy Marriott, who provide a 

valuable service to the people of our province and to the 

constituents of Saskatoon Nutana day in and day out. And I 

want to say thank you to them. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, here’s what’s interesting about this budget. 

The last NDP budget in 2007-2008 had expenditures of $8.3 

billion, $8.3 billion. The budget that was delivered by the Sask 

Party government last week contains expenditures of $10.2 

billion. It’s a $1.9 billion lift, Mr. Speaker. In fact if you look at 

what the Sask Party spent in the last fiscal year that’s coming to 

the end at the end of March, it was $10.3 billion, up from their 

estimate of 9.1 billion — 24 per cent lift in two years, Mr. 

Speaker, 24 per cent lift in expenditures. 

 

Now the members over there say, what should we cut? What I 

will say to the member is, is that the people of Saskatchewan 

want a government that is prepared to present a budget that is 

sustainable in the long term, Mr. Speaker. And this is a 

government that came into office with an election platform — 

and I have a copy of it here — that their ongoing expenditures 

or expenditure growth would be about 3 per cent for the term of 

their government. Well, Mr. Speaker, 3 per cent over a 

four-year period is 12 per cent. But if you look at this year 

alone, this Sask Party government is increasing spending in our 

province by 12.4 per cent. And if you go back to the NDP’s last 



March 24, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2523 

budget two years ago, Mr. Speaker, they have increased 

spending by $1.9 billion or 24 per cent. 

 

No time in the history of the province have we seen that kind of 

expenditure growth. Now the members opposite have used, 

have used a forecast in terms of GDP [gross domestic product] 

growth in this province of over 2 per cent. And my colleagues 

have quite eloquently pointed out that there isn’t a private 

sector analyst in the country that has indicated that this province 

will experience that kind of growth. 

 

[22:00] 

 

There is no one other than the Sask Party government that has 

predicted this kind of GDP growth, and so we will see whether 

in fact the members opposite should have relied upon the 

private sector or should they have relied upon their own 

predictions. And we know what happened in the 1980s when 

the Devine government didn’t listen to the people in Finance, 

relied upon their own senses of what was going to happen in 

this province, and we know what happened in terms of debt and 

deficit. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, also contained in this budget — and these 

folks really don’t want to talk about it — is a projection that we 

will experience close to $2 billion in revenue for potash. Now 

they’re predicting that 10.3 million tonnes of potash will be sold 

in this province this year at a revenue projection per tonne of 

$1,071 per Canadian tonne. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I remember — and it’s important sometimes 

to know a little bit about history — I remember in 2006 when 

our government projected, 2006-07 budget, when our 

government projected what potash sales would be. But because 

of a decision by the Chinese to hold out in terms of the contract 

— there was still negotiations with China — there were lower 

sales than were anticipated by our Ministry of Finance 

personnel. And as a result of that, what we saw, and it was 

stated in the 2007-08 budget, what we saw was about half of the 

revenue that we had projected in 2006-07 coming in because of 

the stalled negotiations. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there is a difference about when that 

decision will be made by the Chinese to buy potash, and I note 

that Agrium and PCS [Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 

Inc.] have a difference of opinion about when this contract 

might be concluded. Agrium believes that it’ll be concluded 

later rather than earlier. PCS says it’ll be concluded earlier. 

 

But the point is that if you look at what’s happening in China, 

the Chinese have some of their own potash that has come into 

the market in December 2008. They have now deregulated the 

price of potash in China. This is the internal market price. And 

we know that the Chinese farmers are experiencing the same 

kinds of escalating input costs that farmers across the globe are 

experiencing. And we’re not quite sure whether or not 

Canpotex will be able to get the deal that they want with China, 

at the prices that they want. And that will have an impact upon 

our revenue stream, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And when you look at this budget, 20 per cent of the revenues 

to support the 24 per cent lift in spending comes from potash. 

Now let’s just use the . . . Let’s just surmise — and I certainly 

hope I’m not correct in this — but let’s say in 2009-10 we have 

the same experience that we had in 2006 where there was a 

delay in the potash negotiations, and half of the revenue that we 

had projected for potash, we did not get. We only got half of the 

revenue that we expected for potash. So let’s say the Sask Party 

is expecting $2 billion. Contracts are stalled with the Chinese. 

We don’t get the price, or because of the delay we receive half 

of the revenue. Well, Mr. Speaker, that would put us back in 

deficit, Mr. Speaker. That would put us in deficit. 

 

And I think that, when I look at what they’re projecting in terms 

of oil, I think that the ministry officials and the minister have 

been quite conservative in terms of what they projected at $48 a 

barrel. But when it comes to potash, I don’t believe that we 

have the conservative estimates that I think in these kinds of . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I don’t 

think we have the conservative estimates in potash that we 

certainly appear to have for oil, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I also have had the opportunity to take a 

look at some of the contents of the budget. And I note that the 

members opposite are pleased with what is contained in the 

budget for agriculture. 

 

And I do make this note — it appears as though the Minister of 

Agriculture’s projections for the move of AgriStability to 

Melville was supposed to cost about $12 million, according to 

the minister’s initial press release. He indicated when he made 

this announcement that in ’08-09 it would cost about 3.8 

million, and in this coming up fiscal year, ’09-10, it would cost 

an extra 8.8 million. Well what we have, stated in the budget, is 

$22 million for the move for AgriStability. So it appears as 

though there are escalating costs associated with this. And it’ll 

be interesting to see why in fact that has occurred given that the 

program is not projected to begin until 2010. 

 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, they indicate that they have record 

spending when it comes to AgriStability, and I do note that 

there appears to be an increase from $58 million, I think, going 

up to $160.6 million. And that’s fair enough. But one of the 

things that we know is that they receive the projections from 

Ottawa in terms of what our portion of the cost is going to be. 

And obviously Ottawa is projecting that there are going to be 

negative margins in the farming community, and that’s why we 

will see a significant increase in the AgriStability program 

because of those negative margins. 

 

So I don’t particularly . . . I know the minister likes to spin this 

as good news for the agriculture industry. But I would say that 

while this money will be available for farmers and producers, it 

appears as though this money is available because they will be 

experiencing negative margins. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when you look at agricultural research, it’s 

disappointing in this budget that there is absolutely no increase 

in this particular allocation from the Sask Party government — 

absolutely no increase whatsoever. And in fact that is extremely 

disappointing. 

 



2524 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2009 

Now, Mr. Speaker, some members opposite have expressed 

concern about some statements that I made in the Saskatoon 

StarPhoenix, in the press, about what’s happening to Saskatoon 

with the decision by the government to reduce education tax on 

property. Mr. Speaker, once again, you know, if you look at the 

Sask Party platform, this is one area where the Sask Party 

completely violated its own platform. Because here’s what they 

said. They said that: 

 

A Saskatchewan Party government will work with school 

boards and consult with Saskatchewan people to 

determine the best way to ensure K-12 education is 

properly funded and that the education portion of property 

taxes is further reduced. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, you know what? Every school board in the 

province of Saskatchewan was absolutely shocked — shocked 

— that this government chose to go to a provincial mill rate and 

take away their ability to have access to the tax system. Now 

they used the word, they used the word shock. I think that was a 

word that was used by school boards across the province. They 

used the word shock, because they weren’t anticipating this at 

all. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, they didn’t consult with school boards. They 

didn’t talk to them about how was the best way to reduce 

education tax on property. Instead, what they did was they 

legislated first and consulted later, Mr. Speaker. Now they’ll 

say, oh I met with them, I met with them. Well, so what? You 

meet with them . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — So what? You meet with them. You tell them 

you’re not going to touch it. You’re going to give them the 

ability to tax. And then what happens? You call them into a 

room at noon and tell them, we’re taking away your ability to 

have access to property taxes and we’re going to a provincial 

mill rate. With a sweep of the hand, they did what they told 

school boards they were not going to do, Mr. Speaker. I would 

say that was a promise broken, Mr. Speaker. That was a 

promise broken. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite have talked about my 

observations when it comes to Saskatoon. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

my observations are contained in their book, ’09-10. I think it’s 

on page 68. Anybody who wants to look at the budget 

document, it’s on the website. Go to the Internet; click on 

budget document. Go to page 68 of the budget summary, and 

here’s what you’re going to find: examples of tax reductions. 

 

Now if you are in Canora, that would be the Minister of 

Education’s riding, and you’re a resident, you will see a $739 

reduction on your education tax — 48 per cent, 48 per cent. If 

you are in Swift Current — that would be the Premier’s riding 

— you’ll see a change in your tax levy of $326.  

 

Now if you are in Saskatoon — Saskatoon, that’s where the 

member from Saskatoon Eastview is from, the member from 

Massey Place, the member from Meewasin Valley, the member 

from Riversdale, the member from Centre, and Saskatoon 

Nutana — what will happen in Saskatoon? It’s called a change 

in the tax levy of $100 — $100. Now once again, once again 

. . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. I’ll ask the members to 

give the member the floor the same respect they expect when 

they’re speaking. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. Well, Mr. Speaker, some 

members have shouted, it’s not true. Well it’s on page 68. It’s in 

their budget document. It says $100. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatoon Nutana, there were people that 

voted for the Sask Party in the last provincial election. And you 

know, Mr. Speaker, they got a pamphlet — I even have copies 

at home — from the Sask Party candidate. And you know what 

that Sask Party candidate, and every Sask Party candidate in the 

city of Saskatoon said? That the average homeowner with a 

$200,000 home — and I think the average price of a home is a 

bit higher in the city of Saskatoon — would save $450 a year. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s not $450 a year. It’s an average of $100 

a year, Mr. Speaker. Now why would that be? Now I know that 

the Minister of Education, his good folks will receive in Canora 

an average change of $739. That’s a pretty good cut. I see that 

Swift Current will get a reduction of $326 — well that comes 

close to $450 a year. And the good people of Saskatoon, on 

average, will get a reduction of $100 a year. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, two points. They like to talk about the 

hundred promises they’ve kept. Let’s talk about two that they 

seem to have trouble keeping. One would be a $450 reduction 

in the city of Saskatoon when it comes to your education tax on 

property — that would be one promise. And the second promise 

is what they said. They said they would work with school 

divisions; they would consult school boards; they said they 

would consult the people of Saskatchewan to determine how 

best to reduce education tax on property. And, Mr. Speaker, 

they didn’t do it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’ve had one constituent contact me to 

indicate that they have done their calculations on their house 

and they will see a savings of $12 — $12. Their education tax is 

going down by $12. Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s not $100 according 

to the budget document. It’s not $450 according to their election 

platform. It’s twelve dollars, Mr. Speaker, twelve whole dollars. 

Last year, I think, it was $27 that they reduced the education 

portion of taxes, and this year for this particular homeowner, 

it’s $12. 

 

[22:15] 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the other thing that the Sask Party likes to 

talk about is how affordable Saskatchewan is. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, once again, once again we have the March 19 release 

on the consumer price index from Stats Canada. And what did 

Stats Canada say? Saskatchewan has the highest consumer price 

index in the country. 

 

And in Saskatchewan, you know what the major factor was? 

The 22.4 per cent rise in natural gas prices, Mr. Speaker. Now 

that was the leading cause of the highest consumer price index 

in all of Canada, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, they didn’t do 

what they said they would do in opposition. They said, when 



March 24, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2525 

natural gas prices were going up, let’s have rebates. And what 

did they do in government? Let’s not have rebates. Let’s give 

them a 22 per cent increase in their home heating. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there are people in this province that aren’t 

making large dollars. There are people that are making modest 

incomes, Mr. Speaker. There are newcomers that are coming to 

this province from other places that are making modest 

incomes. And those newcomers and people on modest incomes 

are having to deal with escalating costs of rent, escalating costs 

of home heating, escalating costs of electricity, Mr. Speaker. 

And it’s becoming very, very, very difficult, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I know that they’re extremely pleased with themselves 

that they have a budget that does a lot of things, does a lot of 

things. There’s no question about that. But the test of the budget 

will be, is the spending sustainable. Is it sustainable? Are the 

revenues that they project, are they going to be there? Because 

if they’re not, Mr. Speaker, the reality is that we’re going back 

to the past — back to the past. When there were people that 

have clawed their way out of the past to get to the point that 

we’re at in this province where we have reducing debt — not 

escalating debt, reducing debt. 

 

And I do note, I do note they’re very proud of the fact that 

because of higher commodity prices we’ve had surpluses that 

can be used to reduce the government debt, and that’s 

important. So it should be. 

 

But I do note that they are projecting for the first time, for the 

first time in decades, or in over a decade, that our per cent of 

GDP and debt to GDP, instead of going down is going to start 

trending back up. And that is a worry, Mr. Speaker, that is a 

worry. And the public should be worried about it. 

 

The public should be worried about a 24 per cent spending 

increase since these people came to office in November 2007. 

The public should be worried. The public should be worried 

that they rely 20 per cent of the revenue on potash when we had 

the experience of 2006 when there were delayed negotiations 

with the Chinese. It took them a while in order to get that 

contract, and it cut our potash revenues in half in 2006. 

 

And the public should be worried that this budget is not fair to 

everybody. And it’s certainly not fair to the good people of 

Saskatoon, of which there are thousands and thousands of 

homeowners that will, on average, can receive $1,000 reduction 

in their education tax. And this is in their own books. They say I 

don’t get it, but I’m relying upon the information that was 

provided by the Ministry of Finance, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And you know what else the members opposite don’t get? What 

the members opposite don’t get is that there are a lot of people 

in this province that live on modest incomes. They pay taxes, 

they go to work every day, and they have seen escalating costs 

associated with the boom, Mr. Speaker. The members opposite 

don’t get that. 

 

And Mr. Speaker, the members opposite don’t get, they don’t 

get that Saskatchewan has the highest labour force attachment 

of young women with children under the age of six who need to 

work. Oh, and they say, oh we’ve increased child daycare, and 

yes they have, Mr. Speaker. 

But you know what they didn’t do? They didn’t increase the 

parent subsidy. If you look at the Social Services ministry’s 

book estimates, they did not change the subsidy . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . And now they say spend more. Well I will say 

this: I note you’re spending more. It’s how you choose the 

priorities, Mr. Speaker. It’s how you choose the priorities. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — There seems to be a number of 

members who would like to enter the debate. You will get your 

turn; respect the member that has the floor. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s how you decide on the 

priorities. It’s who the winners and who the losers are. Well we 

know this: we have the highest labour market attachment of 

young women with children under the age of six. We know that 

they are having difficulty accessing child daycare. In my own 

constituency, Mr. Speaker, we have seven child daycare centres 

that have a waiting list of over 800 children trying to get in, 

because those folks are working, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, not all of them are high-income people. A 

lot of them are lower and modest income people and when you 

look at this government’s budget when it comes to parent 

subsidies for those child daycares, not one thin dime more. 

They’re going to create 1,000 more spaces but nowhere are they 

going to ensure that the parents that might access those spaces 

have access to parent subsidies, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I know that the chatterers are busy chatting, 

but you know what? In this House we get to speak. We get to 

represent our constituents and my constituents fought long and 

hard to bring this province back from the brink of bankruptcy in 

1991. They gave up a lot and they’re watching. They do not, 

they do not want to go back to the past. They do not want a 

government that spending is out of control already. 

 

They’ve only been here 15 months and they’ve increased 

spending in this province by 24 per cent and they’re relying, 

they’re relying 20 per cent of their revenues on potash when we 

have the experience of 2006 when there were delayed 

negotiations; it cut our revenues in half. And that, Mr. Speaker, 

could have, could have a significant impact on the bottom line. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

South. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Well once again, Mr. Speaker, the 

NDP have left us with nothing to work with. It kind of reminds 

me of when I was growing up in a boarding school, people used 

to short-sheet you. It’s the same sort of feeling all over again, 

Mr. Speaker. We’ve got short-sheeted once again by the NDP. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure and a privilege to rise in the House 

today to speak in support of our government’s new budget for 

2009-2010. 

 

I’d like to begin my remarks with a few sincere thank yous to 

some very important people. First of all, I’d like to thank the 

people of Regina South constituency who elected me to 

represent them. It’s a great honour, and I’m reminded of that 

every single day I serve here in the House. Also like to thank 



2526 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2009 

my wife, Jocelyn, for her constant support. 

 

Special thanks are due to Kyle, my constituency assistant; 

Doug, Margo, Karalee, Linda, and Morgan in the office upstairs 

who work very hard — especially Morgan who works very 

hard; the staff of the Municipal Affairs, true professionals every 

one of them; and my caucus colleagues; municipal leaders all 

over Saskatchewan who have come together in an extraordinary 

fashion to craft major parts of this exciting new budget, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now in order to provide the proper context for a discussion of 

the budget, it’s helpful to review public reactions to it before we 

begin. Here’s a small sample of what we’ve read in the press 

and heard in the news recently, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The StarPhoenix and the Leader-Post wrote: 

 

But there were really two things that struck you about this 

particular budget day [they’re referring of course to last 

Wednesday]: First, to see a provincial government 

produce a budget with such aggressive spending and 

property tax cuts, yet still an honest, real $415-million 

surplus in such unsettling economic times . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — This is: 

 

. . . as financial officials [have] described it, rather 

phenomenal. Second [the report goes on to say], the Sask. 

Party government has now addressed so many 

long-standing concerns that one really wonders if the NDP 

has anything legitimately left to criticize. 

 

Well I couldn’t agree more, Mr. Speaker. I couldn’t agree more. 

 

Sadly the opposition Finance critic, the member for Regina 

Douglas Park, disagrees. He says he doesn’t like the budget, 

Mr. Speaker. On what grounds, we might ask. Well it looks like 

he has four reasons. First, he has described the budget as 

runaway spending and calls it a potential fiscal train wreck. 

Strong words, Mr. Speaker, strong words indeed. Unfortunately 

he immediately contradicted himself by declaring his personal 

support for both of the budget’s so-called big ticket items. 

 

Of the historic property tax decrease, he told CTV news 

reporters, well I think some of the government’s initiatives are 

good — initiatives in terms of property tax reduction. 

 

And at his own news conference, when asked his opinion about 

the new revenue-sharing agreement for municipalities he said, I 

think we would have landed there too. In fact when challenged 

by CTV to name specific parts of the budget that he would cut, 

he couldn’t identify a single thing and then chose instead to 

change the topic of conversation. 

 

The Finance critic’s second objection is that he doesn’t like the 

revenue forecast for potash royalties. Others on the other side 

would agree with him. He has repeatedly claimed that the 

current temporary cutbacks in potash production must mean an 

equivalent drop in potash revenues. He doesn’t understand it, 

absolutely. As the members for Kindersley and Meadow Lake 

have patiently explained to him, his view is dead wrong. Letters 

from the most senior officials at the province’s biggest potash 

companies confirm the truth that sales, not production, is by far 

the biggest factor in potash revenues for the Government of 

Saskatchewan. Who knew, indeed? Who knew? 

 

I agree completely with my colleagues that it is truly alarming 

that a former minister of Finance has such a shaky grasp of one 

of Saskatchewan’s most important revenue streams. 

 

The critic’s third issue is what he considers to be optimistic 

projections for the province’s GDP provided by the experts at 

the Ministry of Finance. I find it very disappointing — very 

disappointing indeed, Mr. Speaker — to note that he is now 

showing a complete lack of confidence in the very officials who 

served him so well so recently. And we should remember what 

the press said about it. Too bad he didn’t share his views with 

the former NDP Finance minister, Jim Melenchuk, when he was 

predicting 6 per cent growth in 2003. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Time of adjournment having been 

reached, this House now stands adjourned until 1:30 tomorrow 

afternoon. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 22:30.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2497 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2500 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2504 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2507 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2510 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2514 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2517 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2519 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2522 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 2525 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 


