




















































Hansard: March 31, 2009


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 42A  TUESDAY, MARCH 31, 2009, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2601 

 March 31, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. It gives me a great deal of pleasure to introduce to you 

and through you to all members of the Assembly, 

representatives of the Saskatchewan Association of Fire Chiefs, 

Norm Kindred — Norm, if you want to give us a wave — and 

the president of the Saskatchewan Volunteer Firefighters 

Association, Dale Wagner. 

 

Norm has been involved in a volunteer fire service for 20 years, 

serving as fire chief and presently as deputy fire chief of the 

White City fire department. Dale lives in Hague and has been 

active in the fire service for over 37 years, serving as a 

volunteer firefighter and first responder. 

 

Also joining them is our provincial fire commissioner, Duane 

McKay, and Trent Catley from the office of the fire 

commissioner. Duane has an extensive background in 

emergency services, including over 28 years in the fire service 

emergency management and 911 emergency communications. 

Duane was appointed as the fire commissioner for the province 

in October of 2007, and Trent has been with the office of the 

fire commissioner for seven years, starting in February 2002, 

and is currently a member of the Craven fire department. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these gentlemen are joining me later this afternoon 

to participate in an announcement on behalf of SGI 

[Saskatchewan Government Insurance] that will allow for 

vehicles driven by volunteer firefighters and first responders to 

be designated as emergency vehicles by municipalities. In 

November I announced changes to The Traffic Safety 

Amendment Act, 2008, and tomorrow, Mr. Speaker, those 

changes will come into effect. Due to the co-operation of the 

opposition, we were able to do this in a timely manner. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in welcoming 

some of Saskatchewan‟s finest firefighters and first responders 

to their Legislative Assembly. And again, I look forward to 

joining them later this afternoon for some important 

announcements. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟d like to 

join with the minister and welcome the officials and firefighters 

to our Assembly. We‟re always pleased to have you join us, and 

we understand the very difficult work you do. And on behalf of 

all of us, we‟re very, very pleased that we were able to pass this 

legislation as quickly as we were. Thank you. 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 

and through you to all members of this honoured Assembly, I‟d 

like to introduced a constituent of mine. Seated in your gallery 

is Bill Crouse. Give us a wave, Bill. 

 

Bill used to live about a mile from where my farm is, and him 

and his family have been friends of our family for many, many 

years. Bill was instrumental in my campaign and also just over 

the trials that I‟ve had over this past while. He‟s been always 

there for our family. So I ask all members to join me in 

welcoming Bill and, as well, to extend a speedy recovery to his 

wife Fern. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m 

extremely pleased today to stand and present a petition on 

behalf of Saskatchewan residents. And it‟s in support of the 

government‟s policy on green vehicles. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government ministers named in this petition to follow 

their own platform and government policies and trade in 

their Jeep Libertys for vehicles that are on SGI‟s 2008 list 

of recommended fuel-efficient vehicles. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the signatories on this petition are from the 

good city of Regina, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition in support of indexing minimum wage. Saskatchewan‟s 

cost of living has been dramatically rising, and minimum wage 

oftentimes sporadic increases. And the petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to indexing Saskatchewan 

minimum wage to ensure that the standard of living of 

minimum wage earners is maintained in the face of cost of 

living increases. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petitions are signed by people of Saskatchewan from the 

town of Ituna and the city of Regina. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



2602 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2009 

The Speaker: — Before I recognize the member from The 

Battlefords, there‟s a lot of good jostling across the floor, things 

members want to speak about, but I would ask members to be 

mindful and give the member the opportunity to share their 

petition without interference. 

 

I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It‟s my 

pleasure today to rise and present a petition against the means 

testing for the seniors‟ drug plan. The petitioners note that in 

February 2008, the Saskatchewan Party government announced 

that all seniors would be forced to apply to keep their benefits 

under the seniors‟ drug plan. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners ask: 

 

. . . the Legislative Assembly to cause the government to 

reverse its decision to means test seniors and ensure that 

all seniors continue to have access to affordable 

prescription drugs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitioners are all from the constituency of 

The Battlefords and surrounding area. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition in support of fairness for Saskatchewan 

students through the expansion of the graduate retention 

program. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately expand the graduate retention 

program to include master‟s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are 

students from the University of Regina, as well as students from 

the University of Saskatchewan, as well as a number of health 

care professionals who have graduate degrees working here in 

the province. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

in support of a new long-term care facility in La Ronge. The 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately invest in the planning and 

construction of new long-term care beds in La Ronge.  

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by the good people of La 

Ronge and area. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Swift Current Ardens Win Basketball Championship 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a 

great pleasure for me to rise in the Assembly today and draw 

attention to the Swift Current Comp High School Ardens 

basketball team. The Ardens, who competed in Hoopla 

admittedly some time ago on March 21, won the 4A provincial 

basketball finals. They beat Moose Jaw Central 64-61 in the 

semifinals, and then they defeated the champions, defending 

champions, Weyburn, by a score of 39-33 in the Hoopla final. It 

was the fewest points the Ardens had scored in a game all 

season, but they still managed to win, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Ardens were led by Katie Avram with 12 rebounds and 8 

points in her last game as an Arden; Tessa Andres who was the 

leading scorer in the final with 10 points; and Lindsay Siemens 

who hit a three-pointer with just over a minute to go to seal the 

victory over Weyburn for the Ardens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s the Ardens‟ second 4A Hoopla gold medal in 

the past three years. They won gold in ‟07 and bronze in 2008. 

They finished the season with an impressive 27 and 8 record 

and 5 tournament wins over the course of the season, Mr. 

Speaker.  

 

When I was at the Comp, now years and years ago, the Ardens 

had a reputation for championship basketball. That has been 

restored because of these young women that are playing on the 

team, their parents, and especially because of a great coach, my 

friend, Rod Siemens. 

 

I‟d like all members to congratulate the Swift Current 

Comprehensive High School Ardens on another successful 

Hoopla tournament. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Taoist Tai Chi Society Anniversary Celebration 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, on Saturday, March 28, I along 

with the member from Saskatoon Eastview, had the pleasure of 

attending the first anniversary celebration for the Saskatoon 

branch of the Taoist Tai Chi Society of Canada. Though 

participants have been gathering in Saskatoon for many years, 

this anniversary commemorates the organization‟s formal 

recognition as a branch of this registered national charity. 

 

The Taoist Tai Chi Society is active in communities across 

Canada and in 28 countries around the world. The society was 

founded by Master Moy Lin-Shin who trained in China and 

Hong Kong. It was his vow to share the benefits of Taoist Tai 

Chi with others, and so began the spread of these ancient 

teachings to the rest of the world. In addition to sharing the 

personal health and spiritual benefits of Taoist Tai Chi, the 

society has an outward focus as they engage in activities to 

promote cultural exchange, as well as an emphasis on giving 



March 31, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2603 

back to the community. 

 

The first year anniversary celebration was a great occasion. The 

program began with a lion dance by students from the Chinese 

Language School followed by formal greetings from the 

national society. The morning program also had a number of 

Tai Chi demonstrations by the members, and guests were 

provided with the opportunity to learn some of the basic 

movements. The event concluded with a shared meal and the 

cutting of an anniversary cake. 

 

In speaking with the members of the Saskatoon branch, it was 

clear to me that these individuals are committed to their 

community and committed to a healthy society. I would like to 

congratulate the entire Saskatoon branch, President Pat Keyser, 

and the organizing committee for hosting such a successful 

morning. Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join me in 

congratulating the Saskatoon branch of the Taoist Tai Chi 

Society of Canada on its first anniversary. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Batoche. 

 

Prince Albert Premier’s Dinner 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 

night I was privileged, along with the member for 

Saskatchewan Rivers and the Minister of Corrections, to join 

700 special guests at the first annual Prince Albert Premier‟s 

Dinner. The atmosphere was electric at the Exhibition Centre, 

and the Premier delivered another of his memorable speeches to 

a crowd that, according to today‟s P.A. [Prince Albert] Herald, 

was sardined into the building. In fact, Mr. Speaker, not only 

was the building filled to capacity, but there were another 200 

people on the waiting list hoping to attend. 

 

The people gathered to hear the positive message of our 

province and they weren‟t disappointed. The Premier touched 

on the highlights of our past 16 months in government and 

shared his optimism for the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to take a moment to thank the Premier for 

his kind words regarding the P.A. connection at that dinner last 

night. For members who are unfamiliar, the P.A. connection is 

the informal group which includes the member from 

Saskatchewan Rivers, the Minister of Corrections, and myself. 

 

It is very rewarding to receive that type of recognition. I believe 

I speak for the group when I say that we will continue to do our 

very best. And in appreciation to the Premier, we will work 

hard to ensure that in the future there will be a fourth member 

of the P.A. connection on this side of the House. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

O Ambassador West Africa Project 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, students at St. Agnes School in Moose Jaw are taking 

action against global poverty. The program is called the O 

Ambassador West Africa project run jointly by Oprah‟s Angel 

Network and Free the Children and has the goal of dreaming 

big and creating global change. 

 

St. Agnes is one of just four schools in Canada that have been 

selected to be part of the project. Their goal is to raise $2,500 

by the end of June. The O Ambassador meets with West 

African community leaders, and they direct the project and 

indicate where the money is needed. 

 

The grade eight students of St. Agnes School are raising the 

funds with bake sales, auctions, and later in the month, a 

fast-a-thon to collect pledges. 

 

O Ambassadors is a school-based program where educators are 

invited to apply to form a club at their school. The program 

connects youth in North America with people around the world 

to create lasting change. To date, Free the Children has built 

more than 55 Oprah‟s Angel Network funded schools to 

educate youth in 12 countries. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in congratulating 

the students and staff at Moose Jaw‟s St. Agnes School as they 

work to address problems such as hunger, poverty, and limited 

access to education across the world. Thank you very much, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm River. 

 

Arm River Constituency Hockey Teams 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m very pleased to 

rise in the House today to talk about a championship winning 

hockey team from Davidson. On March 29, the Davidson 

Huskies won the Midget Provincial C title in front of a large, 

cheering hometown crowd. 

 

Game one of the finals was in Kerrobert and Davidson was 

down 1-0 after two periods, but they came back to score three 

unanswered goals in the third period to win 3-1. 

 

Game two saw the largest crowd in the history of the Davidson 

Communiplex. The boys came out hard offensively, defensively 

to shut down the Kerrobert Thunder by skating to a decisive 8-3 

win. 

 

Members of the Davidson Huskies are Mark Zoerb, Kashtin 

Dietz, Sheldon Kenny, Monte Zdunich, Preston Lynch, Jason 

Boyle, Dustin Villeneuve, Lee Carpenter, Terry McNabb, Ian 

Johnson, Dylan Boyle, David Baade, Bryce Prpick, Nolan 

Curts, and Garrett Dieno, Ian McLellan, and Devon Geib. The 

team was well coached by Fred Curts, Lindsay Dieno, Everett 

Johnson, and Dean Palmer and managed by Roy Kenny. 

 

The team worked hard all year and went undefeated in the 

league play, averaging more than 10 goals per game. My 

personal congratulations go out to this fine hockey team. 

 

[13:45] 



2604 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2009 

I also would like to mention to the seniors‟ men hockey team 

from the town of Drake who went to the final game of the 

provincial championships, but unfortunately came up on the 

short end. Congratulations however to team manager Blake 

Bergen and his players on a very successful hockey season for 

Drake. 

 

I would ask that all members of the legislature join me in 

offering congratulations to the Davidson Huskies and Drake 

seniors upon their successful hockey campaigns of 2009. Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Law Day for Secondary Students 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, for several years, the 

French-speaking lawyers of Saskatchewan, the AJEFS 

[Association des juristes d‟expression française de la 

Saskatchewan], have organized a law day enabling secondary 

school students to learn about and debate current issues relating 

to law in our society. The high school participants in these 

debates learn about the law by doing research in advance of 

their debate and then hone their speaking skills in the debate 

itself. This year‟s debate topic was “We should make voting in 

elections mandatory.” 

 

I am pleased to inform my colleagues in the House that the 

young person named the best debater this year is Alex Thumm. 

Alex is a constituent of mine who‟s attending Collège Mathieu 

in Gravelbourg this school year. Alex‟s success is especially 

remarkable because French is not Alex‟s first language. He has 

had previous success at the national level in debating English, 

having participated in debates in Montreal two years ago with 

other junior high school students from across Canada. 

 

I invite all members to extend warm congratulations, both to 

Alex Thumm on his personal success and to the 

French-speaking lawyers of Saskatchewan as it continues to 

provide this excellent opportunity for young persons to expand 

their knowledge and appreciation of the law and to develop 

their oratorical skills. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood River. 

 

Good Economic News 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Two new 

reports show that the Saskatchewan economy — while not 

immune to the effects of the global recession — remains strong. 

According to the Scotiabank, consumer confidence and 

employment growth will keep auto sales strong in 2009, unlike 

in Alberta and British Columbia where they will be down 

sharply. Here‟s a quote from the Scotiabank report: “. . . 

Saskatchewan is proving to be one of the best places to ride out 

the current economic storm.” 

 

But that‟s not the only good news, Mr. Speaker. Stats Canada is 

reporting average weekly earnings are up again to more than 

$800 a week, third highest in Canada. It is also the first time it‟s 

been over $800. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people are earning 

more and they‟re keeping more of what they earn, thanks to our 

government‟s significant tax cuts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this good economic news reflects both the strength 

of the economy and the positive attitude of Saskatchewan 

people. It‟s in stark contrast to the doom and gloom attitude of 

the members opposite. 

 

Mr. Speaker, recently I was asked if I knew what the difference 

was between the NDP [New Democratic Party] and a car 

battery. Mr. Speaker, the answer is a car battery has a positive 

side. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Changes at Distribution Centre 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, there are some changes being made 

at the Government Services distribution centre. A number of 

services that were previously provided by government will now 

be privatized and jobs will be lost. And not surprisingly, Mr. 

Speaker, nobody heard one word about the privatization at the 

centre until the deal was done. 

 

To the minister: why was no one told about the Sask Party‟s 

plan to privatize the distribution centre? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services. 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the initiative the member opposite talks about is a 

budget initiative. Obviously, Mr. Speaker, budget secrecy 

demands that nothing be released until the budget is released, 

Mr. Speaker, which is exactly what happened. When the budget 

was released, Mr. Speaker, the people working at the 

distribution centre were informed of the circumstances. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there were 10 FTEs [full-time equivalent] reduced 

at Government Services because we take the mandate seriously 

to operate frugally, Mr. Speaker, at Government Services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there were a further 18 positions that were 

reallocated within Government Services. Mr. Speaker, those are 

the individuals that will be impacted. And of the 15 people 

there that will be impacted, once they go through the collective 

bargaining process, Mr. Speaker, I‟m sure every one of them 

will continue to be working at Government Services. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 



March 31, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2605 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party government doesn‟t 

understand what being transparent, open, and accountable 

means. Mr. Speaker, we‟ve seen this privatization on the sly 

before with SaskTel — with email services, message relaying, 

and operator assistance. This is the way the Sask Party 

government is privatizing Crowns and Government Services, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Last week the government‟s online auction was privatized to a 

former Devine cabinet minister. This week we learned the 

government distribution centre will be privatized and jobs will 

be lost. Why won‟t the minister be open and honest about this 

government‟s privatization plans? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services. 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, this is not privatization. This is efficiencies within 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

If it‟s privatization, Mr. Speaker, then the members opposite 

were practising it as well. They privatized salvage and sales 

within Government Services, Mr. Speaker. They privatized 60 

per cent of ITO [Information Technology Office], Mr. Speaker, 

under their mandate. And fact is, Mr. Speaker, they were 

proposing to privatize — if that‟s what it is, Mr. Speaker — the 

entire ITO to EDS [Electronic Data Systems Corporation], Mr. 

Speaker, under Andrew Thomson, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

this is efficiencies. The people involved will continue to be 

working for Government Services. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, before the Sask Party lost the 2003 

election, they weren‟t afraid to talk about their privatization 

plans. After losing the election on the privatization issue, they 

quit talking about it. Now, Mr. Speaker, they are following a 

privatization agenda. As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, it is clear 

from Sask Party government actions that the privatization of 

Crown corporations and Government Services is still on the 

agenda. To the minister: why not at least be honest about it 

instead of privatizing services on the sly? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services. 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, this 

is not privatization. The members may portray it in any means 

they prefer. When they do something, it‟s not privatization. If 

members on this side do exactly the same thing, all of a sudden 

it‟s privatization. Mr. Speaker, this is just a rehash of past 

elections. Fear and smear is what that party knows. They accuse 

everybody else, Mr. Speaker, of doing exactly the things they 

do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they went around in 1987 saying, if you elected a 

Conservative in Wood River, they were going to close all the 

hospitals. In ‟91, Mr. Speaker, that party did it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Employment Trends 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, more than 3,000 jobs have been 

lost since December, most of them good paying jobs. There 

have been layoffs, among others, at Doepker Industries, 50 to 

60 employees; StarTek, 266 employees; Cameco, 35 

employees; Agrium, 300 employees; Mosaic potash, 1,000 

employees; Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, 940 

employees. To the Minister of Enterprise and Innovation: has 

Enterprise Saskatchewan conducted an analysis and prepared a 

plan to respond to the crisis? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, since this government was 

elected in the fall of 2007, we haven‟t just developed a plan. 

We‟ve executed a growth agenda, Mr. Speaker, for this 

province, and the net result just two weeks ago in the job 

reports that that member ignores, that the Finance critic ignored 

yesterday, the news was pretty clear. Notwithstanding those 

layoffs, which are serious by any measure, this province, this 

provincial economy has created 14,500 jobs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — We were the only place to create jobs. 

That‟s what we‟re doing about it, Mr. Speaker. And moreover, 

yesterday the Finance critic mused in the media about why 

there aren‟t any help wanted signs in the malls that he toured on 

the weekend. Well, Mr. Speaker, I think part of the problem is 

they‟re so negative on that side of the House, when shopkeepers 

see them coming, they take down their help wanted sign, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party claims that its 

so-called . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I sense the debate‟s becoming quite lively, but 

let‟s respect the right of the members to place the question and 

the members to respond. The member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — The Sask Party claims that its so-called 

economic stimulus package is a plan for the economy. The Sask 

Party claimed before the last election that Enterprise 

Saskatchewan would “. . . establish provincial economic 

development goals and strategies for the endorsement by 



2606 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2009 

Cabinet and the Legislature.” 

 

And Enterprise Saskatchewan Deputy Chair Gavin Semple says 

that Enterprise Saskatchewan will “. . . serve as an independent 

monitor of very specific growth measures and targets.” 

 

To the minister: did Enterprise Saskatchewan advise the 

government on its so-called economic stimulus package, and 

will Enterprise Saskatchewan be conducting an analysis of how 

many jobs the economic stimulus package will actually create? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in terms of how many 

jobs the Government of Saskatchewan‟s growth agenda is 

contributing to, Mr. Speaker, because we know the resource 

strength in the province, the people of the province is what 

deserves the credit for the unique strength of our economy 

when you compare us to other places in the country. 

 

But the facts are in. The measures are in that the member seeks. 

The measures include the population numbers from last 

Thursday where this province grew at 15,131 — the largest 

population jump on the calendar since 1975, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There were 14,500 more people working in Saskatchewan in 

February compared to the same month. Mr. Speaker, today the 

Conference Board of Canada has a report just today — the hon. 

member who‟s from Saskatoon will want to note — that 

predicts Saskatoon will lead the country in economic growth, 

Mr. Speaker; under this party‟s plan, Regina will be number 

two, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And well they keep saying, how much? How about 14,500 new 

jobs when no other province in Canada created new jobs at all, 

Mr. Speaker? There is more work to be done, but the growth 

agenda for this side of the House is working for Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Enterprise Saskatchewan and Economic Development 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, at least one rural community 

believes that Enterprise Saskatchewan will provide them with 

less support for community economic development than the old 

REDA [regional economic development authority] program.  

 

According to the February 9 World-Spectator, Mr. Weedmark 

said, “It‟s unfortunate to see the funding disappear for the 

REDA system, to be replaced by a few centralized offices with 

no clear mandate . . .” 

 

He also said: 

 

. . . regions like ours are seen as simply sources of raw 

materials and workers for the cities. 

 

. . . I would not expect much in terms of economic 

development for rural Saskatchewan out of these 

organizations. 

 

To the minister: has there been an analysis of how well 

communities like Moosomin will fare under this new enterprise 

region scheme? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 

member for that question as well. Clearly, Mr. Speaker, there is 

substantial additional funding for the new regions over what the 

REDAs received in the past. In fact, to be perfectly frank and 

honest, it‟s doubled — the funding is doubled, member — and 

clearly the benefits for economic development in the regions 

will far exceed what they ever, whatever existed under the 

pre-existing REDA program. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party 

promised that Enterprise Saskatchewan would establish goals 

and strategies and provide independent and objective analysis. 

But it doesn‟t seem to have played a role in any of the 

government‟s major economic initiatives. Saskatchewan people 

want to know what they‟re getting for the $21 million a year 

that the Sask Party spends just to operate Enterprise 

Saskatchewan. They want to know how many jobs does it 

create, do those jobs pay well, where are those jobs located. 

 

To the minister: will the Sask Party conduct a third party, 

independent analysis of Enterprise Saskatchewan in how 

effective it has been in creating good paying jobs in all parts of 

the province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Well I thank the member for the 

question, Mr. Speaker. And I‟ll tell this Hon. Assembly this, 

that certainly due to the substantial and substantive 

recommendations from Enterprise Saskatchewan, that our 

economy has done better and it will continue to do so. 

 

Certainly we continue to monitor our progress as we go along. 

And I would inform that member that a number of the, the vast 

majority of the staff that we have, we inherited from the 

previous Ministry of Industry and Resources. And they are fine 

people and continue to do a fabulous job for this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 



March 31, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2607 

Energy Options 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. When the 

Sask Party created this 12-person Uranium Development 

Partnership, they indicated that the government was, quoting 

the news release, creating „“. . . an energy plan for the future . . . 

looking at primarily four sources of energy — nuclear, wind, 

hydro and clean coal.‟” 

 

There was no mention, Mr. Speaker, of energy conservation, no 

mention of other renewable energy sources like geothermal or 

solar energy. By its own admission, the Saskatchewan Party has 

spent $3 million to study nuclear energy in just five short 

months but there have been no announcements of similar 

studies for wind, hydro, geothermal, or solar energy. 

 

To the Minister of Enterprise Saskatchewan: in order to “create 

the complete energy plan for the future,” will the Saskatchewan 

Party be announcing multi-million dollar panels on wind, 

hydro, geothermal, and solar energy in the near future? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 

member for that question. And clearly a partnership like the 

Uranium Development Partnership won‟t be required on those 

other issues because we‟re moving ahead on those, member. 

 

The former government, the NDP government, the people of 

Saskatchewan will remember when they rolled out a piece 

called the action plan for the economy in 2005, and here‟s part 

of that action plan for the economy, Mr. Speaker. The action 

plan for the economy under the NDP government said that: 

 

As a major producer of uranium, the province should 

consider adding value to this resource to create more jobs 

and opportunities for Saskatchewan people. 

 

. . . Stimulate further uranium exploration and 

development by working with the industry and pressing 

the federal government to address regulatory burdens and 

duplication. 

 

Evaluate opportunities for processing and refining 

uranium in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It certainly 

is a pleasure to know that the member opposite reads our 

material and, Mr. Speaker, he‟d be well-advised to follow it as 

well. 

 

By contrast, Mr. Speaker, to the activities of the minister 

opposite, the former NDP government brought wind energy 

production to Saskatchewan, enough to power 73,000 homes. 

But the Saskatchewan Party‟s recent announcement of a 

significant investment in energy-related infrastructure made no 

mention of investing in wind energy or any other alternative 

energy source. More than 250 megawatts of new electricity is 

being added to the provincial system, but not a single megawatt 

of green energy is in the mix. 

 

To the minister: if the Uranium Development Partnership was 

tasked with this review but failed to produce results, and the 

Sask Party will not invest in other alternative energy studies, 

how can Saskatchewan people have any confidence in this 

flawed and failing process initiated by the minister and this 

government? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I 

thank the member for that question as well. Clearly, you know, 

the Saskatchewan Party is proposing a full public consultation 

process on uranium development, where the NDP have already 

made up their minds. The problem is they have a whole bunch 

of different positions. Dwain Lingenfelter says this: 

 

. . . I‟m not talking about debating the pros and cons of 

nuclear power until the cows come home . . . That debate 

is over [he says]. We need to evaluate the discussion as to 

how we best capture the opportunity. 

 

Meanwhile, Ryan Meili says he‟s dead set against even 

considering nuclear energy. And Yens Pedersen goes even 

farther. He says he wants to shut down any further development 

of the uranium industry in the province, including new uranium 

mines. What is their position? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 

stand with the people of Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan people 

want informed debate. They want all of their energy options 

examined, including the potential costs, the risks, the benefits, 

and the environmental impacts, Mr. Speaker, of those options. 

They want an honest debate. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The Speaker is having difficulty 

hearing the question. I‟ll ask the member to start again and 

place his question. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan people 

want an honest debate — an open, transparent, and objective 

assessment of all the options, including the environmental 

impact of each option throughout its life cycle. To the minister, 

Mr. Speaker: is the Saskatchewan Party prepared to expand the 

current debate on value-added development of Saskatchewan‟s 

energy industry beyond nuclear, to include energy conservation 

and alternative energy sources like wind, solar, geothermal, and 

hydro? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 



2608 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2009 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr, Speaker. This 

government is clearly moving ahead on all of those fronts. We 

will proceed to look into those and to develop those sources of 

power in this province. What I ask that member: what‟s his 

position on the UDP [Uranium Development Partnership]? And 

I inform him, as I have before in this House, that there will be 

full public consultations around this province announced before 

the end of this very week. 

 

Here, Mr. Speaker, is a quote from their leader, the Leader of 

the Opposition. He said this in 2005 when he was the premier of 

the province. He said it in Asia, mind you, so maybe it doesn‟t 

count. He said, “The province would consider any business case 

to establish a reactor or nuclear waste storage facility in the 

province.” 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Despite 

the bad track record on public consultation on important 

subjects, yesterday and again today, the Minister of Enterprise 

Saskatchewan said the Uranium Development Partnership 

report will be subject to a broad and comprehensive public 

consultation process. 

 

The minister doesn‟t know what the consultation process will 

include. He doesn‟t know where, and he doesn‟t know when 

these so-called comprehensive consultations will take place. 

What he does know is that they will be wrapped up by the end 

of spring, the beginning of summer. In other words, Mr. 

Speaker, something like six weeks from now, six weeks to hold 

a full-fledged, province-wide consultation on a subject of great 

importance to all Saskatchewan residents. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, to the minister: how is this even possible, Mr. 

Speaker? Six weeks. How can anyone believe that the minister 

and the Sask Party are taking this very important consultation 

process seriously? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Clearly, as I‟ve 

stated before, the process will be outlined before the end of this 

very week to the people of Saskatchewan. And I assure you that 

we are taking the process very seriously, and it will be 

comprehensive in nature. I ask that member: who does he 

support in the leadership convention that‟s coming up for the 

NDP on June 6? 

 

Here‟s what another candidate had to say about the issue. Mr. 

Dwain Lingenfelter — by all accounts the leading candidate in 

that race — he said: 

 

Nuclear power plants in our province would provide clean, 

safe, affordable energy to power oil sands development. I 

want to be clear about the scale of the development. I am 

suggesting that enough nuclear generation be built in 

Saskatchewan to provide at least a third of the energy for 

the oil sands as well as an alternative to coal and natural 

gas in meeting future electrical needs in Saskatchewan, 

Alberta and our energy-hungry neighbor to the south. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Uranium Development Partnership 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I have here a letter, a mandate 

letter, that was signed by the Minister of Enterprise and the 

Minister of CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan], the mandate letter handed to the Uranium 

Development Partnership. Mr. Speaker, this letter has been 

made public through a freedom of information request. But 

interestingly, Mr. Speaker, before the government made this 

letter available to the public, what did they do, Mr. Speaker? 

They blacked out sections of the letter. 

 

My question to the Premier is: what in this letter did the 

ministers instruct the Uranium Development Partnership to do, 

that you do not want the public to be aware of? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I thank 

the member for that question as well. We‟ve recently 

discovered where he stands on the issue — at least where he 

stood on it in 2005, Mr. Speaker, when he was in Asia. 

 

Clearly there‟s nothing that I‟m aware of that this government 

has blacked out, and there‟s certainly no part of the mandate of 

the UDP that is a secret as far as I‟m concerned. I will say this 

though, that originally, the original mandate of the UDP did not 

include any reference to storage of spent fuel cartridges in the 

province of Saskatchewan. The UDP came back to us and asked 

that that be included. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I have the letter in my hand. It‟s 

plain to see that important sections of this letter have been 

blacked out, have been blacked out. They‟ve been blacked out 

by this government so the public would not know what it is that 

this government has instructed the Uranium Development 

Partnership to report. 

 

My question is to the minister: will he make this letter in its 

entirety public? Will he expose what it is that he has told the 

Uranium Development Partnership to do, that he does not want 

the people of Saskatchewan to be aware of? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 



March 31, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2609 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say very clearly that 

the process that‟s been outlined by the minister responsible for 

the Uranium Development Partnership has been followed to the 

letter, Mr. Speaker. The minister has invited an excellent and 

qualified cross-section of people from this province to be . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the group of people that are 

involved in the UDP, I think, are well qualified — I think all 

members of this Assembly would recognize that — led by Dr. 

Richard Florizone, vice-president of the University of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. It‟s not going to be very much 

longer now before the minister is presented with the report, the 

full report. That report will be released to the public in due 

course, even perhaps, as the minister said, by the end of the 

week. 

 

All of the report, without any editing, will be released to the 

members of this House and all of the people of the province. 

And as the minister has said, then the people of Saskatchewan 

will be asked for their input. We‟ll facilitate, I think, that input 

in any way we can. I think we‟ll be seeking advice from the 

minister and others on how we best engage Saskatchewan 

people on this issue. And, Mr. Speaker, I would make this point 

very, very clearly. The position of this government is that we 

should be looking at, at least considering the opportunity of 

adding value to our uranium resource. That used to be the 

member‟s position. Has it changed, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, not only will they not tell the 

public what it is they have instructed the UDP to do. In their 

own communications around this issue, there are some 

significant variances between what they were telling the public 

and what they were telling the Uranium Development 

Partnership, Mr. Speaker. I have the news release. 

 

The news release says, and I quote, “The report will include 

specific recommendations on value added opportunities . . .” 

And if you read the backgrounder, it reads: “. . . on value added 

opportunities best suited to Saskatchewan.” 

 

But I have the minister‟s order here, the more private document 

that‟s given to the UDP. And what does it say? It says, “. . . on 

value added opportunities best suited . . .” not to Saskatchewan, 

but “. . . to the growth and expansion of the nuclear industry in 

western Canada from a base in Saskatchewan.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the minister‟s order they ask this partnership to 

identify obstacles and solutions to get around those obstacles. 

None of that in the news release, Mr. Speaker; none of it in the 

public presentation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a question of transparency and openness. 

Why are they hiding these kinds of facts and information from 

the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, if you check the 

speeches by members on this side of the House when we were 

in opposition, if you check the secret election platform 

document of the Saskatchewan Party, you‟re going to see the 

Saskatchewan Party saying, if we form the government, we are 

going to explore every opportunity we can to add value to the 

uranium resource. Mr. Speaker, that‟s what we‟ve said publicly. 

The UDP is looking at a number of options. We‟ll hear from 

them shortly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that also used to be the position of that member 

opposite, Mr. Speaker. The government that he led in 2005 said 

in their action plan for the economy, said, “As a major producer 

of uranium, the province should consider adding value to this 

resource to create more jobs and opportunities for 

Saskatchewan people.” That member went farther. He said we 

should be looking at storing spent fuel in the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the question to the hon. member is this: why have they 

changed their position, Mr. Speaker, and why are they so 

unfamiliar with the Saskatchewan Party platform? This move 

on uranium is simply one of the 100 campaign promises our 

government has kept, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:15] 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 87 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2009 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

Bill No. 87, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2009 be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved first 

reading of Bill No. 87, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2009. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 88 — The Corporation Capital Tax 

Amendment Act, 2009 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 



2610 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2009 

Bill No. 88, The Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 

2009 be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved first 

reading of Bill No. 88, The Corporation Capital Tax 

Amendment Act, 2009. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 89 — The Education 

Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 3)/Loi n
o
 3 de 2009 

 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

move that Bill No. 89, The Education Amendment Act, 2009 

(No. 3) be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Education has moved first 

reading of Bill No. 89, The Education Amendment Act, 2009 

(No. 3). Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 90 — The Miscellaneous Statutes 

(Education Property Tax) Repeal 

and Amendment Act, 2009 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

move that Bill No. 90, The Miscellaneous Statutes (Education 

Property Tax) Repeal and Amendment Act, 2009 be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Education has moved first 

reading of Bill No. 90, The Miscellaneous Statutes (Education 

Property Tax) Repeal and Amendment Act, 2009 be now read 

the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Human Services 

Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Human Services 

 

Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Human Services to report that it has considered 

certain supplementary estimates and to present its sixth report. I 

move: 

 

That the sixth report of the Standing Committee on 

Human Services be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — The Chair of the Human Services Committee 

has moved: 

 

That the sixth report of the Standing Committee on 

Human Services be now concurred in. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Chair of the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 

Bill No. 52, The Trustee Act, 2008 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I request leave to waive consideration in 

Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that this Bill be now 

read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 52, 

The Trustee Act, 2008 and that the Bill be now read a third time. 

Is leave granted? 



March 31, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2611 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave is granted. The minister may proceed 

to move third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 52 — The Trustee Act, 2008 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that this Bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 

No. 52, The Trustee Act, 2008 be now read the third time and 

passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL 

COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the 

Intergovernmental Affairs Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am instructed by the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

to report Bill No. 56, The Trustee Consequential Amendments 

Act, 2008 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? 

 

I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I request leave to waive consideration in 

Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that this Bill now be 

read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister has requested leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 56, The 

Trustee Consequential Amendments Act, 2008 and that the Bill 

be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. The minister may proceed to move 

third reading of the Bill. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 56 — The Trustee Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2008/Loi de 2008 portant modifications 

corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Trustee Act, 2008 
 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that this Bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

that Bill No. 56, The Trustee Consequential Amendments Act, 

2008 be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL 

COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of committees. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 

Bill No. 65, The Seizure of Criminal Property Act, 2008 without 

amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I request leave to waive consideration in 

Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that the Bill now be 

read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 65, 

The Seizure of Criminal Property Act, 2008 without amendment 

and that the Bill be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. The minister may proceed to move 

third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 65 — The Seizure of Criminal Property Act, 2008 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that this Bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

that Bill No. 65, The Seizure of Criminal Property Act, 2008 



2612 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2009 

without amendment be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL 

COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Intergovernmental 

Affairs. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 

Bill No. 74, The Miscellaneous Statutes (English) Amendment 

and Repeal Act, 2008 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I request leave to waive consideration in 

Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that the Bill be now 

read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole of Bill No. 74, The 

Miscellaneous Statutes (English) Amendment and Repeal Act, 

2008 without amendment. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. The minister may proceed to move 

third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 74 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (English) 

Amendment and Repeal Act, 2008 
 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that this Bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

that Bill No. 74, The Miscellaneous Statutes (English) 

Amendment and Repeal Act, 2008 without amendment be now 

read the third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly 

ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL 

COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Intergovernmental 

Affairs. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 

Bill No. 75, The Miscellaneous Statutes (Bilingual) Amendment 

and Repeal Act, 2008 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in the 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that 

the Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 74, 

The Miscellaneous Statutes (English) Amendment and Repeal 

Act, 2008 without amendment. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. The minister may proceed to move 

third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 75 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Bilingual) 

Amendment and Repeal Act, 2008/Loi corrective (lois 

bilingues) de 2008 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that this Bill be now read a third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

that Bill No. 74, The Miscellaneous Statutes (English) 

Amendment and Repeal Act, 2008 . . . 

 

It has been moved by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 74, 

The Miscellaneous Statutes (English) Amendment and Repeal 

Act, 2008 without amendment be now read the third time and 

passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the . . . Pardon 

me. I‟m still working on the last Bill that we already passed. 

 

Seventy-five. There are too many Bills here. We will do 

number 75. Bill No. 75, The Miscellaneous Statutes (Bilingual) 

Amendment and Repeal Act, 2008 without amendment be now 

read the third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly 



March 31, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2613 

ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Speaker: — I would like to lay on the table the report of 

the Chief Electoral Officer. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answer to questions 320 through 326. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 320 to 326 are tabled. I recognize 

the Government Whip. 

 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Not Debatable) 

 

Return No. 42 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to convert to a notice of 

motion for return (debatable). 

 

The Speaker: — Motion‟s converted. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

The Speaker: — Committee of Finance. I do now leave the 

Chair. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Motions for Supply 

 

The Chair: — I call the committee to order. Business before 

the committee is certain resolution for supplementary estimates. 

I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

move no. 1: 

 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 

the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 2009, 

the sum of $39,100,000 be granted out of the General 

Revenue Fund. 

 

 

The Chair: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance that 

no. 1: 

 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 

the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 2009, 

the sum of $39,100,000 be granted out of the General 

Revenue Fund. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Chair: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I move 

that the committee rise, and that the Chair report that the committee 

has agreed to a certain resolution, and ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The Chair: — The Minister of Finance has moved that the 

committee rise, that the Chair report that the committee has 

approved to a certain resolution, and ask for leave to sit again. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. 

 

[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of committees. 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, the Committee of Finance has 

agreed to a certain resolution, and instructed me to report the 

same, and ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the resolution be read the first time? 

I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that the 

resolution be now read the first and second time. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 

reading of the resolutions. 

 

[14:30] 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? 

 



2614 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2009 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Later this day, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Later this day. I recognize the Minister of 

Finance. 

 

APPROPRIATION BILL 

 

Bill No. 91 — The Appropriation Act, 2009 (No. 2) 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By leave of 

the Assembly, I move that Bill No. 91, The Appropriation Act, 

2009 (No. 2) be now introduced and read the first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved that Bill 

No. 91, The Appropriation Act, 2009 (No. 2) be now introduced 

and read the first time. Is leave of the Assembly granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? I 

recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By leave of 

the Assembly and under rule 72, subsection 2, I move that the 

Bill be now read a second and a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — Is leave of the Assembly granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Moved by the Minister of Finance that Bill 

No. 91, The Appropriation Act, 2009 (No. 2) be now read a 

second and third time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second and third 

reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I wish to remind the members that His 

Honour is here for Royal Assent. 

 

ROYAL ASSENT 

 

[At 14:34 His Honour the Administrator entered the Chamber, 

took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent to the 

following Bills.] 

 

His Honour: — Pray be seated. 

 

The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 

Assembly in its present session has passed several Bills which 

in the name of the Assembly I present to Your Honour and to 

which Bills I respectfully request Your Honour‟s assent. 

 

Clerk: — Your Honour, the Bills are as follows: 

 

Bill No. 52 - The Trustee Act, 2008 

Bill No. 56  - The Trustee Consequential Amendments Act, 

2008/Loi de 2008 portant modifications 

corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Trustee Act, 

2008 

Bill No. 65  - The Seizure of Criminal Property Act, 2008 

Bill No. 74 - The Miscellaneous Statutes (English) 

Amendment and Repeal Act, 2008 

Bill No. 75  - The Miscellaneous Statutes (Bilingual) 

Amendment and Repeal Act, 2008/Loi corrective 

(lois bilingues) de 2008 

 

His Honour: — In Her Majesty‟s name, I assent to these Bills. 

 

The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 

Assembly has voted the supplies required to enable the 

government to defray the expenses of the public service. 

 

In the name of the Assembly I present to your Honour: 

 

Bill No. 91  - The Appropriation Act, 2009 (No. 2) 

 

to which Bill I respectfully request your Honour‟s assent. 

 

His Honour: — In Her Majesty‟s name, I thank the Legislative 

Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to this Bill. 

 

[His Honour retired from the Chamber at 14:37.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 

allow the important work of the Standing Committee on the 

Crown and Central Agencies and the Economy to do their work, 

I move this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

adjournment of the Assembly to allow committees to do their 

work. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. This Assembly stands 

adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 14:38.] 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2601 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2601 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2601 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2601 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2601 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2602 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2602 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2602 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Swift Current Ardens Win Basketball Championship 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2602 

 Taoist Tai Chi Society Anniversary Celebration 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2602 

 Prince Albert Premier’s Dinner 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2603 

 O Ambassador West Africa Project 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2603 

 Arm River Constituency Hockey Teams 

  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2603 

 Law Day for Secondary Students 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2604 

 Good Economic News 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2604 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Changes at Distribution Centre 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2604 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2604 

 Employment Trends 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2605 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2605 

 Enterprise Saskatchewan and Economic Development 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2606 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2606 

 Energy Options 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2607 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2607 

 Uranium Development Partnership 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2608 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2608 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2609 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 87 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2009 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2609 

 Bill No. 88 — The Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 2009 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2609 

 Bill No. 89 — The Education Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 3) 

 Loi n
o
 3 de 2009 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2610 

 Bill No. 90 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Education Property Tax) Repeal and Amendment Act, 2009 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2610 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Human Services 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2610 

 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2610 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 52 — The Trustee Act, 2008 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2611 

 

 



 

 Bill No. 56 — The Trustee Consequential Amendments Act, 2008 

 Loi de 2008 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Trustee Act, 2008 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2611 

 Bill No. 65 — The Seizure of Criminal Property Act, 2008 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2611 

 Bill No. 74 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (English) Amendment and Repeal Act, 2008 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2612 

 Bill No. 75 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Bilingual) Amendment and Repeal Act, 2008 

 Loi corrective (lois bilingues) de 2008 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2612 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2613 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2613 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Not Debatable) 

 Return No. 42 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2613 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 Motions for Supply 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2613 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 

  Gantefoer ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2613 

APPROPRIATION BILL 

 Bill No. 91 — The Appropriation Act, 2009 (No. 2) 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2614 

ROYAL ASSENT ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2614 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 




