




















































Hansard: March 02, 2009


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2035 

 March 2, 2009 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 46 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 46 — The Labour 

Market Commission Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The time being 7 o‟clock, this House 

now resumes. Debate will continue on Bill No. 46. The member 

from Regina Northeast had the floor. I recognize the member 

for Regina Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Now let‟s 

see, where was I before I was so rudely interrupted by the 

clock? Oh well I guess I‟ll just have to start from the beginning 

again. And I can hear the joy being raised over there across the 

way when I suggest that perhaps I‟ll just start from the 

beginning again. And it would be from the beginning, I can 

assure you of that. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in regards to this particular piece of 

legislation, the legislation that basically limits the abilities of 

the Labour Market Commission to do its job, we can‟t help but 

to wonder about the reasons why the government is moving in 

the direction it‟s moving. At a time when we have a strong and 

buoyant economy, at a time when there is a shortage of skilled 

workers and a shortage of qualified candidates right across the 

piece, we would think that the government would want to move 

in a direction that would assist in addressing some of these 

shortfalls, would assist in making the industry and the 

marketplace more responsive to attract the quality labour that 

we need. 

 

But rather not, they‟re doing the opposite. They‟re not 

supporting an agency that has a proven track record of working 

towards addressing the problems identified within the industry 

by bringing all the stakeholders of the industry together to work 

collectively for a common goal, and that common goal being a 

strong industry. Simply put, a strong industry benefits everyone. 

All the stakeholders within the industry would certainly benefit 

from it. 

 

But rather than that, they‟re moving to reduce the size of the 

commission. They‟re reducing the effectiveness in all intents 

and purposes of the commission by stripping away its resources 

— the resources of the people who make up the commission 

body itself, but also cutting their budget in half. By cutting their 

budget in half, they reduce their ability for the commission to 

have the resources to effectively carry out their mandate. 

 

The loss of the personnel on the commission is a loss of 

knowledge. It‟s a loss of experience. These people have served 

and served the commission well and served this province well, 

carry with them not only the knowledge that they‟ve gained 

over the years. From their experience, they‟ve gained such 

expertise that just isn‟t available just off the wall or off the shelf 

sort of thing. This is experience that‟s been learned through 

time, learned through trial and error, and through, yes, some 

mistakes, but also some making the right decisions. And those 

are the important things. 

 

Also by limiting the size of the commission, they‟re limiting the 

ability to have at that commission, at that table, the differing 

points of view. Differing points of view are very important 

when you‟re developing policy and doing planning to address 

the needs of the marketplace. You need to have a balance. In 

order to have a balance, you have to have different points of 

view. You have to have representation there with the 

stakeholders in the industry so that you bring forward to that 

discussion the information, the experiences, and the knowledge 

that each group brings forward. So by limiting the size of the 

commission, I think you limit the ability for that commission to 

deliver quality product that is so important to ensure that 

Saskatchewan continues to enjoy a strong economy, continues 

to enjoy a strong workforce. 

 

Saskatchewan workers have a reputation — I was going to say 

nationally; I think it‟s even internationally — of being a strong 

group of workers who do efficient and effective work. I think 

for the most part, I think you would talk to employers, whether 

they be here in Saskatchewan or whether they be elsewhere 

employing Saskatchewan people, and they will tell you that 

Saskatchewan workers bring to the job a strong work ethic, 

quality work. Saskatchewan people provide an honest day‟s 

work for an honest day‟s pay. And I think that goes without 

saying and I think that‟s very important and I think that‟s a 

reputation that we‟re all very, very proud of. 

 

But through the current boom, it‟s clearly evident that the Sask 

Party has made it clear that it believes that the labour is an 

impediment to growth. Rolling the LMC [Labour Market 

Commission] into the Enterprise Saskatchewan is just one more 

way the Saskatchewan Party is attempting to weaken the labour 

here in the province. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, who is the labour? Who is labour? Labour 

are the working people that we see each and every day, the 

working people whose children attend our schools, the working 

people whose children attend our swimming pools and who 

attend the various social functions throughout the city here. 

Who are the working people? They are the people who shop at 

our stores each and every day. The working people are the 

people who use our restaurant facilities and who use our 

shopping facilities and who contribute in a meaningful way to 

our economy. 

 

Fact, Mr. Speaker, it‟s the working people who drive our 

economy. It‟s the working people who have the disposable 

income, who spend that money not in New York, not in Dallas, 

not in Chicago; they spend it right here in the cities and the 

towns of our province of Saskatchewan. They drive our 

economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s those working people who by the sweat of 

their brow and through their efforts we enjoy many of the 

services that we take for granted each and every day. Those, 



2036 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 2009 

Mr. Speaker, are the working people. Those are the people who 

are the strength and the backbone of Saskatchewan. Those are 

the people who are the strength and the backbone of our 

Saskatchewan economy. 

 

And who did this Saskatchewan Party consult with in drafting 

this legislation? Well I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, they didn‟t 

consult with the labour people. They may have consulted with 

their friends in business. They may have consulted with their 

friends in the chamber of commerce, but they didn‟t talk to the 

labour people across this province, the very people who make 

up the heart and the soul of our economy, who drive our 

economy, and who ensure that our economy stays strong. 

 

We also note, Mr. Speaker, that this Act removes the legislative 

requirements to consult with labour and business organizations 

that are the most representative of labour and of business. We 

have no doubt, we have no doubt at all that business will 

continue to be widely consulted while labour organizations will 

largely be ignored if not totally ignored. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is the sad part of it because it is the strength 

of our industry, the strength of the economy that benefits all. It 

benefits business. It benefits labour. By benefitting labour and 

having a strong labour workforce that receives fair and 

reasonable compensation for the efforts that they put out each 

and every day, they take that money that they received for their 

sweat of their brow and for the work that they put into our 

economy, they take that money and they spend it right here in 

Saskatchewan. They spend it in our business places right here in 

Saskatchewan. They make Saskatchewan strong. 

 

So working people of this province, it‟s the working people of 

this province that drive our economy, and it‟s the working 

people of this province that need to be insured that they are 

getting a fair deal, and that is what Labour Market Commission 

was all about, was insuring that there was fairness within our 

system, there was equity within our system, there was a balance 

within our system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this legislation falls short on a lot of fronts, but it 

makes it quite obvious, Mr. Speaker, that this government is not 

a government that has really any real interests in insuring the 

fairness within our marketplace. They‟re more interested in 

insuring that there‟s an advantage to their friends, the people in 

the business community, and that‟s certainly evident in this 

legislation. 

 

But with that, Mr. Speaker, I think we need to spend more time 

in reviewing this legislation, talking to all the stakeholders — 

and I say all the stakeholders, Mr. Speaker — in regards to how 

it may or may not affect them, and to do that we‟ll need a little 

more time. So with that in mind, Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to move 

adjournment of debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Northeast 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 46, The Labour 

Market Commission Amendment Act, 2008. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

Bill No. 43 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the by Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 43 — The 

Trespass to Property Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I rise to speak on the trespass Act, and I would 

think a review of the minister‟s main points in terms of the 

legislation would be probably in order. And that is some of the 

points made by the minister were why . . . We can only assume 

why because I don‟t know that we had any consultations or 

what was driving the process or why we ended up with the 

trespass Act. But some of the things that the minister went on to 

say was that he made part of the Act or felt the need to be there 

was the unlawful to “enter a posted or enclosed lands . . . 

without the consent of the occupier” and also if requested not to 

enter. So they‟re talking about the definitions of the trespass 

legislation. 

 

In talking about the offences, he said it‟s an offence to fail to 

stop activity when requested when to do so or to re-enter the 

premises. Further went on to say that the onus on the defendant 

to prove that they had consent of occupier to enter onto the 

premises and that “People in contravention of the Act will be 

liable on summary conviction to a fine of up to $2,000.” 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I put those on record to show not 

only the content of the Act but the slant and the onus which is 

very important, when we look across the country and compare 

to other Acts that we have. And as you know and as we know, 

Saskatchewan did not have, prior to this, a trespass Act. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the minister went on to say that: 

 

The Trespass to Property Act seeks to balance the 

reasonable expectation of landowners and those wanting 

to access privately owned property to enjoy the great 

Saskatchewan outdoors. To that end, [he said] Mr. 

Speaker, the Act is not applied to individuals engaging in 

lawful hunting, fishing, or trapping activities, and for the 

benefit of my mother, berry picking. As well the Act will 

not apply to vacant agricultural Crown lands, Crown 

resource lands, or parklands that are used for public 

recreation purposes. 

 

He went on to say, “It is not the intention of our government to 

restrict access to such lands intended for public use beyond 

current regulation contained in other Acts.” He said, “The Act 

will also not apply to people acting in the course of their duties, 

such as emergency personnel or meter readers . . .” 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, Bill 43, The Trespass to Property Act, just 

when we look at it, this Act creates a new provincial offence of 

trespass and raises a number of questions. We would ask, what 

circumstances made this Act necessary? Who will benefit from 

the passage of this Act? Are there specific activities or 

problems this Act intended to address, and if so, what might 

they be? Are there specific examples of situations where this 

Act would be seen to be partially useful? Who was consulted 



March 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2037 

before the Act was drafted? This is a new Act, and it definitely 

requires further review to determine. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in my remarks tonight I will be trying to 

address those questions as they pertain to this Act because I 

think these are very important and must be answered before this 

Act can move forward, so just some of the other things that 

would come to mind that would add a bit more detail here and I 

guess, as some have mentioned, unintended consequences of 

Acts. And for us that is a concern, a concern of what might be 

there and why the drafting was as it is. 

 

Things that I saw or that we see on this side is, does this Act 

deal with, for example, Mr. Deputy Speaker, freedom of 

assembly or freedom of expression? Are those impacted by this 

Act? What constitutes premises? And more specifically, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, what constitutes Crown land, including the 

exemptions listed under section 15 of Crown land? What are we 

trying to get at here? What exactly is this Act trying to address? 

What about freedom of assembly? What about freedom of 

expression, Mr. Deputy Speaker? What about freedom of 

expression? Is there any understanding for the people who 

drafted this, for the people who drafted this? Perhaps, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, perhaps there are Charter concerns here. I‟m 

not saying that there are, but perhaps there are, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

The question here would be, are all rural and city and municipal 

land, is it Crown land? Is that Crown land, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker? Is it Crown land and what kind of activities or trespass 

are we prohibiting? Now section 17, exemptions from the Act, 

make that clear. And then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we do have the 

regulations, and we know that again that we have the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council, which we all know is the cabinet, that 

makes the regulations. If you draft an Act in such a way that 

you require lengthy regulations, that the regulations are many 

times more than what the Act it, because it is unclear, it does 

raise concerns. It does raise concerns as to what we are trying to 

get at. 

 

So again I would say, are there issues? Are there issues here of 

freedom of assembly, freedom of expression? What constitutes 

premises? What constitutes Crown land? What are the 

exemptions listed under 15, Crown land? Are those the only 

exemptions that we‟re . . . [inaudible] . . . Why was that list not 

expanded? Why were some of these questions . . . Again, as I 

raise rural and municipal land, our understanding is that it is all 

Crown land — rural, municipal. 

 

[19:15] 

 

Now the minister talked about snowmobiles, and the minister 

talked about fishing and hunting. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I‟m not 

sure that fishing and hunting on Albert Street is exactly what we 

would be looking at. But again when you read the Act, when 

you read the Act, there‟s no mention that in fact, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that Albert Street in Regina isn‟t part of what the 

minister was trying to capture. And we just simply wish to point 

out to the minister that if in fact he wasn‟t trying to capture this, 

he could have been perhaps a bit more clear in the legislation. 

 

Now I go back as to who basically, perhaps we can find some 

answers into who basically wanted this Act. What are some of 

the concerns, what were the concerns of the people of 

Saskatchewan? And what are we trying to address in terms of 

this Act? 

 

This government has been very, Mr. Deputy Speaker, lax with 

consultations. We‟ve seen that across the piece, whether it be 

labour Bills that they‟re passing, whether it be the Agreement 

on Internal Trade that they had, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that they 

went, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in early December, this government 

went and signed an Agreement on Internal Trade and then came 

back and told us that there was nothing. They didn‟t have any 

documents that they had signed. We found that hard to believe, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, but that is in fact what happened. It was 

only until pressure from our side of the House that — all of a 

sudden, lo and behold — there was the Agreement on Internal 

Trade. It came forward. So it‟s unfortunate that a government 

lacks such transparency that when they talk about consultation 

transparency, that we don‟t have any of that here. There‟s 

nothing of that here, that we see, that we see in this document. 

 

And again on the Agreement on Internal Trade, when we 

looked at that at the end of the day, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 

don‟t know what the big deal was all about. We don‟t know at 

all what that was all about, why they were getting all excited 

and jumping up and down. You can‟t see it. We‟re upset that 

nobody . . . You know, we‟re upset at Alberta because they 

talked about it. Now Alberta, you know, they said, great, we 

will tell you what‟s in there. But here in Saskatchewan, we can 

. . . Big secret, biggest secret in the world, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And when you look at it at the end of the day, not such a big 

deal. We can agree with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There‟s 

nothing that secretive about it, but apparently they feel that 

there is. 

 

So it was with things like that. It‟s the transparency, the lack of 

consultation. We‟ve seen that that‟s almost a track record of this 

government since day one — whether they are simply unsure, 

whether they simply are afraid of what the people of 

Saskatchewan might say, but again it‟s an internal trade. We 

hear a number of the stakeholders saying, asking what was in 

the deal. And then it was only after, after we asked the 

questions that the government thought, well maybe we should 

go ask the stakeholders to find out what‟s happening. Maybe we 

should ask them and see what they have to say. 

 

So why the secrecy? Why the lack of transparency? And I think 

this is a bit of, starting to be a bit of a, I should say, track 

record, but a bit of a way that this government operates in terms 

of consultations. And here, no different, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

no different here either. We did not hear anything from the 

minister about what consultations took place, what exactly the 

Act was trying to address. We could only look at the words and 

raise issues, legitimate issues of freedom, again freedom of 

expression and freedom of association. Were those questions, 

were those questions that the government was trying to address? 

It‟s uncertain. It‟s uncertain, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Now I guess in terms of that, that led us to try and look across 

the country to try and assume, assume what they might‟ve been 

up to since they‟re not willing to tell us or the people of 

Saskatchewan what they‟re up to. Maybe go to Manitoba and 

have a look at the legislation in Manitoba. Manitoba has a petty 

trespasses Act, and again they have a section similar to ours, 



2038 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 2009 

The Petty Trespasses Act, trespassing offence, definition of that. 

If I may, Mr. Deputy Speaker, before getting into analysis of 

the Saskatchewan and Manitoba Acts, I‟d just like to put on the 

record the Manitoba Act: 

 

Trespassing offence 

 

Subject to subsections (2), (3), (4) and(5), any person 

 

(a) who unlawfully enters or in any way trespasses upon 

lands or premises that are the property of another and are 

wholly enclosed; or 

 

(b) who enters or in any way trespasses upon lands or 

premises that are the property of another and are not 

wholly enclosed, after being requested by the owner, 

tenant or occupier not to do so, or who, having entered the 

lands or premises or committed the trespass, refuses to 

leave upon being requested by the owner, tenant or 

occupier to do so. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it goes on to say that this is “. . . an 

offence, whether or not any damage has been occasioned by the 

entry . . . and is liable on summary conviction to a fine of not 

more than $5,000.” And as I mentioned, Saskatchewan has a 

$2,000 fine. 

 

There is also a “Request of person in actual occupation,” and 

that is, “1(2) [similar to ours] Where lands or premises are 

occupied, clause (1)(b) does not apply unless the request there 

mentioned is made by or with the approval of the person in 

actual occupation of the lands or premises.” 

 

It goes on to say: 

 

Exception in case of resident 

 

1(3) Clause (1)(b) does not apply in the case of a person 

who 

 

(a) ordinarily resides on the lands or premises there 

described; or 

 

(b) if not ordinarily residing on the lands or premises 

there described, is at the material time residing thereon 

with the express or implied consent of the owner, tenant 

or occupier of the lands or premises. 

 

Now I think that‟s, so far, Mr. Deputy Speaker, fairly 

straightforward. I don‟t think we need to go into explanations of 

those clauses, and I‟m concerned I guess at times when we read 

ours that it isn‟t as clear as the Manitoba legislation. 

 

Now there‟s an interesting clause, “Exception where honest 

belief.” And these, these are all relating to the onus, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, the onus on the person trespassing and, in this case, 

the person who is the occupier: 

 

Exception where honest belief 

 

1(4) Subsection (1) does not apply where a person 

entering or trespassing upon the lands or premises there 

described is acting under an honest and reasonable 

belief that he or she has the right to do the act 

complained of. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one thing that that raises or points 

out to us is honest belief, honest belief where at least some 

ability for the person who is going to be charged or accused of 

trespassing, that that person has the right to a defence. 

 

Now they also have an interesting section here, application in 

religious communities: 

 

In this section, the expression “owner, tenant, or 

occupier”, where used with respect to lands or premises 

occupied by a religious organization or religious 

community as owner, tenant or occupier the by-laws, 

articles or a resolution of which authorize one or more 

officials of the organization or community to act on its 

behalf in preventing or controlling disorderly conduct, 

loitering, nuisances, and other disruptive behaviour on the 

lands or premises . . . such an official or officials acting in 

accordance with those by-laws or . . . [activities] or 

resolution. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we come to a part here, “Arrest 

without warrant.” Any person found committing an offence 

. . . and as I mentioned before, the Manitoba Act has a $5,000 

penalty in here: 

 

Any person found committing an offence under section 1 

[which outlines the sections above] may be apprehended 

without a warrant by any peace officer, or by the owner, 

tenant or occupier of the lands or premises on which the 

offence is committed or by any person authorized by the 

owner, tenant or occupier, and shall be taken to the nearest 

justice as soon as reasonably practicable to be dealt with 

according to law. 

 

An important point, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Now that‟s (2) and 

(3): 

 

Act not to affect any case involving title to land [an 

important consideration, I believe, in any trespass Act, 

and that is:] 

 

Nothing in this Act authorizes any justice to hear and 

determine any case of unlawful entry or trespass in which 

the title to land, or any interest therein or accruing 

thereupon, is called in question or affected in any manner 

howsoever; but every such case of unlawful entry or 

trespass shall be dealt with according to law, in the same 

manner in all respects as if this Act had not been passed. 

 

And then finally, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 

 

Any person who, on any walk, driveway, roadway, square 

or parking area provided outdoors at the site of or in 

conjunction with the premises in which any business or 

undertaking is operated and to which the public is 

normally admitted without fee or charge, communicates 

true statements, either orally or through printed material 

or through any other means, is not guilty of an offence 

under this Act [and I would say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, not 

guilty of an offence under this Act] whether the walk, 



March 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2039 

driveway, roadway, square or parking area is owned by 

the operator of that business or undertaking or by any 

other person or is publically owned, but nothing in this 

section relieves the person from liability for damages he 

causes to the owner or occupier of the property. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a very important part there, because 

it deals with the situation I talked about before, are we dealing 

with Albert Street or what is our Act? And our Act is very 

unclear. Manitoba Act specifically states that. 

 

Now there are a number of points here that I wish to draw a 

little closer attention to. Again, just to be clear on what I‟m 

saying here, the offence description in The Petty Trespass Act is 

not as expansive as that contained in our own Bill 43. 

Subsection 3(1) sets out a list of circumstances in which 

trespass is prohibited, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Now section 3(1), 

“Trespass prohibited” in our Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 

“Without the consent of the occupier of a premises, no person 

who is not acting under a right or authority conferred by law 

shall . . .” 

 

And I would just want to also turn you, while we are here, to 

the . . . and we‟ll get back to that section. But just in terms of 

the definition or interpretation of our section, and that is under 

“Interpretation”: 

 

2(c) “occupier” includes: 

 

a person who is in physical possession of premises; [and 

that‟s (i)] 

 

(ii) is a person who: 

 

(A) has a responsibility for and control over the 

condition of premises or of the activities there carried 

on; or 

 

(B) has control over persons allowed to enter in or 

onto premises; or 

 

(iii) a person prescribed in the regulations. 

 

Now as I read that to you — and I knew you probably wanted 

me to clarify the definition or interpretation of occupier, so I 

thought I‟d read that in — one of the other words used in 3(1) 

we also find in section 2(e), which is premises. And I 

mentioned premises to you earlier in my opening remarks, and 

that was what the meaning of premises was. Now again I want 

to refer you back into the Manitoba legislation which talks 

about driveways and roadways and the rest of that. We don‟t 

find those kinds of words in our Act here, but yet we‟re talking 

about trespassing. But here in ours, just so that we also know 

some of the premises and what the definition would be: 

 

. . . means lands or structures and includes the following: 

 

(i) water; 

 

(ii) ships and vessels; 

 

(iii) trailers and portable structures designed or used for 

a residence, business or shelter; [and] 

(iv) trains, railway cars, vehicles and aircraft, except 

while in operation. 

 

So now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we read all that together — 

and I know the interpretations, you wanted to hear those — in 

terms of, “Without the consent of the occupier of a premises, no 

person who is not acting under a right or authority conferred by 

law shall . . .” and it goes on to list. And I‟ll probably like to 

read those in, in terms of: 

 

(a) enter in or on the premises when entry is prohibited 

pursuant to this Act; 

 

(b) engage in an activity in or on the premises if that 

activity is prohibited by this Act. 

 

Now again, and I want to, as I go through this, that we keep in 

mind, “Where no offence under Act.”And this is the Manitoba 

legislation wherefore it says: 

 

Any person who, on any walk, driveway, roadway, square 

or parking area provided outdoors at the site of or in 

conjunction with the premises in which any business or 

undertaking is operated and to which the public is 

normally admitted without fee or charge, communicates 

true statements, [again] either orally or through printed 

material . . . is not guilty of an offence . . . 

 

People are not guilty of an offence, and yet we now go over our 

prohibited trespass and we — just to go over (a) again, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, so we don‟t lose our train of thought here — 

“enter in or on the premises when entry is prohibited pursuant 

to this Act.” And the Act again in other parts . . . I will get to 

that yet, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I know everybody‟s riveted to 

wanting to know when that will happen . . . but where it‟s 

prohibited and how the onus shifts and who the onus is on in 

terms of when an offence has occurred. 

 

[19:30] 

 

So: 

 

Without prior consent of the occupier of a premises, no 

person who is not acting under a right or authority 

conferred by law shall: 

 

(a) enter in or on the premises when entry is prohibited 

pursuant to this Act; [and] 

 

(b) engage in an activity in or on the premises if that 

activity is prohibited by this Act; 

 

(c) [Mr. Deputy Speaker] after being requested either 

orally or in writing by the occupier to leave the premises, 

fail to leave the premises soon as is practicable; [and] 

 

(d) after being requested either orally or in writing by the 

occupier to stop engaging in an activity in or on the 

premises, fail to stop the activity as soon as practicable; 

 

(e) after leaving the premises pursuant to request to do so 

made pursuant to this Act, re-enter the premises; or 

[finally] 



2040 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 2009 

(f) after discontinuing an activity pursuant to a request to 

do so made pursuant to this Act, resume the activity . . . 

 

Again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, nothing . . . And I will be bringing 

forward legislation from Alberta, British Columbia, and Ontario 

yet to point out where in fact we have offences and where 

they‟re prohibited. We don‟t have anything similar in our Act 

that would say this is not an offence. Don‟t worry about Albert 

Street. Members from Saskatoon should not not be concerned 

about hunting or fishing down Albert Street. Don‟t worry. 

That‟s not what that Act is intended to do. The Act is intended 

for something other than that. 

 

Yet when we have this sort of drafting, when we know of the 

. . . When you put that together, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with the 

lack of transparency and the lack of consultation and the lack of 

information as to where this Act comes from, overall we find 

ourselves here having to do perhaps what should be 

straightforward, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We should be able to 

pass, you know, a trespass Act and it should not create any 

concerns for us. But yet here we are, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

having to talk about other provinces, what happens. 

 

So for a first attempt maybe we could say well since it‟s a new 

Act in Saskatchewan, a first attempt, maybe we can cut them 

some slack. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is an important issue. 

And when we talk about things like freedom of assembly and 

freedom of expression, those are not issues that we on this side 

take lightly and we raise them. We would hope that we 

wouldn‟t have to raise issues like that. But yet again, just as 

I‟ve been going over and pointing out to you in terms of the 

prohibitions in our Act, we don‟t have anything there that talks 

about when in fact what is not an offence. We have some 

exemptions, and I mentioned those earlier, about Crown land 

and I‟ll be getting into those further, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 

terms of definitions. 

 

But the key issue here is it does throw quite a wide net here. 

And if that isn‟t the intention and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would 

be the first to say that if that isn‟t the intention, then the 

minister should have looked at this, done the necessary due 

diligence on this Bill and perhaps said, you know, that we 

should cover this off. 

 

In drafting legislation, we want . . . I‟m sure we all strive for 

clarity. We strive that the intent is clear. We don‟t want this to 

end up before the courts with some unintended results, 

unintended consequences of this Bill. We want a Bill that‟s 

clear. We want a Bill that‟s clear. 

 

And unfortunately, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as you‟re probably 

noticing and as I‟m sure the members across are starting to 

agree that yes, perhaps this isn‟t as clear as we could have made 

it. You know, give us another chance; we‟ll try. We‟ll withdraw 

the Bill. Maybe we‟ll put in something different. We‟ll make 

amendments. You know, maybe we should give them the 

opportunity to do that. I‟m sure I see some heads nodding over 

there that perhaps they‟re ready to agree, to say, we didn‟t 

consult, you know, we‟ll try to work on that transparency issue. 

 

And then again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, maybe it‟s like the 

definitions in the Bill here. People are having difficulty in terms 

of what is transparent, like in terms of what way does the 

government act to be transparent. In what way must the 

government act to show that they are consulting the people of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

What should they be doing? Other than that, you get legislation 

. . . We‟ve had maybe others; we‟ve had legislation around the 

Labour Relations Board where again there was lack of 

consultation, maybe a little haste, maybe not being prepared, 

whatever it was, and we had to amend it. We had to redo it. We 

had to continuously redo it. And sometimes we‟re going to be 

known as the redos. Redos, that‟s . . . I‟m not . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — The do-overs. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — The do-overs. That sounds like a good name 

for a group, but maybe it would fit a party, like a political party. 

The do-overs. I don‟t know. Maybe it‟s got a little cachet. 

Maybe it would pick up and have a hit single of we redo things 

and we‟re the do-overs. You know, I mean, I don‟t know, 

maybe it‟s whatever . . . 

 

But anyways this seems to be again, as I talked about a track 

record, but it seems to be a part of a type of almost behaviour, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker — lack of consultation, lack of 

transparency. Do it, you know, the redo-overs do it and then 

they consult after that. What do you think? What do you think 

of this? What do you think of this? And throw it out and leave it 

for the opposition to point out and carefully go through the 

details of each Bill so that we get the kind of legislation that the 

people of this province deserve. And I think the lack of 

consultation would give you the kind of legislation that the 

people deserve. And unfortunately, that‟s not happening here, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the fine — again, as I pointed out earlier 

— the fine is lower in Bill 43 compared to Manitoba‟s 5,000. 

And I‟d like to just get on to this, and I had mentioned that I 

would be . . . we talked just briefly, I talked briefly about the 

onus. And Bill 43 places an onus on the defendant to prove, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker “. . . on a balance of probabilities, that he or 

she had the consent of the occupier to enter in or on the 

premises or to engage in the activity in or on the premises.” 

 

Subsections 3(1) and (2) and again . . . I read 3(1), Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. I would like to read 3(2), is that: 

 

For the purposes of subsection (1), the onus rests on the 

defendant to prove, [again] on a balance of probabilities, 

that he or she had the consent of the occupier to enter in or 

on the premises or to engage in the activity in or on the 

premises. 

 

Now for greater clarity, subsection 7(1) of the Act lists the 

defences that are available to trespasses. Section 7(1), Mr. 

Deputy Speaker . . . Again just to go back to Manitoba for just a 

second, Mr. Deputy Speaker, The Petty Trespasses Act does not 

contain a provision that specifically places the burden on the 

defendant to prove that he or she had consent of the occupier to 

enter in or on the premises to engage in activity or enter in or on 

the premises. 

 

Now these are very important differences. When we go to 

section 1, “Defences to trespasses,” again here, just that the 



March 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2041 

thing about the Manitoba Bill where it talks about where there 

is no offence under the Act. Now that isn‟t a defence, but I 

think it could be seen as a defence. And it would be clearer 

because it‟s in the Act, where it talks about: 

 

Where no offence under Act [where 4 says] 

 

Any person who, on any walk, driveway, roadway, square 

or parking area provided outdoors at the site of or in 

conjunction with the premises in which any business or 

undertaking is operated and to which the public is 

normally admitted without fee or charge, communicates 

true statements, either orally or through printed material 

or through any other means, is not guilty of an offence 

under this Act whether the walk, driveway, roadway, 

square or parking area is owned by the operator of that 

business or undertaking or any other person or is publicly 

owned, but nothing in this section relieves the person from 

liability for damages he causes the owner or occupier of 

the property. 

 

Again here, 7(1) talks about defences, but our 7(1) in terms of 

defences, to read that to you Mr. Deputy Speaker: 

 

It is a defence for a person charged with an offence 

pursuant to section 3 or 5 to prove, on a balance of 

probabilities, that he or she reasonably believed that he or 

she had title to or an interest in the premises that entitled 

the person to enter in or on the premises or to engage in 

the activity complained of. 

 

Now nowhere there, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . we come the 

closest there probably to trying to deal with what a defence 

would be, but unfortunately there‟s no clarity here in terms of 

what might not be an offence. 

 

So we get down back to, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to Albert avenue 

and hunting and fishing. Again likelihood . . . I‟m not sure what 

we would be doing hunting and fishing on Albert Street, but it 

is a concern as to why we couldn‟t in a simple sentence write 

about roadways, driveways, walkways, things that are there. 

Again it doesn‟t seem to be there. 

 

So 7(1) comes close and talks about probabilities of what would 

happen so the only defence that we have now in the Act . . . and 

again I say that the regulations, Mr. Deputy Speaker, could very 

easily deal with those issues. And you know, we‟re open then if 

people . . . but in the Act, as we have in the Manitoba Act, 

something right in the Act which helps to go a long way to 

clarify, as opposed to just talking what is a defence, what is the 

law, and what isn‟t the law and that is important. 

 

So now we again just to further . . . In an attempt, I guess 

maybe not a very good attempt, but we have section (2): 

 

It is a defence for a person charged . . . an offence 

pursuant to section 3 or 5 to prove, on a balance of 

probabilities, that the entry in or on the premises or 

activity there engaged was: 

 

(a) with the consent of an occupier of the premises; 

 

(b) under a right or authority conferred by the law; 

(c) undertaken in the honest and reasonable belief that 

he or she had the consent of an occupier of the premises; 

or 

 

(d) undertaken in the honest and reasonable belief that 

he or she had lawful justification . . . 

 

Now the Manitoba Act also talks about that, but I think there is 

nothing here again. All we are talking about is on the balance of 

probabilities and having consent and arguing or not. So I don‟t 

know that any of us here would like to be concerned about 

having to walk down the sidewalk, cross a roadway, walk 

through driveways and be concerned that in fact that what we 

should have been thinking about, as opposed to thinking about 

what we were doing there disseminating true statements, that 

we should be concerned about worrying about the probabilities 

of actually whether we had consent to be there. That‟s a very 

new concept that‟s coming in here in terms of that we would 

only . . . that that would be main defence that we would have is 

the right to have consent of the occupier. And again I have read 

the definitions there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of occupier and of 

premises to you, but I guess I could do that just so for clarity 

because perhaps it would serve our purposes that occupier, just 

so that for those that probably have had some trouble following, 

I would just read that: 

 

“occupier” includes: 

 

(i) a person who is in physical possession of premises; 

 

(ii) a person who: 

 

(A) has responsibility for and control over the 

condition of premises or of the activities . . . 

 

(B) [and] has control of persons allowed . . . 

 

So not only is it the occupier of the premises, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, but it is the occupier as defined in the section 

2(c)(iii)(B) that in fact can allow somebody else to be there so 

that you would have to think, do I have consent of this person? 

 

Again so now in a further just sort of further analysis, which I 

know was needed for a Bill of this magnitude, as there are a 

number of key similarities and differences between Bill 43 and 

The Petty Trespasses Act. Not to say that we‟ve simply pointed 

out some of the differences, but there are a number of things 

that are the same, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So the similarities, subsection 3(1) of Bill 43 lists the 

circumstances in which trespass is prohibited. Again: 

 

Trespass prohibited 

 

3(1) Without the consent of the occupier of a premises, 

no person who is not acting under a right or authority 

conferred by law shall: 

 

(a) enter in or on the premises when entry is 

prohibited pursuant to this Act; 

 

(b) engage in a activity in or on the premises if that 

activity is prohibited by this Act; 



2042 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 2009 

(c) after being requested either orally or in writing by 

the occupier to leave the premises, fail to leave the 

premises as soon as is practicable; 

 

(d) after being requested either orally or in writing by 

the occupier to stop engaging in an activity in or on 

the premises, fail to stop the activity as soon as is 

practicable; 

 

(e) after leaving the premises pursuant to a request to 

do so made pursuant to this Act, re-enter the 

premises; or 

 

(f) after discontinuing an activity pursuant to a 

request to do so made pursuant to this Act, resume the 

activity in or on the premises. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, again: 

 

For the purposes of subsection (1) [we‟re talking about the 

onus here and that], the onus rests on the defendant to 

prove, on a balance of probabilities, that he or she had the 

consent of the occupier to enter in or on the premises or 

engage in the activity in or on the premises. 

 

Again all the onus on the defendant, nothing to say that as the 

activity that I‟m doing I could feel comfortable in, that it is in 

fact not an illegal activity. 

 

[19:45] 

 

It leaves a lot to discretion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I think 

that we would have been better served had we had more clarity 

on this Bill that outlined exactly where we could and where we 

could not walk, gather, as again, as I mentioned, that these are 

the types of things that are important and why we have to go 

through this. 

 

Now again, and I have gotten into the definition of occupier, 

and I think we‟re finally getting what the definition of occupier 

is and the definition of premises. I think the one thing just to 

remember, the occupier can also be somebody that was named 

by the occupier to be in there, and I think that that is clear. 

 

Perhaps we should clarify again the premises, section 2(e) 

where premises is defined, because where are we sitting, what 

is that, what is defined? And these are lands or structures 

including the following, which is water — water, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. Now again I don‟t know again in talking about Albert 

Street in Regina: 

 

(i) water; 

 

(ii) ships and vessels; 

 

(iii) trailers and portable structures designed for use for 

residence, business or shelter; 

 

(iv) trains, railway cars, vehicles and aircraft, except 

while in operation. 

 

Now we did get here into some trains, railway cars, vehicles, 

aircraft which talk about some of the things we see throughout 

Saskatchewan but might be found in Regina, and that‟s clear, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, of what a trespass there would be. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what however isn‟t clear is, what 

about the roadways, what about the driveways, what about the 

walkways? Now just to say in the Manitoba Act, just on this 

one, that the terms occupier and premises are not defined in The 

Petty Trespasses Act in Manitoba. And I would probably say 

that the reason that they‟re not — and I‟d just venture a guess 

— is that the Act is clearer, the Act is clearer, the trespass Act, 

and people are not guessing as to when they might not be 

breaking the law in these instances. 

 

Now subsection 4(1) and (2) of Bill 43 specify the 

circumstances under which entry in or on premises is 

prohibited, when the activity is prohibited. Those circumstances 

include those situations in which notice has been given in 

accordance with section 11. Now: 

 

Prohibited entry and activities 

4(1) For the purpose of clause 3(1)(a), entry in or on 

premises is prohibited if any person: 

 

(a) enters in or on a premises that are the property of 

another person when a notice respecting the premises 

is given in accordance with section 11; or 

 

(b) enters in or on enclosed lands that are property of 

another person. 

 

(2) For the purposes of clause 3(1)(b), an activity is 

prohibited if it is an activity for which notice respecting 

the premises is given in accordance with section 11. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, these are important points because, I 

mean, obviously in terms of listing out, enters in or on premises 

of another person when notice respecting premises is given in 

accordance . . . The question of course would be, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, if it‟s unclear when this is to occur, it causes further 

confusion for the parties who have to deal with these because in 

no way are we concerned, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with issues of 

illegal entry or people going on private property or entering 

causing damage, as we well heard of concerns — whether that 

be snowmobilers, whether that be people driving onto private 

property. 

 

Some order, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is most certainly appreciated 

by all residents of Saskatchewan, and knowing full well when 

and where people can go. And I think that that part you‟ll 

receive no objection from this side of the House. But again 

when we go on and we talk about hunting and fishing on 

Regina Avenue, Albert avenue — I‟m sorry, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker — then I see that we‟re getting into areas that perhaps 

would be of some concern. 

 

Now section 11 states that the method of giving the notice, as I 

talked before previously about notices being posted, so section 

11 states and outlines a procedure by which notices would be 

given. Fair enough, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 

 

11(1) A notice pursuant to this Act may be given: 

 

(a) orally or in writing; 



March 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2043 

(b) by means of a signs posted so the sign is clearly 

visible in daylight under normal conditions from the 

approach to each ordinary point of access to the 

premises to which the notice applies; or 

 

(c) by any other means prescribed in the regulations. 

 

Now again here, and again this section probably is not as 

harmful as some of the other areas that are left wide open, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, wide open in terms of interpretation or lack of 

clarity, lack of clarity in this. Now: 

 

(2) Substantial compliance with clause (1)(b) or (c) is 

sufficient notice. 

 

(3) A sign that is posted in accordance with clause (1)(b) is 

sufficient for the purpose of giving notice that an activity 

is prohibited if the sign . . . 

 

Again here, very clear, Mr. Deputy Speaker, perhaps this is 

something that the government could have followed or the 

minister could have followed in looking at drafting this: 

 

A sign that is posted in accordance with clause (1)(b) is 

sufficient for the purpose of giving notice that an activity 

is prohibited if the sign: 

 

(a) names that activity and has an oblique line drawn 

through the name of the activity; or 

 

(b) shows a graphic representation of that activity and 

has an oblique line drawn through that representation. 

 

A notice given pursuant to this section may relate to all or 

[any] part of any premises and different notices may be 

given or posted in relation to different parts of any 

premises. 

 

No person, other than the occupier, shall remove, alter or 

deface signs posted for the purposes of this section. 

 

Now again here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to draw your 

attention to the definition. And I know I‟ve done it a couple 

times, but I think all members have now understood that 

definition, but I think that the clear . . . (5) here, where “No 

person, other than the occupier, shall remove, alter or deface 

signs posted for the purposes of this section” and “A notice 

given pursuant . . . ” is the occupier. And we have the definition 

of occupier “shall remove, alter or deface” signposts. 

 

Now that‟s very clear, Mr. Deputy Speaker. People putting up 

signs, when they read this section, they understand who can and 

who cannot. And even that fine detail, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of 

occupier also being somebody else who‟s in charge of your 

premises, as I read the definition, that could also be an occupier. 

But in this case, if you notice that was not there that somebody 

could be put in charge of that but, in fact, the occupier . . . So 

very clear in this part of the Act in terms of putting up the signs, 

where they go, the oblique lines that are drawn between the 

representations, and how those signs are to be put out. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it always amazes me that we could have 

something clear, and then in other parts we leave something, 

maybe we could say you could drive a Mack truck through, 

why that would be of concern. Yet you see the work done here 

and the care taken, and yet in that we leave . . . We understand 

that you leave certain things to regulations, but other things 

which can be clear, again like the Manitoba section that we 

have, “Where no offence under Act,” where it says: 

 

Any person who, on any walk, driveway, roadway, square 

or parking area provided outdoors at the site of or in 

conjunction with the premises in which any business or 

undertaking is operated and to which the public is 

normally admitted without fee or charge, communicates 

true statements, either orally or through printed material 

or through any other means, is not guilty of an offence . . . 

 

Now that is pretty straightforward. We don‟t have . . . Here we 

have another section that‟s quite clear in terms of signposts — 

who can, who cannot take them down, what they‟re to work 

like. And you read that and you find yourself thinking, well we 

can see from the plain written word what that means. 

 

Now we get into . . . And I‟ve mentioned in terms of consent 

and owners, and we‟ve talked a bit about what owners should 

do and what they aren‟t to do, and subsection 4(3) of Bill 43 

states that “(3) A person found in or on enclosed land is 

presumed not to have the consent of the occupier to be there.” 

And finally section 14(b) states: 

 

Offence and penalty 

 

Every person who contravenes any provision of this Act 

or the regulations is guilty of an offence and liable on 

summary conviction to a fine of not more than $2,000. 

 

Here again we have, as I mentioned, Manitoba is $5,000. Now 

the corresponding provision of The Petty Trespasses Act is 

subsection 1(1) which create and describes the trespassing 

offence and in that Act it states: 

 

Trespassing offence 

 

1(1) Subject to subsections (2), (3), (4) and (5), any 

person 

 

(a) who unlawfully enters or in any way trespasses 

upon lands and premises that are the property of 

another and are wholly enclosed; or 

 

(b) who enters in or in any way trespasses upon lands 

or premises that are the property of another and are 

not wholly enclosed, after being requested by the 

owner, tenant or occupier not to do so, or . . . having 

entered the lands or premises or committed the 

trespass, refuses to leave upon being requested by the 

owner, tenant or occupier to do so; 

 

is guilty of an offence, whether or not any damage has 

been occasioned by the entry or trespass, and [it‟s 

again] is liable . . . [to the] conviction . . . [of] $5,000. 

 

Now again here we have in terms of defences, “Defences to 

trespass 7(1) It is a defence for a person charged with an 

offence pursuant to 3 or 5 to prove, on the balance of 



2044 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 2009 

probabilities . . .” 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I read those in so perhaps it wouldn‟t be 

necessary to go over that, but The Petty Trespasses Act does not 

contain a provision that specifically places a burden on the 

defendant to prove that he or she had the consent of the 

occupier to enter in or on the premises or engage in activity in 

or on the premises. It does however list four specific 

circumstances in which trespassing will be said to not have 

occurred. Presumably the defendant bears the burden on the 

balance of probabilities to prove that he falls within one of 

those four exceptions. 

 

So definitely, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in terms of . . . perhaps for 

those that didn‟t hear that, where The Petty Trespass Act does 

not contain a provision that specifically places the burden on 

the defendant to prove that he or she had consent of the 

occupier, it does however list four circumstances in which 

trespassing will be said to not have occurred and presumably 

the defendant bears the burden on the balance of probabilities to 

prove. So a little more, I would say, clarity on this issue coming 

from next door in Manitoba, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Now how about the “Request of person in actual occupation 

1(2) Where lands or premises are occupied, clause 1(b) does not 

apply unless the request there mentioned is made by or with the 

approval of the person in actual occupation of the lands or 

premises.” Exception again in the case of a resident: 

 

1(3) Clause (l)(b) does not apply in the case of a person 

who 

 

(a) ordinarily resides on the lands or premises there 

described. 

 

Where lands or premises are occupied, clause 1(b) does 

not apply unless the request there mentioned is made by or 

with the approval of the person in actual occupation of the 

lands . . . 

 

Again I had read that in earlier, but it‟s an important, important 

exemption. So those exemptions, Mr. Deputy Speaker, make 

the Acts different. Different but in terms of clarity, by all means 

it would be our contention that the Manitoba The Petty 

Trespasses Act outlines that. 

 

So just so we‟re clear in terms of those exemptions, exemption, 

for example, exemption in case of resident, exemption where 

honest belief, Mr. Deputy Speaker: “Subsection (1) does not 

apply where a person entering or trespassing upon the lands or 

premises there described is acting under an honest and 

reasonable belief that he or she has the right to do the act 

complained of.” 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, a very important point in it would seem to 

be in terms of the onus, as we‟ve talked about in ours, in our 

Act where the onus is totally on the individual. (4) is an 

interesting concept, does not apply to a person “. . . entering or 

trespassing upon lands or premises there described . . .” So why 

the clarity? Why the clarity in Manitoba? And where is our 

clarity? 

 

And again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, an issue, a clause like the 

exception for honest belief, a very important clause to have . . . 

Now again in Manitoba, there is a “Application to religious 

communities” and I went over that when I read that, but again: 

 

In this section, the expression “owner, tenant or 

occupier”, where used with respect to lands or premises 

occupied by a religious organization or religious 

community as owner, tenant or occupier the by-laws, 

articles or a resolution of which authorize one or more 

officials of the organization or community to act on its 

behalf in preventing or controlling disorderly conduct, 

loitering, nuisances, and other disruptive behaviour on the 

lands and premises, means such an official or officials 

acting in accordance with those by-laws or articles or 

resolution. 

 

[20:00] 

 

Subsection (1)(5) appears to be the only provision that differs 

substantially from the defences listed in subsection (7)(2) of 

Bill 43. 

 

Both Bill 43 and The Petty Trespass Act allow a peace officer to 

arrest a trespasser without warrant. Section 2 of The Petty 

Trespass Act states that: 

 

Arrest without warrant 

 

2 Any person found committing an offence under section 

1 may be apprehended without a warrant by any peace 

officer, or by the owner, tenant or occupier of the lands or 

premises on which the offence is committed or by a 

person authorized by the owner, tenant or occupier, and 

shall be taken to the nearest justice as soon as reasonably 

practicable to be dealt with according to law. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I, no doubt, as in going through this and 

listing this out, I think it becoming quite evident in terms of 

some of the concerns that we‟ve been expressing in terms of 

clarity and drafting. Perhaps a redo might be . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — A do-over. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — A do-over, a do-over. So as we look at this 

more and the more . . . Actually the more I read it, the more 

concerned I actually get, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So I‟m not quite 

sure what we would need here to change the Act to make it 

right, to fix it. Do we have to go back and redo it? We would 

hope that this would not have to be another redo, but I think it 

again goes back to the people responsible in doing this to do the 

due diligence, to do the work necessary to look at these things, 

to look across the country perhaps to see what other people 

have done, and then to make application, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

so that we would get it right the first time and wouldn‟t have to 

redo and go over and over and over the same ground, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

So I‟ve talked about section 12 of Bill 43, the arrest without a 

warrant. Now however Bill 43 confers additional powers onto a 

peace officer that are not included in The Petty Trespass Act. 

Sections 5 and 6 of the Bill give the peace officer the power to 

assume the authority of an occupier. Now I‟ve talked about the 

occupiers previously. We‟ve had occupiers and the definition of 



March 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2045 

occupiers. We talked about the signposts, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

the clarity on the signposts, the oblique signs on there. But here 

we have again included extra powers. And if I could just talk 

about those extra powers: 

 

A peace officer may do all or any of the things mentioned 

in subsection (2) if: 

 

(a) a person enters in or on premises when entry is 

prohibited pursuant to this Act; or 

 

(b) a person is engaged in an activity in or on premises 

that is prohibited pursuant to this Act. 

 

Now . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Mr. Speaker, the member 

opposite is yelling, trust me, to us. And I guess that‟s one of the 

problems we‟re having is that — trust me. And we could just do 

that. So we could draft this Act, we could draft some of the 

other legislation that we‟ve seen, and trust us. And then we‟ll 

take it back if it doesn‟t work. 

 

You know, so what. You know, it doesn‟t really matter. We can 

preoccupy this Assembly with work that might not be necessary 

had we done the right thing at the right time, had we done the 

consultation, had we done the due diligence, had the drafting 

been clear so that we wouldn‟t have to raise these questions. It 

would save all of us not only the work, but then we could move 

on and deal with the business that the residents of this province 

want us to do. Instead we are caught up trying to see what the 

Bill means — in fact what does it mean? — because there‟s no 

clarity when it was first drafted. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I‟ve been trying to take those few 

minutes now to get that clarity, to get the message across the 

way to see if anything could be done about this Bill. And so I 

think it‟s somewhat timely that we get yelled from across the 

way, trust us to do that. I think it would be not the thing to do 

from this side, not the appropriate thing, not the proper thing to 

simply say, trust us. 

 

And I would think that that‟s what‟s going to be the new call 

from the other side — trust us — to people of Saskatchewan. 

Trust us. Trust us. Trust us in terms of being transparent. Trust 

us. We‟ll talk to you about it — be that the Agreement on 

Internal Trade, be that labour Bills or whatever — trust us and 

we will get back to you. We‟ll get back to you. We‟ll get back 

to you if you haven‟t quite got it right. Just trust us. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if I might just venture to say that that 

is a dangerous path that they‟ve started on there by trust us. 

Trust us. Many good people have been down that road before, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, and we see the results of that. What 

should be happening, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and let me tell you, 

what should be happening is that work on Bills like these 

should be done prior to being brought to the Assembly, so we 

wouldn‟t have to say trust us on this Bill. Just trust us. If it‟s not 

clear, trust us that we‟ll do the right thing. Trust us. 

 

Our democracy has not been built on something like that. 

We‟ve had, Mr. Speaker . . . The very essence of legislation that 

we bring forward here is to deal with the issues in a fair manner 

so that today but also people coming after us can read these 

Bills and feel comfort or feel confident that they understand 

how they are to treat themselves in our society. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, this new concept of throwing out legislation 

and saying trust us is hardly worth . . . I‟m not sure why I‟m 

taking the time to even talk about, you know, trust us; there will 

be no fishing or hunting on Albert Street. I guess next thing 

they‟ll be saying to us, but just trust us, just trust us. Just trust 

us and that‟s what they say. Just do this and trust us. We‟ll put 

in the next Bill and we‟ll have the trust . . . maybe just do an 

overall Bill, the trust-us Bill. We‟ll have the trust-us Bill where 

we‟ll just talk about trusting us and then we‟ll submit 

legislation. 

 

Under that trust-us subsection 1, subsection 2, Bills on trespass 

Acts or whatever, but the opening remarks will not be any kind 

of . . . what the Bill was intended. Any kind of prelude to the 

Bill will be the trust us, and then we‟ll have the Bills. So if we 

miss anything, you know, just go under trust us, and that‟ll be 

the new argument. They won‟t have to have any debate. We 

won‟t have to do the work. In fact we might not even, under 

that kind of thing, consult, because we can just say trust us and 

we‟ll get to you later, you know, which seems to be sort of the 

theme that‟s being established here. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

I‟ve probably spent too much time on the new approach of the 

Sask Party, and I probably should be getting back here because 

I‟m sure that the work on the Bill that we need to do should 

proceed. 

 

Now I think I was at . . . I apologize for losing my place here. 

But Bill 43, we talked about the conferring additional powers, 

and then we talked about when the peace office may exercise 

powers of occupier. Now I know I‟ve probably, twice already 

I‟ve read into the record the occupier on here, but I think, you 

know, just in terms of that because I‟m always wondering when 

we get the kind of replies from the other side, trust us, that 

perhaps I wasn‟t clear or maybe there wasn‟t a clear 

understanding. So I‟m just going to just again, so that we really 

do have this clear, read into the thing about . . . and I trust that 

they will trust us that this is in the Act. Occupier includes and 

this is under “Interpretation,” 2(c), (i) under occupier: 

 

a person who is in physical possession of premises; 

 

a person who: 

 

(A) has responsibility for and control over the condition 

of premises or of the activities there carried on; or 

 

(B) has control over persons allowed to enter in or on 

the premises; or 

 

(iii) a person prescribed in the regulations. 

 

Of course the regulations are not here. Not that strange, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that we don‟t have regulations. But regulations 

still somehow should be, in terms of clarifying, doing the 

specifics, but they should not leave gaping holes in legislation, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So the peace officer may exercise powers of occupier, that 

we‟ve gone over the powers of the occupier and again, I just 

bring you back to the signposts that we talked about. The clarity 

of that, the signposts, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am encouraged by 



2046 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 2009 

the clarity there that there is a possibility that we will in fact get 

that kind of work eventually. I mean I‟m hoping. It doesn‟t 

leave me with a lot of faith when I do hear the issues around, 

trust us. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I guess I believe in democracy and I 

believe in debate. And I believe this is a serious place, and we 

come here to do serious business. It might not be shared by 

everybody, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This might not be shared by 

everybody as to what they think this place is or not. But for my 

part I‟m serious about the work that is to be done here, and I 

wouldn‟t just go under the trust-us thing. 

 

Again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I digress: 

 

(2) In circumstances mentioned in subsection (1), a peace 

officer may do all or any of the following: 

 

(a) request a person either orally or in writing not to 

enter in or on the premises; [so that is similar] 

 

(b) request a person either orally or in writing to leave 

the premises; 

 

(c) request, either orally or in writing, a person engaged 

in an activity in or on the premises to stop engaging in 

that activity. 

 

All fairly straightforward, but something new in terms of giving 

a peace officer additional duties in here, in this Act, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker: 

 

(3) No person shall fail to comply with a request of a 

peace officer made pursuant to this section. 

 

Peace officer may act in imminent situations or 

conditions [again, Mr. Deputy Speaker:] 

 

6(1) With respect to any premises, a peace officer may do 

all . . . [the things] mentioned in subsection (2) if the 

peace officer has reasonable grounds to believe that there 

is a present or imminent situation or condition that 

requires prompt action to prevent or limit . . . 

 

And again, it lists out here the things that are limited, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy Speaker, section 5 goes further to 

say that: 

 

. . . if the peace officer has reasonable grounds to believe 

that there is a present or imminent situation or condition 

that requires prompt action to prevent or limit: 

 

(a) loss of life; 

 

(b) harm or damage to the safety, health or welfare of 

any person; or 

 

(c) damage to property or the environment. 

 

(2) In the circumstances mentioned in subsection (1), a 

peace officer may do all or any of the following: 

 

(a) request a person either orally or in writing not to 

enter in or on the premises; 

 

(b) request a person either orally or in writing to leave 

the premises; 

 

(c) request, either orally or in writing, a person engaged 

in an activity in or on the premises to stop engaging . . . 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, again here, like the signpost we 

were talking about and the oblique sign says to what would not 

be allowed, take a look at this section. I mean just read this 

section. And I would ask all members to read this section and 

say this is clear. This is clear now. This will probably be clear 

in the future. This will be probably clear to the generations that 

come, this one section. I would suggest this is one section that 

might not be ever amended the way this is written. 

 

Now we wonder, we wonder, we wonder and we have to give 

credit where credit is due, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

An Hon. Member: — They got one section right. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Well my fellow colleague says that they got 

one. The signpost section, I think we have to agree, was another 

good section, the signpost section. I think the signpost section 

was a good section. And this section, this section in terms of 

that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think I would like to just simply . . . 

This is such a good section I‟d like to read it again. I think I‟m 

going to put in the record again so those that follow in 

generations to come can, when they read this speech, they will 

say it was the NDP [New Democratic Party] who said that when 

a good job was done, they gave credit where credit was due. 

Never it be not said that we did not give credit where credit was 

due, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So I‟m just going to read this section 

one more time because I think this has potential historically: “In 

the circumstances mentioned in subsection (1), a peace officer 

may do all or any of the following . . .” 

 

The members opposite are riveted to this so I . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Now some, not all members, I guess. There‟s 

some members who are chirping from the seat there. But I 

notice a number of members are riveted about the good work, 

about the good work that‟s been done here in this section, about 

the good work that‟s been done here in this section, and that is: 

 

(2) In the circumstances mentioned in subsection (1), [and 

I‟m not going to read subsection 1. I know I‟ve done that, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker] a peace officer may do . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — The member from Cannington would 

like you to read it again. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Well I‟ll read this first so I don‟t lose track, 

Mr. Deputy, because I‟ve gotten knocked off my train of 

thought here a couple of times, so I don‟t want to do that. I want 

to finish this and then perhaps I‟ll go back to (1). I could do the 

signpost one again too because I‟m not sure . . . This is good, 

but let‟s not take it away from the signpost. 

 

[20:15] 

 

Now (2), as I started out, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 

 



March 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2047 

In the circumstances mentioned in subsection (1), a peace 

officer may do all or any of the following: 

 

(a) request a person either orally or in writing not to enter 

in or on the premises; 

 

(b) request a person either orally or in writing to leave the 

premises; 

 

Now how about that, Mr. Deputy Speaker? You can request a 

person orally, in writing to enter the premises and (b), followed 

right next after (a), is to request a person either orally or in 

writing to leave the premises. So that‟s covered off. You‟re 

coming and you‟re going. You‟re coming and you‟re going. 

You‟ve got it orally and in writing and you‟ve got him in 

coming and going. No reason to say, trust us, on this one. Clear. 

 

(c) request, either orally or in writing, a person engaged in 

an activity in or on the premises to stop engaging in that 

activity. 

 

Now I like that. Request either orally or in writing a person 

engaged in an activity in or on the premises — a good thing in 

this. I shouldn‟t say good, but at least it‟s clear, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And we don‟t have, as I mentioned earlier, what looks 

like perhaps a Mack truck driving through because we don‟t 

talk about what, for example, they talk about in Manitoba. 

 

They talk in Manitoba and they cover off hunting and fishing on 

Albert Street. They cover it off. They don‟t say Albert Street in 

necessarily, Mr. Deputy Speaker — I‟m just writing that in — 

but “Where no offence under [the] Act” in the Alberta Act, 

says: 

 

Any person who, on any walk, driveway, roadway, 

square, or parking area provided outdoors at the site of or 

in conjunction with the premises in which any business or 

undertaking is operated and to which the public is 

normally admitted without fee or charge, communicates 

true statements [Mr. Deputy Speaker, true statements], 

either orally or through printed material or through any 

other means, is not guilty of an offence under this Act 

whether the walk, driveway, roadway, square or parking 

area is owned by the operator of that business or 

undertaking or by any other person or is publically owned, 

but nothing in this section relieves the person from 

liability for damages he causes to the owner or the 

occupier of the property. 

 

Now that‟s clear. The signpost is clear. The signpost clause is 

clear and the peace officer coming and going in writing, orally, 

and then engaging and not engaging in activity is clear. 

 

And then finally: “(3) No person shall fail to comply with a 

request of a peace officer made pursuant to this section.” 

 

That‟s good too — good ending, strong ending on that clause. 

 

Now the remaining provisions in both Bill 43 and The Petty 

Trespasses Act are unique to each piece of legislation. First the 

enclosed land is given a specific definition in Bill 43 and that is 

in subsection 2(a), “enclosed land.” This one we haven‟t dealt 

with, Mr. Deputy Speaker, so I‟ll probably just read that in for 

the record. and it‟s under “Interpretation.” We have dealt with 

under 2, interpretation of the occupier and the premises 

definitions. I‟d like to read in what the enclosed land means. 

 

So interpretation of this is: 

 

2 In this Act: 

 

(a) “enclosed land” means . . . that: 

 

(i) is surrounded by a fence, a natural boundary or a 

combination of a fence and a natural boundary; 

 

(ii) is enclosed in a manner that indicates the 

occupier‟s intention to keep persons off the occupier‟s 

premises or animals on the occupier‟s premises; or 

 

(iii) is prescribed in the regulations; 

 

Now even this one with the regulations, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 

not something that would cause a lot of concern. I think 

enclosed land, we can look at that and get a sense of what the 

intentions were here. I don‟t think that that would be one area 

that we would be afraid to say that that was drafted and that we 

have some understanding of that. 

 

But now we go to subsection 1(a) of Bill 43 and specify 

circumstances in which entry is prohibited — prohibition of 

entry, if I could put that also in the . . . [inaudible interjection] 

. . . The member is asking if I could start again. The Minister of 

Justice is asking if I could start again. Now I don‟t know which 

part he would like me to start on again. But I‟m willing to . . . 

The member has asked that, and if this is leading to perhaps an 

amendment, Mr. Deputy Speaker, or perhaps a discussion of a 

redo, I am tempted to oblige the member and do this. But I‟m 

really concerned about . . . What time is it? Oh we have time. 

 

So I‟m concerned as to where he meant I should start again. I‟m 

not certain if it would be appropriate to ask him the question 

exactly what start again means in that. I mean, does it mean do 

over? Is he planning an amendment? What are we here? 

 

But I do want to oblige the member. I don‟t want to leave 

interaction . . . I mean interaction is good. I think we‟re here to 

interact with each other for clarification, for content, debate. I 

think this is what this place is. And I‟m glad to see that the 

Minister of Justice is engaged. It‟s good to see him here. I‟m 

sure his constituents would say . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Good, good. We‟re getting some real debate. 

 

I can see the people at home perhaps calling in the neighbours 

to watch. Perhaps the Bruins and Philadelphia game is over and 

you know, I mean people were sitting there and just happened 

to be surfing the channels and came on the legislative channel. 

Perhaps there‟s somebody watching that‟s never watched 

before, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I mean, this is a telling moment, 

probably, in the legislature here, that in terms of interaction 

among members, and perhaps we can get this Bill done tonight 

in terms of amendments or proposals. Who knows, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker — democracy in action. 

 

But in terms of that, I believe I was going to 8(1). And I would 

like to oblige the member, and I will consider that request. I do 



2048 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 2009 

have legislation still to go through, and perhaps we can do it in 

that fashion. 

 

But prohibition of entry is: 

 

8(1) Entry in or on premises may be prohibited by a notice 

given in accordance with section 11. 

 

(2) Entry in or on any enclosed land is prohibited whether 

or not any notice is given pursuant to section 11 with 

respect to that enclosed land. 

 

(3) For the purposes of this Act, there is a presumption 

that access for lawful purposes is not prohibited to the 

door of a building on premises by means apparently 

provided and used for the purpose of access. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, again here I‟m not sure if you read 

this in conjunction with the posts, signposts, but again an 

eye-opener, I guess, in terms of prohibitions in terms of where 

notices perhaps are not posted. So again: 

 

8(1) Entry in or on premises may be prohibited by a notice 

given in accordance with section 11. 

 

(2) Entry in or on any enclosed land is prohibited whether 

or not any notice is given . . . 

 

And again, directly, our section 11 here . . . And I can‟t help, I 

guess, by thinking that section 11, Mr. Deputy Speaker, section 

11 is . . . I know the members are probably . . . Maybe some 

members don‟t have the Bill before them, but section 11 is the 

signpost section, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So 8(1), in terms where 8(1) talks about: 

 

8(1) Entry in or on premises may be prohibited by notice 

given in accordance with section 11. 

 

(2) Entry in or on any enclosed land is prohibited whether 

or not any notice is given pursuant to section 11 . . . 

 

So I think perhaps I can‟t accommodate the Justice minister 

completely by starting over again, but what we could do is redo 

— redo may be a positive — on the method of giving notice, 

the section 11, the signpost section so . . . because in reference: 

“Entry . . . on premises may be prohibited by notice given in 

accordance with section 11.” And that‟s 8(1). So perhaps before 

going down further into section 8, I would maybe redo section 

11 again. And then we‟d get the entire picture, a clear picture of 

what I am talking about. 

 

So: 

 

Method of giving notice 

 

11(1) A notice pursuant to this Act may be given: 

 

(a) orally or in writing; [and this is, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, of going onto land or premises] 

 

(b) by means of signs posted so that a sign is clearly 

visible in daylight under normal conditions from the 

approach to each ordinary point of access to the 

premises to which the notice applies. 

 

So the signs, it very clearly says where the sign should be 

posted: “. . . is clearly visible in daylight under normal 

conditions [Mr. Deputy] from the approach to each ordinary 

point of access to the premises to which the notice applies.” 

 

So you can kind of visualize that in terms of how these postings 

would be done so that any of us walking by would know and 

see these. There‟s some good thought put into this so that any 

member or any resident of Saskatchewan would know when 

they shouldn‟t go here. 

 

And then “(c) by any . . . means prescribed in the regulations.” 

And again, this is also one place where regulations, where we 

oftentimes say, no regulations, we don‟t understand what this 

means. But I think this is probably an appropriate place, as I 

mentioned previously in terms of the definition section. And 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, you probably remember that section 

where we talked about the regulations. And that‟s where I 

started out on, and not at the beginning again, but in terms of it 

being enclosed land and when we talked about regulations 

there. And I said that, again, there the regulations were probably 

an appropriate use of regulations. 

 

And again just the comparison, I guess, in terms of drafting, our 

point that we‟re trying to make: 

 

“enclosed land” means . . . that: 

 

(i) is surrounded by a fence, natural boundary or a 

combination of fence and a natural boundary; 

 

(ii) is enclosed in a manner that indicates the occupier‟s 

intention to keep persons off the occupier‟s premises or 

animals on the occupier‟s premises; or 

 

(iii) is prescribed in the regulations. 

 

We read that and we read section 11 in conjunction with 8, 

which I will get back to on section 8 yet, but method of giving 

notice pursuant to this Act may be given: 

 

(a) orally or in writing; 

 

(b) by means of signs posted so that a sign is clearly 

visible in daylight under normal conditions from the 

approach to each ordinary point of access to the premises 

. . .; or 

 

(c) by any other means prescribed in the regulations. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, those regulations, and I digress a bit in 

terms of talking about regulations and the use of regulations, 

but I think that to get back to the provision of entry, entry in or 

on premises may be prohibited by notice given in accordance 

with section 11: 

 

8(2) Entry in or on any enclosed land is prohibited 

whether or not any notice is given pursuant to section 11 

respect to that enclosed land [and]. 

 



March 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2049 

(3) For the purposes of this Act, there is a presumption 

that access for lawful purposes is not prohibited to the 

door of a building on premises by means apparently 

provided and used for the purpose of access. 

 

An Hon. Member: — I knew it. That‟s the first time I ever saw 

a windmill run on water. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, only in southwestern 

Saskatchewan, but it‟s very creative. I thank that member for 

giving me, for giving me that initial boost then for seeing that. I 

can appreciate that and thank the member for the remark there. 

Hopefully that Hansard will have picked it up and put that in. 

 

An Hon. Member: — It‟s right up there with trust me. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — As my colleague says, it‟s right up there 

with trust me, but I would take it in the sense that it was used, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, and look at it as a comment. So I thank the 

member from across the way, from Cypress Hills, for that 

comment. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the issues that we have been dealing with 

here, 8(1), I would now like to turn to section 9 of Bill 43 which 

specifies circumstances in which limited permission of one or 

more activities may be granted and how all other activities are 

deemed to be prohibited — a very interesting section which 

would define just from the beginning that in some ways we are 

now to deal with prohibited and which sections would be 

limited, and which sections a person would allow certain 

activities. 

 

[20:30] 

 

So under section 9: 

 

Limited permission 

9(1) If notice is given that one or more particular 

activities are permitted, all other activities and entry for 

the purpose of engaging in those other activities are 

deemed to be prohibited. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, an interesting kind of phrase. Just to 

perhaps do this again: 

 

If notice is given that one or more particular activities are 

permitted, all other activities and entry for the purpose of 

engaging in those other activities are deemed to be 

prohibited. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, again probably very clear in terms of 

where that is. Unfortunately what is not clear is what happens 

with hunting and fishing on Albert Street in Regina. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, the unfortunate part about that is that we then . . . it 

causes us to look that much more careful because . . . and 

particularly when we hear, just trust us, we start wondering 

what it is that we are to be trusted. 

 

But overall I think the Bill has some positive aspects to it, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. Positive aspects in terms of as we have seen 

the location of signs, what the in and outs of what a peace 

officer can do whether it be in writing or orally, and now the 

limited permission 9(1). 

There is a 9(2) that allows us to look at if one particular activity 

is permitted that would be the only activity that would be there. 

In fact this is so clear that it requires no regulations to even to 

deal with this clause, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So, and I know 

everyone is waiting for 9(2), and 9(2) reads: 

 

(2) Any notice given in addition to that mentioned in 

subsection (1) that entry is prohibited or a particular 

activity is prohibited in or on the premises is to be 

construed as for greater certainty only. 

 

So: 

 

Any notice given in addition to that mentioned . . . is 

prohibited or a particular activity is prohibited in or on the 

premises is to be construed as for greater certainty only. 

 

So one activity only, any others are just to provide greater 

certainty. So a clause like that does also give me pause to 

consider that the certainty involved here is greatly appreciated. 

 

After 9, we have 10 which specifies circumstances in which 

limited prohibition of one or more activities may be granted and 

how other activities are deemed to be permitted: 

 

Limited prohibition 

 

10 If entry in or on premises is . . . prohibited pursuant 

to section 3 or by notice that one or more particular 

activities are permitted pursuant to section 9, and notice 

is given that a particular activity is prohibited: 

 

(a) that activity and entry in or on the premises for 

the purpose of engaging in that activity are 

prohibited; and 

 

(b) all other activities and entry in or on the premises 

for the purpose of engaging in those activities are not 

prohibited. 

 

So that is section 10. Section 10. The exception in terms of the 

. . . involved in, and again the Manitoba Act is nowhere near, I 

guess, nowhere near the amount of clauses that are in this Act. 

But again here, exception in terms of some of the things that 

might look clear, and we have a lot of clauses under our Act. 

 

But as I read some of these that . . . And they are clear, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. It makes me want to go and look at the 

Manitoba Act again where there is clarity and we can see 

where, for example, as I mentioned before, in terms of a request 

of a person in actual occupation, which is similar to some of the 

discussions that we have in ongoing sections under the trespass 

Act. 

 

But if you look at the way Manitoba structured their Act, 

“Request of person in actual occupation,” it‟s simple: “Where 

lands or premises are occupied . . .” This is in The Petty 

Trespasses Act, section 1(2): 

 

Where lands or premises are occupied, clause (1)(b) does 

not apply unless the request there mentioned is made by 

or with the approval of the person in actual occupation of 

the lands or premises. 



2050 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 2009 

I‟m at a bit of a loss. I mean I think it clarifies that, and so we 

kind of get the feeling that in fact under some of these sections, 

maybe the reason they‟re clear is they‟re like regulations and 

they‟ve gone even past and ended up being regulations, that 

we‟re writing some regulations in here. We‟re saying that we 

should do regulations in other parts. In other parts we‟re leaving 

out of the Act roadways; we‟re leaving out a part like Manitoba 

talks about. 

 

And you know it might well be worthwhile reading that section 

again, “Where no offence under Act” because they‟re just 

simply not in existence under the trespass Act, and Manitoba‟s 

so clear in there where it says: 

 

Any person who, on any walk, driveway, roadway, square 

or parking area provided outdoors at the site of or in 

conjunction with the premises in which any business or 

undertaking is operated and to which the public is 

normally admitted without fee or charge, communicates 

true statements, either orally or through printed material 

or through any other means, is not guilty of an offence 

under this Act whether the walk, driveway, roadway, 

square or parking area is owned by the operator of that 

business or undertaking . . . 

 

So it‟s interesting that we would have clarity like that. Again 

even in the . . . In terms of the “Exception in case of resident,” 

I read about the part where exception, a person in actual 

occupation: 

 

Exception in case of resident 

 

Clause 1(b) does not apply in a case of a person who 

 

(a) ordinarily resides on the lands or premises there 

described; or 

 

(b) if not ordinarily residing on the lands or premises 

there described, is at the material time residing thereon 

with the express or implied consent of the owner, tenant 

or occupier of the lands or premises. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it‟s becoming abundantly clear, 

abundantly clear to me that perhaps, perhaps we might have a 

redo on our hands here, in terms just of the whole . . . even the 

construction, even the construction. Because we are, in our Act 

we are being specific in some cases. You take for example the 

signpost, the placing of the signpost so that everyone who walks 

by knows immediately — knows immediately without question 

— this is a trespass and, you know, I can‟t go there. And it‟s 

legally posted; it talks about in detail how it‟s to be posted. 

 

And then we have other sections . . . well we don‟t know what‟s 

going to happen on Albert Street. We don‟t know what‟s going 

to happen on Albert Street. And then we hear from the other 

side, is there hunting or is there fishing? And then we hear, trust 

us. Trust us, from the other side. Trust us in this. And we‟ve 

seen what has happened with the trust us, and we‟ve had to redo 

Bills. We‟ve had to deal with that. And where has it gotten us, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker? Where has it really gotten us? 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Act is confusing. I‟m simply reading 

about the Act, and I hear that people, the members opposite are 

saying that there‟s a lack of understanding. I think it‟s reflective 

of what I‟m reading. And perhaps the member has actually hit 

upon something that in fact the Act is unclear and we‟re not 

sure what is being said, as opposed to the messenger in this case 

— which is me, Mr. Deputy Speaker — in fact reading and 

trying to look at and do the work, the work that‟s necessary 

before this Bill . . . before we can move it on or before, in fact, 

we can look at how we should vote. 

 

So when we get this sort of thing before us, I think it is clear 

that it does lead one to say, do you know what you‟re talking 

about? Because simply reading this at times, it was sort of my 

reaction: I wonder if they know what they‟re talking about here. 

 

So we not only have the just trust us, but I wonder what really 

the intention of this Act is. The intention, the unintended 

consequences, we‟ve talked about those issues of the 

unintended consequences here. Many people have mentioned 

that. And I think that‟s the work we have to do. Unfortunately it 

is the work we have to do because it‟s unclear, and we come to 

the same conclusion about this: I wonder what they‟re talking 

about. Or do they know what they‟re talking about? And so it‟s 

unfortunate to have to come to that, to say, I wonder what 

they‟re talking about. And we say, you know, I wonder what 

this Bill is about. And that shouldn‟t happen, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

The discourse here should be more about challenging ideas, 

challenging debate, talking about as whether or not the Justice 

minister talked about starting over again or . . . And I hear still 

chirping from the seats about what are we talking about. 

Perhaps they‟ve just joined us and, as the Justice minister said, 

we have to start over again. 

 

Now I have more Acts to deal with. We have just started in 

Manitoba, but you know, Alberta has one, British Columbia has 

one, and Ontario. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know I can‟t . . . 

I don‟t really want to rush through that. I think we need to do a 

thorough job because as outlined here in, well, section 11. 

We‟ve talked about section 11, the placing of the signs. We‟ve 

done that. We‟ve looked at that and we‟ve compared about that. 

And we‟d like to . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I recognize the 

member from Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Thank you 

very much. As we go across this great country of Canada, and 

we look at what we have or we don‟t have . . . And the member 

opposite talked about the essential services legislation and what 

that means, what that means in terms of here, and have we 

looked across the country. 

 

And the Minister of Labour says, well did you check across the 

country? Or what about essential services legislation? I think 

that, much like . . . And here‟s one minister that probably 

shouldn‟t be saying anything because I think he‟s probably had 

more redos connected to his tenure than anybody over there, so 

I think he‟s kind of setting the trend. Thank goodness. Perhaps 

he does have some more Bills because with some of the other 

folks over there are catching up to his redos, changes, and that. 

So he probably doesn‟t want to lose that title of Mr. Redo from 

over there, or lead singer for the redos, or you know, the 



March 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2051 

do-overs — top dog for the do-overs, over in Sask Party land 

over there. 

 

Now in terms of essential services legislation, perhaps if they 

had looked across the country, we also wouldn‟t be in the mess 

we are with essential services legislation, since they brought it 

up in its drafting, because it‟s a mess. It‟s costing our health 

regions money to do this. They‟ve had to spend enormous 

amounts of money and time on that, and there are people that 

are saying that in fact this is maybe contrary to their charter, 

you know. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, if that was to do that . . . And I guess the 

question, the question I ask about that, on the essential services, 

since it‟s been raised, and I think it relates to the drafting here 

of this, and looking across the country . . . I‟ll get to that point, 

but I just make this point, that the animosity that that has caused 

— nowhere near, I must say, the animosity . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I‟ll ask the member to stay to the Bill 

on hand. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the animosity caused 

by the trespass Act and the potential of the animosity and in 

terms of the drafting in terms of the essential services, where 

we have Bills that are passed . . . And what did I talk about 

initially? What did I talk about initially, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 

The consultation and transparency. 

 

And where is that, whether that be here or in the essential 

services? It was the same thing with the Agreement on Internal 

Trade. They went and signed a document, and then we don‟t 

have a document or we don‟t know, we don‟t know where the 

document is. Essential services, we‟re not going to do it. We‟re, 

you know . . . and here it is. 

 

And in each of the three cases, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in each of 

the three cases, we were going to consult later. We were going 

to consult later. Well we‟ll do this and then we‟ll do the redo 

later; that‟s what we‟ll do. 

 

But anyways, Mr. Deputy Speaker, now if we had more of the 

consistency around the signposts in there, we would not have to 

look at what people in Ontario are doing, what people in . . . to 

try and simply duplicate, because the duplication that they are 

doing on that side, whether that‟s essential services or this, is 

they‟re widely missing the point of what is going on. First there 

has to be some grasp of what is happening. So I would hope 

that the trespass Act is not going to cause us the animosity and 

the grief and the cost. 

 

And I think what we‟re doing here . . . And I again thank the 

Justice minister for wanting to become involved and trying to 

pay attention so that he could amend it. He could, perhaps he 

would amend it, perhaps redo the Act if we deem it to be in that 

much difficulty, without creating the animosity or cost that 

some of his fellow colleagues have caused in this Assembly and 

to the people of this province. 

 

[20:45] 

 

So we would hope that to bring it back to that. I know there are 

some members who are wanting to enter the debate, but I too 

believe we should stick with the matter at hand and deal with 

the trespass Act because we do not want to colour this Act with 

some of the other things that we have seen here and create the 

problems that are still to come, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So in this, I finished the limited prohibition and Section 13 of 

Bill 43 provides a provision that gives direction how to deal 

with contravention of the Act committed by means of a motor 

vehicle, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Motor vehicles, cars which are a lot in discussion now with the 

Obama presidency in the United States, and we hear every day 

in terms of the big auto makers and how we‟re to deal with that. 

We hear how the Europeans are dealing with that, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. The Europeans have an interesting . . . I believe the 

Germans have an interesting concept on that in terms of giving 

the money directly to the people so they can go and purchase 

that. Here we are taking the other approach of giving money to 

the big car companies. I‟m not certain which necessarily is 

better. But we talk about motor vehicles here not in terms of 

that. 

 

But I just say that in terms of the type of motor vehicle, maybe 

this would be one section that we‟ll be amending if in fact the 

electric car takes over. We might be amending this section to 

not only talk about motor vehicles, but in fact who knows what 

holds for the future. But as I mentioned previously there were 

. . . that this, again, this might be one section that in the future 

might need amendments. I only mention that for that case. 

 

So in section 13 of Bill 43: 

 

Motor vehicles 

 

13 If a contravention of this Act is committed by means 

of a motor vehicle: 

 

(a) the driver of the motor vehicle is liable to the fine 

provided pursuant to this 

Act; and 

 

(b) if the driver is not the owner of the motor vehicle, 

the owner is liable to the fine provided pursuant to this 

Act . . . 

 

(i) the driver is convicted of the offence; or 

 

(ii) at the time the contravention was committed, the 

motor vehicle was in the possession of a person other 

than the owner without the owner‟s consent. 

 

So again, when I read this particular section, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, this section also is clear other than perhaps some 

amendments that we might require in the future. 

 

Section 15 of the Bill states the Act does not apply to Crown 

land. Crown land. 

 

And this is an interesting section, Mr. Deputy Speaker, maybe 

some would say at the heart of what this Bill is about. Because 

here was the opportunity for the minister to exempt, now the 

minister could have exempted any number of things in the Act 

here, but it was limited. Now I‟m not willing to wholly dismiss 



2052 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 2009 

this because of that, but it does make one wonder what the 

thinking was here. And I again, I won‟t read the driveway thing 

in Manitoba, but it does make one wonder when you talk about 

where the Act will not apply, again here, there is at the end of 

this section, there is: 

 

(d) any other Crown land or any category of other Crown 

land that is prescribed in the regulations. 

 

This one might be one of those areas, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 

we might look at the regulations as being too wide. Again we 

have the signposts, we have some of the other things that we‟ve 

gone over, where the placement of signposts limited the 

prohibition, the peace officer . . . I know that that clause, the 

peace officer orally or in writing advising people when they can 

enter and when they cannot. But here in this: 

 

Crown Land 

 

15 This Act does not apply to the following: 

 

(a) vacant Crown agricultural land; 

 

(b) Crown resource land; 

 

(c) park land as defined in The Parks Act; 

 

(d) any other Crown land or any category of other 

Crown land that is prescribed in regulations. 

 

Now I think this is where . . . And now my question I guess, 

what is concerning me is all rural and urban municipalities are 

Crown land under lease. And if this is true, where does that put 

us? Where does that put the residents of Saskatchewan who 

might stop in a driveway or a roadway? I‟m uncertain if you are 

in a rural or urban municipality, does this capture the rest of us. 

 

Now I know there‟s regulations and I know how clear the 

minister was on the signposts. I know how clear he was on the 

posting of the signposts. And I commended the minister on that 

and the oblique line running through the posting, so that it is 

clear to any person walking by that where they stand. But yet in 

something that is so crucial here in this Act — and talk about 

the Mack truck driving through it — why would we not define 

places where people can congregate? Again, freedom of 

expression or freedom of assembly, why would we not deal 

with that? 

 

My question, and perhaps we‟re reading something into this 

that is not there, but I surely when I read this it‟s a question. 

Maybe the Justice minister or someone could enlighten me on 

this issue because leaving it simply to regulations, the obvious 

question is, is what about rural and urban municipalities? Very 

easily he dealt with, you know, not a problem — Manitoba, you 

know, and different places have dealt with that. 

 

But in ours, something where we were so clear on posting of 

signs, posting . . . peace officers saying again, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, who an occupier is. The section on the occupiers is . . . 

just 5(1) again, if we would‟ve had that clarity like, for 

example, 5(1) is: 

 

When peace officer may exercise powers of occupier 

5(1) A peace officer may do all or any of the things 

mentioned in subsection (2) if: 

 

(a) a person enters in or on premises when entry is 

prohibited pursuant to this Act; or 

 

(b) a person is engaged in an activity in or on 

premises that is prohibited . . . 

 

And then: 

 

(2) In the circumstances mentioned in subsection (1), a 

peace officer may do all or any of the following: 

 

(a) request a person either orally or in writing not to 

enter in or on the premises; 

 

(b) request a person either orally or in writing to 

leave the premises; 

 

(c) request, either orally or in writing, a person 

engaged in an activity . . . 

 

I guess I‟m not sure what that peace officer would do for people 

standing in a roadway or driveway, disseminating truthful 

literature. Like I guess in Manitoba, and probably again if you 

just . . . And I know members who had . . . probably likely to do 

the Manitoba, “Where no offence under the Act.” I mean in 

this case a peace officer in Manitoba I think would be very 

clear. 

 

Any person who, on any walk, driveway, roadway, square 

or parking area provided outdoors at the site of or in 

conjunction with the premises in which any business or 

undertaking is operated and to which the public is 

normally admitted without fee or charge, communicates 

true statements, either orally or through printed material 

or through any other means, is not guilty of an offence . . . 

 

Now I think the peace officer coming on that . . . I‟ll tell you, 

the peace officer coming on that or the signpost in this 

legislation or where they‟re placed knows immediately, knows 

immediately, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where he or she stands. They 

know immediately where he or she stands because the 

legislation is clear. The legislation is clear in those instances, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I would say that a peace officer 

coming upon, as 15 is written, what about rural and urban 

municipalities and Crown land under lease? What is the answer 

to that question, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, while we have on one hand a clarity, 

in another, which is a very substantive issue to this Act, is in 

fact unclear or at the very best leaves everything to regulations 

— which leaves all of us, which leaves all of us here as we sit 

here tonight thinking that thought. What happens, what happens 

under section 15? Are rural and urban municipalities covered? 

Are they not covered? We can almost know that that peace 

officer is not going to understand. And perhaps they would be 

aware of that but I can almost think that you‟re putting that 

person in a place of not knowing, of not knowing and not 

understanding what it is that they are to do. 

 

Yet in some of the other Acts — again I have read the Manitoba 



March 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2053 

Act to hopefully clarify this issue — it is very clear to people, 

to any sensible person, that if you‟re in a walkway and you‟re 

disseminating truthful information, a peace officer is not going 

to, either in writing or orally, tell you to move on, providing 

there‟s no posting and the posting‟s done in a legal manner. I 

mean, why can we not have the signpost kind of clarity here? 

Why can we not have the peace officer when it directs the 

duties . . . And in fact the occupier, I mean that whole section 

where it talks about when and when not the peace officer can be 

deemed to be an occupier, deemed to be an occupier, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and that is clear in terms of the peace officer. 

 

And yet we come to the heart, the very heart of this Bill and 

what do we find? We find trust you, trust us. Trust us. And you 

wonder, Mr. Deputy Speaker, why that party over there is in 

fact losing the trust of Saskatchewan people when their answer 

is trust us. 

 

It‟s not something we can take back to my constituents and say 

on this issue when we sit down next time and discuss it over a 

coffee and we‟re talking about the signposts and we‟re talking 

about the clarity of the peace officer, that when it comes to this 

particularly important issue that I would have to turn to my 

constituents around the coffee table and say to them what they 

said — to trust us on this issue. 

 

And I‟m sure they would say how can that be? How can that be 

that they can be clear in the drafting here and not then be clear 

in the issue of Crown lands and have to say trust us? They 

would be somewhat confused, and so I‟m not sure what I could 

say to them. What would I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in terms of 

trying to convey to them, trying to convey to them that we spent 

hours on this Bill working and asking the questions and going 

over it in a manner that‟s required and yet at the end of the day 

we would not have these very substantive questions answered 

on this Bill. So I suppose it‟s with reluctance that I move on 

from the Crown lands. But the understanding is crucial, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, to this Bill moving forward as we can see. 

 

Now in section 16 of the Bill, we have the application of this 

Act, and section 16 of Bill 43 states the Act is in addition to and 

not a derogation of other Acts. And this is important, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. I think this is an important section that talks 

about the provisions here. 

 

The provisions of this Act are in addition to, and not in 

derogation of, the provisions of any other Act, regulations 

made pursuant to any other Act or a municipal bylaw that 

deal with entry in or on premises for the purposes of 

engaging in an activity and, if there is any conflict 

between the provisions of this Act and the regulations and 

any other Act, the regulations made pursuant to any other 

Act or the municipal bylaw, the provisions of the other 

Act, the regulations made pursuant . . . or the municipal 

bylaw prevail. 

 

[21:00] 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is an interesting, an interesting 

section. The section deals with . . . as if municipalities and other 

legal entities have the right to make regulations, the other 

regulations, that municipal bylaws will prevail. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I‟m not certain what the intent was here, and I guess I 

would go back to 15. So if a municipality does not have a 

bylaw, then again we‟re left with the vagaries of regulations. 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in terms of clarity, that‟s simply . . . 

well I would say it‟s more than unfair. It‟s perhaps even 

dangerous that we would do that. 

 

Now what would that mean that any municipality, municipal 

bylaw, would prevail? Would we then have conflicts, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, of which bylaw? In drafting, what does that 

cause municipalities? Would they be checking whether or not 

that they would have to read the trespass Act and then 

themselves draft bylaws if they felt it wasn‟t working? 

 

I would think that in the straightforward manner we should be 

dealing with issues to make this understandable, to make it 

workable so that then we‟re not forcing municipalities to 

re-write the Act to make it make sense and to make it workable 

for the people of Saskatchewan. I think we should do it right the 

first time, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Do it right and we wouldn‟t 

have to now say, not only will we deal with it in regulations, but 

we‟ll impose upon the municipalities. We‟ll impose upon the 

municipalities issues of having to draft bylaws. 

 

Like, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where does that leave us? Where 

does that leave us if the municipalities are not in favour of some 

of the sections? Are they going to be passing bylaws so that 

they can put their houses in order because this does not deal 

with that? An interesting scenario. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the exemptions from the Act are 

straightforward and again another section that is clear, the Act 

not applying to: 

 

(a) peace officers, firefighters, ambulance attendants, 

paramedics, first responders or other emergency 

personnel while acting in the course of their duties; 

 

(b) persons authorized by an Act or law to enter in or on 

premises to install, inspect, replace, remove or read 

meters or service connections that are part of a public 

utility while acting in the course of their duties; 

 

(c) inspectors appointed pursuant to The Electrical 

Inspection Act, 1993 or The Gas Inspection Act, 1993 

while acting in the course of their duties; 

 

(d) individuals engaged in lawful hunting, fishing and 

trapping activities; or 

 

(e) any other person or class of persons prescribed in the 

regulations. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: 

 

Act not to affect any case involving title to land 

 

Nothing in this Act authorizes any justice to hear and 

determine any case of lawful entry or trespass in which 

the title to land, or any interest therein or accruing 

thereupon, is called in question or affected in any manner 

howsoever, but every such case of unlawful entry or 

trespass shall be dealt with according to the law in the 

same manner in all respects as if this Act had not been 



2054 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 2009 

passed. 

 

And now lastly section 4 of The Petty Trespasses Act, by going 

back to Manitoba, indicates no offence will occur when person 

communicates true statements, or property owned, and a person, 

publicly owned . . . are no offence under the Act. Those again 

that I‟ve put into the record, read into the record, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, are again important. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in review, in review of the statements 

that I have had the opportunity to make tonight, what are we to 

make of this Bill? We‟ve tried to impress, to impress upon the 

opposition, to impress upon the members opposite, to impress 

upon them the due diligence, the transparency, the consultation 

that is required to make an Act. What comes first? Where was 

the need? 

 

And again as I ended off, there will be bylaws, municipal 

bylaws that supersede this Act, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They 

supersede this Act and that those will prevail over this Act. So 

what have we done here when we look at this and attempt a 

review of what have we done . . . We have put forward an Act. 

 

There was no comment as to where or why we needed this. 

There was nothing on consultations which is really quite 

indicative of the way the approach of the government has been 

— no consultation, no listening. And listening is very much a 

requirement. And I think what‟s becoming evident, and I think 

they do it at their peril, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when they 

determine that listening has now dropped off the radar screen, 

that we . . . at their peril, Mr. Deputy Speaker, not to listen to 

the people of Saskatchewan, not to say why do we have . . . 

what is the need here? What is the need that‟s being expressed? 

What do we cover off? And what do we cover off when a 

municipal bylaw can supersede the Act? 

 

So how does that work? How does that work in terms of putting 

forward an Act where it‟s unclear who wanted this, what 

purpose it is to serve. Where are the consultations? Where are 

the backgrounders here to say that this is the work that was 

done to put this forward? And I think it‟s reflected in some 

sections of the Act when we look at that and we say, okay, what 

have we got here. And I think that‟s indicative of the 

groundwork that perhaps should have been done, but that‟s 

reflected here. 

 

As some members have said, they weren‟t sure what I was 

saying. And in fact what I was doing is just simply reading from 

the Act. So reading from the Act, they couldn‟t understand it. 

And I think that they should take that as a little bit of a, well 

let‟s just say, a signpost that they should say that, you know, 

this is something we should be aware of, that we should take 

care. Let‟s not, let‟s not start not listening. But unfortunately, 

this is what we have. 

 

We have at the end of the day, Crown lands — unclear as to 

what is the definition or in fact whether this applies to Crown 

lands, rural, urban municipalities. We‟re not clear as to . . . 

unlike perhaps the peace officers where it is clear, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. It is absolutely clear what the peace officer can do. 

 

And as I said, it is to be commended the issue of posting of the 

trespass signs. The issue of where they‟re . . . not only the way 

they‟re posted, but how they‟re posted. A peace officer coming 

upon that, as I said, would know exactly what he was to do. But 

yet coming upon people handing out literature in a driveway, 

I‟m not certain that that peace officer would know or be 

directed what to do. 

 

So in terms of regulations — the use of regulations, clarity at 

times, regulations at other times — I think a lot more work 

needs to be done here on this Bill. I know that I think we‟ve 

dealt with each clause in this Bill. 

 

And I‟m sure that I would hope that the members opposite 

would not say trust us. I think it doesn‟t serve this Assembly 

well when the members across say trust us. I think do your 

work, do the due diligence, talk to people. Do the due diligence, 

talk to that, have some respect for the Assembly, have some 

respect for the Assembly, and we can all then have the debate. 

And I think there was some indication earlier tonight from the 

Justice minister that he was thinking about this. He‟s thinking 

about this. And I‟m sure his constituents, as well as mine in the 

city of Saskatoon, would want some clarity on this. 

 

So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know there‟s more I could 

say on this Bill. And I think more work needs to be done, but 

with that I would like to adjourn debate on this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 

Fairview has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 43, The 

Trespass to Property Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 9 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Gantefoer that Bill No. 9 — The 

Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 

2008 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a bit 

daunting coming up at this stage of the evening of course 

because the member from Fairview did a fine job with that last 

Bill — not just in intellect, but in stamina, Mr. Speaker. I‟ll try 

to live up to that standard. I‟ll try to do what I can, but we‟ll 

take it from here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Bill 9, An Act to amend the Superannuation (Supplementary 

Provisions) Act, this one‟s interesting because we, on this side, 

we‟ve taken to calling it the double-dipping Bill. This one itself 

has been double dipped, Mr. Speaker. It had been mysteriously 

pulled from the legislative agenda after its first debut in the 

Assembly. It‟s even betting whether or not it had been scared 

off the agenda by the rhetorical power of the member from 

Regina Dewdney, but it‟s come back, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it‟s sad to say there a few things that are good about this 

Bill, Mr. Speaker, but that same old double-dipping stench is 



March 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2055 

still on it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I guess a few things that we can agree with off the top, they are 

tightening up some of the provisions to ensure that annual 

reports do not disclose personal information such as the names 

of individuals who have retired or died during the period 

covered, the amounts of superannuation or other allowances or 

benefits granted in individual cases, or any other personal 

information respecting those individuals. We think that‟s fair 

enough, Mr. Speaker, and we‟re glad to see that‟s coming 

forward. I think we can also agree on the fact that the proposed 

minor amendments regarding the calculation of pension benefits 

for a spouse . . . we think that holds some water as well, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But the thing that we find kind of staggering on this side of the 

House, Mr. Speaker, a number of years ago there has been a 

practice from time to time where individuals who have retired 

from the public service — serving in so some cases 30-plus 

years, 35 years — that those individuals would be brought back 

on contract. And previously under section 27, which will be 

repealed under this legislation, those individuals had been 

limited in the way that they could engage in the public service. I 

think this problem, as I understand it, was raised by the 

Provincial Auditor in terms of something that he wanted to see 

tightened up in terms of the legislation. 

 

So instead of tightening up the loopholes, closing the loopholes, 

what does this government do? What does this Sask Party 

government do? They legalize the whole practice of 

double-dipping. It‟s sort of like you‟ve got a hole in the wall, 

Mr. Speaker, and to fix it you tear down the wall. It doesn‟t 

make a lot of sense from where we sit, Mr. Speaker. So they‟ve 

introduced measures that will allow double-dipping to be 

entrenched into the warp and woof of how the public service 

does their business. 

 

We‟d be very interested to know, Mr. Speaker, how many, you 

know, what are the projections around this, what they think this 

will cost the treasury, what impact this will have on the public 

service as a whole, what it will do in terms of stacking up the 

top end of the public service and doing nothing for the 

recruitment side in terms of bringing new and young people 

into the public service. 

 

And I guess, you know, those are just some of the practical 

questions in terms of how this affects the public service as a 

whole but, you know, it goes back to the fact that you‟ve got 

. . . if you‟re going to legalize and embrace and run as far and as 

fast as you can go with the whole practice of double-dipping, 

Mr. Speaker, you‟ve got people who have, you know, earned a 

pension, and rightly so, and then to be making that pension, and 

then being paid again the salary for it, I mean it‟s, again it‟s 

akin to having a hole in the wall and, instead of plugging the 

hole, tearing down the entire wall. 

 

[21:15] 

 

So we think that this is not a good step for the people of 

Saskatchewan. We think this takes the public service in a bad 

direction. And, Mr. Speaker, I think, you know, given what‟s 

going on around the world right now and around different 

pension plans across the country, that this is in fact the priority 

of the government of the day in terms of steps towards the 

pensions in the province of Saskatchewan, that this is the 

priority, that this is job one for them to be undertaking as it 

regards the pensions of, you know, the superannuates in this 

province — I think again it speaks to some wildly misplaced 

priorities. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I‟m not going to be going on at the same 

length as my colleague from Saskatoon Fairview. I‟m sure 

there‟s some that are sad about that, but I will be standing to say 

the minor things that are good with this could be accomplished 

on their own. The loopholes underlined by the Provincial 

Auditor in raising this issue to the attention of the government 

could have been dealt with in a Bill that dealt with closing those 

loopholes. 

 

This is something else altogether, this Bill in sum, Mr. Speaker, 

and for that we think it‟s completely wrong handed. With that I 

adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre has adjourned debate on Bill No. 9, The 

Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act. Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried 

 

Bill No. 49 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 49 — The 

Ambulance Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It 

is a pleasure to rise tonight and to make a few comments on 

Bill. 49, The Ambulance Amendment Act. It‟s one that I know 

we all will have some connection with unfortunately, perhaps, 

throughout our lives and our families, our loved ones, when 

they‟re in danger or had something unfortunate happen to them, 

we had that experiences with ambulances. 

 

But first I want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I very much 

respect and honour the work of ambulance operators and 

paramedics and all those involved in that area. And I think it‟s 

important that we recognize them as an integral part of the 

health care system in a province as vast and as wide, both the 

North, the South, East, West, that it‟s a difficult job, and it‟s 

one that‟s demanding 24/7. Rural, north, urban — we all face 

challenges. You know we wish to have the best health care 

system, and of course we do believe we do have. I know I‟ve 

reviewed the comments from earlier speakers on this, and we 

think in Saskatchewan we have a pretty good system. It‟s one 

we value, that right across the province the people expect care 

that is much the same throughout the province, and that‟s 

something that‟s very, very important. 

 

I understand that the minister in his comments that portions of 

this Bill are essentially housekeeping, and most likely we can 



2056 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 2009 

support those aspects of the Act. Of course we‟ll have questions 

when the Bill goes to committee. We want to make sure that 

there are no unintended consequences. One of the pitfalls 

whenever you do legislation . . . And my colleague from 

Saskatoon Fairview very much talked about clarity, how 

important clarity, conciseness, simple language is so, so 

important, making sure that legislation is well thought out. And 

of course when you come to something as important as health 

care and what people experience, particularly through their 

experiences with ambulances, it‟s a huge concern that we make 

sure we do this right and we take the time tonight and 

throughout the weeks ahead to make sure that this Bill serves 

the purpose that it was set out to do. 

 

I think that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we‟re happy to see the 

role, the expanded role of paramedics. We see their roles 

increased over time, and that‟s so important as we see how 

important the first response is to so many accidents or heart 

attacks or strokes. The first response is hugely important. So it‟s 

important that we take the time and recognize that and 

recognize the whole array of health professionals within the 

system. It‟s so important that we do that and we hear their 

voices about how legislation can be as good as it can be. So 

tonight we take a look at that, and it‟s a pleasure to be talking 

about that. 

 

I want to say though, and I know that many of us have talked 

about our personal experiences, whether it‟s a broken femur or 

a constituent that had to only go a couple of blocks to City 

Hospital in downtown Saskatoon or people in rural 

Saskatchewan who have to travel many, many miles. And we 

know that ambulances in Saskatchewan are not only road 

ambulances. They‟re air ambulances. 

 

It‟s important that we hear from everyone on this. We know and 

I know — I represent many seniors in my riding — the cost of 

ambulances is a big concern. We need to understand and we 

need to hear their concerns as well. So important to hear the 

professionals, obviously that‟s a key constituency. Obviously 

they have first-hand experience, and they have the professional 

ethics to make it the very best. But we need to make sure we 

take the time to consult and to listen to ordinary people in our 

communities, whether they be in the North, whether they be in 

rural communities, villages, on the farm, downtown Saskatoon, 

Regina, Moose Jaw. We need to hear their concerns about how 

they can have the best access possible to the hospitals when 

something unfortunate — whether it be an accident, a heart 

attack, a stroke, something like that — happens. It‟s very 

important that we hear from them. 

 

So we recognize there has been ongoing discussions with the 

Saskatchewan Emergency Medical Services Association, and of 

course that will help to develop the role of the ambulance 

provider. We hope that there‟s a sense of transparency and 

accountability as they become self-regulating. It‟s so important 

that when we recognize the maturity of these groups that take 

on those roles that we also recognize that we can‟t let the 

professionalization of these organizations not allow for the 

ordinary voice — the people, the clients, the customers, the 

people who experience it first-hand unfortunately. 

 

I know we all know those people would rather not have those 

experiences, but they do have those experiences, and at the end, 

we often hear about them as MLAs [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly]. We hear the stories of things that might have gone a 

little bit better if we‟d taken the time. So I want to make sure 

that the minister, when he‟s done his consultations, not only 

listens to those people — the paramedics, the professional 

associations — about how we can improve the quality of health 

care, but we also make sure we listen to the ordinary Joes and 

Janes in our communities, whether they be young or old or, as I 

said, from the North or South. It‟s very important that we take 

the time to hear those concerns. 

 

So I understand this Bill provides for further opportunities for 

consultations with the industry, with the regional health 

authority, so it is good to see that these things are lining up. 

Clearly that‟s something we‟ve suffered from too much in 

Saskatchewan, too many maps that don‟t line up. So here when 

you‟re lining up the regional health authorities, that‟s a good 

thing. You know, you got a problem. So it‟s very important that 

we do that. So it‟s time to do that, and I‟m glad to see the 

minister and the government is moving ahead with this and 

again making sure the public has a way to hear. 

 

I know, for example, the minister has just appointed many more 

new people onto the health region boards. I hope they get out 

and meet with people, that they are accessible, that they can 

hear about the concerns — about ambulances, other things as 

well. I know we‟re trying to meet with those folks. It‟s 

important that they meet with everyone to hear about the 

concerns and tell us what are the challenges that they‟re facing 

within the health care system. This is an important aspect that‟s 

made Saskatchewan‟s health care what it is today, and how it 

can be better tomorrow. 

 

So we‟re excited about this. It‟s important that we take this 

opportunity to take a look. Are there ways that we need to 

expand this legislation? Now that we have this Act there, is 

there more things that we should be thinking about? Again 

when we get it to committee, I want to make sure that there‟s an 

opportunity for us to hear what the professionals have been 

saying, what the paramedics have been saying, what the 

operators have been saying, but also what the public has been 

saying. What are the national standards? What should we be 

comparing ourselves right across this country? 

 

I know that the member from Meewasin was talking about a 

study from the States, talking about if you had to be in an 

ambulance, which state was the best to be in an ambulance? Not 

because of the hospital you were going to, but because of the 

challenges that came along with being in that ambulance, some 

states were better than others. Are there ways that we can learn 

from that? 

 

So it would be really good to hear about those kind of things 

during this debate, and I‟m looking forward to hearing more 

about that in the committee. 

 

We know for rural Saskatchewan particularly that there are 

challenges of course. We know that access is really important, 

how quickly the ambulance can get to the situation at hand. We 

know there‟s been a lot of work done around first responders in 

rural Saskatchewan. My family actually, my brother‟s been 

involved with that, and my mom, who used to be a nurse in 

rural Saskatchewan, speaks a lot about this. It‟s very much 



March 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2057 

different though in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

It‟s different throughout the province where health care people 

would come together as communities and support each other. 

But we know that with health care becoming so much more 

professional and so much more effective at delivering good 

health care as quickly as possible, that there are opportunities to 

make this the very best it can be. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I look forward to seeing more about 

this in committee. There are issues that I‟ve raised, and I want 

to make sure that the minister is prepared to be talking about 

those in terms of what are the concerns the public has said. How 

can they work with the professional organizations here? 

 

We know that whether we‟ve heard the minister talk about air 

ambulances in different forms, you know, we‟ve heard him talk 

about the helicopters. We know that that party, the government 

opposite, has been intrigued by this. It would be interesting to 

see, will we be revisiting this in a year or two to talk about that? 

What are their plans to go further down the road, so to speak, on 

those areas? How can we provide for that? 

 

And of course, as the cities grow . . . We know this is a 

challenge in Saskatoon with the suburbs. Distances are getting 

greater. The access, we‟re glad to see for example in Saskatoon 

better urban planning for that. We know that we‟re looking 

forward to the bridge being built, how that will impact on the 

ambulance delivery. What impact does it mean for people living 

in certain parts of the city? We‟re used to having very good 

access, quick access to the hospitals but now what are the 

challenges out there? 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I look forward to this. Again what I‟m 

concerned about is the unintended consequences that when we 

set out to do the right thing, we unfortunately do things that 

none of us thought could possibly happen; we do the wrong 

thing. And so here‟s an opportunity to have a good, frank 

discussion about that, and this is so, so important that we do 

take a look at that. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with Bill 49, The Ambulance 

Amendment Act, I know that there are challenges but I‟m 

looking forward to hearing more about that. So, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I would move that we now adjourn the debate. Thank 

you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 49, The Ambulance 

Amendment Act, 2008. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 59 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 59 — The 

Election Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

[21:30] 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a pleasure tonight 

to stand and be able to speak on Bill No. 59, An Act to amend 

The Election Act, 1996. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in general terms this is a Bill that deals with the 

guidelines with respect to government spending leading up to 

an election period. It‟s a Bill that addresses what the appropriate 

guidelines and rules would be for government to be spending in 

ministries and through other agencies leading up to an election. 

And that‟s fine, Mr. Speaker. It is coming out of much the work 

that has been discussed for some time in this House. 

 

Central to this Bill No. 59, Mr. Speaker, is the earlier legislation 

we saw in this Chamber, which was the legislation for fixed 

election date, because these two pieces of legislation really need 

to be viewed as one item in some respects because in order to 

know when the rules kick in for spending up to an election 

period, you have to know when that election will in fact occur. 

So when looking at this piece of legislation, it‟s important to 

look at also the election, the fixed election dates legislation — 

not the fixed election legislation, Mr. Speaker; that was one 

piece that thankfully did not make it — but the fixed election 

dates legislation that we have in place in the province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And again it‟s necessary to look at the fixed election dates, 

because that is the date that‟s being set for the election that 

would in fact provide, that would make sense of the parameters 

to do with election spending and advertising at this time. 

 

With An Act to amend The Election Act, Mr. Speaker, that looks 

at government spending, looks at the guidelines around that. 

And as we look at the previous legislation that‟s gone through 

this House, Mr. Speaker, for fixed election dates, it follows 

some instances in other places in the province where fixed 

election dates have occurred. And I thought it would be 

interesting, Mr. Speaker, to look at how that crucial part of this 

Bill 59, the fixed election dates, Mr. Speaker, what has been the 

experience of having the fixed election dates in other parts of 

the country. 

 

There‟s been a trend in other jurisdictions in certain provinces 

where we have seen fixed election dates come into place and 

then out of that there comes other pieces of legislation like Bill 

No. 59. The example that is most obvious to people would be in 

our federal government, Mr. Speaker, where the Harper 

Conservatives brought in a fixed election date. So we can ask 

ourselves, based on the situation that we saw in Ottawa, how 

well did the fixed election date work for the Harper 

Conservatives? And what we see, Mr. Speaker, is a troubling 

situation. We saw in that instance a case where the government 

actually chose to ignore its own legislation that it passed having 

named the date when the election would occur. The government 

ignored its own legislation that it passed through the parliament 

and decided to have their own way and decided to have the 

election early, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And this is troublesome, Mr. Speaker, because when we see an 

example of what has been done with fixed election dates in 



2058 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 2009 

other jurisdictions, to me and to many people in Saskatchewan 

it raises question marks and raises concerns about how the fixed 

election date legislation here in Saskatchewan might be treated 

at the end of the day. It might give us an idea as to how 

members opposite would be viewing the fixed election dates. 

And, Mr. Speaker, as I introed and as I set up what I‟m talking 

about, it‟s important to look at the fixed election date legislation 

with Bill No. 59 because it really . . . it‟s the lynch pin for why 

you would have these guidelines and how these guidelines 

would in fact be ruling. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, given the situation that we‟ve seen in Ottawa 

where we saw a government that was willing to ignore its own 

legislation with the fixed election dates, we have, I think in 

Saskatchewan, reason to be concerned about how the fixed 

election date legislation might in fact be treated here in our 

province. 

 

And I say this, Mr. Speaker, because it‟s no secret to anyone in 

this Chamber and to the people in Saskatchewan how closely 

linked the federal Conservatives are with the Sask Party 

government here in Saskatchewan. And we can see by a shared 

mindset, a shared approach to handling matters, a shared 

opinion on pieces of legislation, a shared opinion on policy 

items, how so often, Mr. Speaker, the tune that we hear being 

sung by the Sask Party government is completely consistent 

with what we hear coming out of Ottawa from the Harper 

Conservatives. 

 

Because they are so consistent, Mr. Speaker, in what they say, 

that is why I‟m concerned that the Sask Party government 

sitting opposite, when push comes to shove, I‟m worried how 

they might treat the fixed election date legislation that was 

brought into Saskatchewan here. 

 

And my comments, Mr. Speaker, are going to be . . . Well I 

would suggest that there‟s three sort of themes of evidence that 

would provide us with a fairly strong link and worry about how 

the Sask Party government will be treating the fixed election 

dates because we can see what happened with the Harper 

Conservatives. 

 

The first group of evidence, Mr. Speaker, that I would like to 

talk about is a similar arrogance or hubris, a similar approach to 

where the government in power deals with matters on a daily 

basis — deals with the media, deals with the Chamber, deals 

with the people. 

 

The first example I‟d like to use, Mr. Speaker, that could 

highlight what some commentators have called an arrogance by 

members opposite . . . And we know in Ottawa, Mr. Speaker, 

the Harper Conservatives are notorious for having this approach 

to dealing with other political parties, in dealing with the media, 

in dealing with the masses. 

 

The first piece I would like to highlight, Mr. Speaker, is from a 

Leader-Post article, and the title of the article was, “A humble 

Sask. Party would be glorious.” And this was from Saturday, 

November 15, 2008, Mr. Speaker. And the article talked about 

how in the early days of the Sask Party government we started 

to see the arrogance that they‟ve tried to hide, but it‟s coming 

through. It‟s clear what their true intentions are. 

 

And in this article — it was quite interesting to me — it 

highlighted some of the information or the advertising that 

occurred in promoting the Sask Party convention that occurred 

not too long ago. And on this literature that was used to 

advertise the event and used as a way to try to lure people to 

come and to think that it would be a good time, the quote was, 

“We urge you to register early, and plan to be entertained and 

informed, and share in the glory of the Saskatchewan Party in 

power.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would say a decent tag line, a decent tag line for 

a big tent revival, a decent tag line for other settings. But for a 

Sask Party convention, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t think that it‟s a 

great line to be used for advertising. 

 

For the regular watchers of the Legislative Assembly who are 

perhaps watching at home, and I‟m sure all of the members in 

this Chamber will recall, the member from Athabasca who, 

following the Sask Party convention, provided a great member 

statement. And those watching at home might want to search 

Hansard online to see the member‟s statement that the member 

from Athabasca provided not long ago. It would have been 

around the November 15 mark of 2008. 

 

And by the member‟s analysis, from Athabasca, when he 

looked at the number of people that actually had to be there and 

then the number of people that were brought along because they 

were trying to catch a ride to Saskatoon, and the number of 

partners that were brought along — people that actually wanted 

to be there to share in the glory — Mr. Speaker, was actually 

quite small. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, that would be the first example that I would 

provide to give a hint, a glimpse about the arrogance that we 

can see at times from the other side. And again, no secret to 

members in this Assembly and to the general public, how 

similar that type of arrogance can be when we look at what the 

federal context is with the Harper Conservatives. 

 

The next piece, Mr. Speaker, that I would like to highlight that I 

think is a good example of arrogance would be from November 

28, 2008. And the title of this article from The StarPhoenix at 

that time was “Revved up cabinet runs on hubris.” And this one, 

Mr. Speaker, you‟ll recall the debate that was going in the 

House at that time. During the election, the Sask Party 

campaigned on a pledge to have a green fleet of vehicles, and 

new purchases for the Central Vehicle Agency would meet a 

certain requirement according to standards. 

 

Well it turns out, Mr. Speaker, in the same way that Harper 

ignored his own legislation, his own guidelines, his own rules 

about the fixed election date, we saw the same thing take place 

with the vehicles. And he might say, well what does it really 

matter; it‟s some vehicles. But it‟s an indicator, Mr. Speaker, of 

a mindset. It‟s an indicator of an approach to dealing with 

government and an approach with dealing with the finances of 

this province. 

 

And when the minister that was responsible was questioned 

about this and gave a reply as to his thoughts about this 

situation, he said, come on . . . Okay the quote didn‟t start there; 

that was the intro. But the quote: “At least we didn‟t give 

ourselves Hummers or Cadillac Escalades, he offered.” The 



March 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2059 

author of this article said, “I kid you not . . . the official 

explanation is even funnier.” 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, perhaps trying to use a bit of humour there, 

but I think it was humour that was misplaced. And it was 

humour again that hints to an arrogance that I think is very 

similar to the Harper Conservatives and would cause me to 

have concerns, and causes many people in the province to have 

concern about how seriously they might consider the fixed 

election dates. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the first issue that I was talking about was why 

. . . Or in this idea of the very, very strong similarities between 

the Sask Party government here in Saskatchewan and the 

Harper Conservatives in Ottawa, and some of the worries that 

causes us about how they view the world and how they treat 

their own legislation, Mr. Speaker. I addressed a similar amount 

of arrogance and hubris that can come from the members 

opposite. 

 

The second point I would like to highlight is a similar attitude 

of my way or the highway, Mr. Speaker. A similar attitude that 

if you don‟t like it, tough. I‟m taking my toys out of the 

sandbox. I‟m leaving you, and that‟s it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This is a similar approach. The Harper Conservatives are . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . I hear the Environment minister 

comment, and she could speak well to the characteristics of the 

Harper Conservatives. So, Mr. Speaker, when we‟re looking at 

this my-way-or-the-highway world view and mentality, we 

could go to . . . This is an article from the Leader-Post; it‟s 

titled “Wall‟s flip flops” and it‟s from July 18, 2008, Friday. 

 

And this is, Mr. Speaker, coming out of the debate that you‟ll 

recall that was occurring at that time in the province, and sadly 

it‟s an issue that continues to be highly relevant now. But this 

was the Sask Party government‟s willingness to completely 

acquiesce to the demands of the Harper Conservatives and give 

up on a challenge for Saskatchewan to be treated fairly on the 

equalization file, to give up the defence of Saskatchewan. And 

when asked about it, what the Premier said was — he was 

ending this discussion — the quote from the paper says, 

“Therein lies the problem with Wall‟s Harperesque 

pronouncement Tuesday that, „I‟m not having this debate 

again.‟” 

 

Tough luck. A textbook example of a Stephen Harper approach 

used by the Sask Party government here on the way the debate 

occurs under the leadership of the Premier and of Stephen 

Harper. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, a further example, a quote to highlight this 

point, the preamble: 

 

That suggests Saskatchewan still should have reasonable 

expectations of more from Ottawa. Yet a 

fresh-from-holidays Wall now tells us: “That‟s not going 

to happen, so it‟s time to move on”? 

 

Basically saying, tough. Mr. Speaker, I don‟t think that‟s a great 

defence, but the issue of equalization is obviously a topic for 

another debate. The point that I want to bring up from the 

comments made by the Premier on this issue, Mr. Speaker, is 

that it shows an example of the my-way-or-the-highway attitude 

that, if you don‟t like something, tough — I‟m going to do it 

and it doesn‟t matter. And that‟s a concern, Mr. Speaker, 

because that‟s the same approach that will be applied to the 

legislation that the Sask Party government brings in. The 

legislation like the fixed election dates that is so crucial to the 

success of the Bill No. 59, the Act to amend The Election Act. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I‟ve highlighted the similar arrogance that we 

see from the local Sask Party government and the federal 

Conservatives. I‟ve talked about the similar attitude, Mr. 

Speaker, of the my way or the highway. 

 

[21:45] 

 

The third approach or the third similarity, Mr. Speaker, that I 

would like to identify to members and to the good people 

watching at home, Mr. Speaker, is the Sask Party‟s eagerness to 

defend the Harper Conservatives. And this is the next reason 

why, Mr. Speaker, I think it‟s worrisome as to how the local 

Sask Party government will be treating their own legislation. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party misses no chance to defend 

and work for the federal Conservatives, Mr. Speaker. And it‟s a 

result, Mr. Speaker, that I think most people in the province 

now would realize is not serving the interests of the province 

well. We have a group of federal Conservative MPs [Member 

of Parliament], Mr. Speaker, that are great and many but small 

in voice when it comes to standing up for the issues of 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, that‟s not the approach the Sask Party 

government has taken. We can see a quote, Mr. Speaker, and 

this comes from July 23, 2008, from the Justice minister, also 

from the Leader-Post. And it‟s: 

 

“I think we have a good working relationship and it bodes 

well for us. If anybody‟s going to cut somebody some 

slack they‟re going to cut us slack, and I think it will do us 

more favours than the other way around,” he said in 

interview. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a clear indication of an eagerness to defend, an 

eagerness to defend a decision like ignoring your own fixed 

election dates legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Another example that can be used to highlight the eagerness to 

defend of the Sask Party government for the Harper 

Conservatives, Mr. Speaker, was the more recent reaction to the 

budget. And when the official word came from the Premier on 

the Sask Party‟s take on the budget, you know, at first it was 

yes, it was okay. And they didn‟t raise a large fuss. 

 

And you could understand, Mr. Speaker, why they would take 

that approach at first because for so long the mantra has been, 

whatever they say, whatever they do, we fully support, we fully 

back. In fact we‟re going to try to emulate that behaviour here 

in the province. We‟re going to try to use that as a template for 

how we should be behaving and acting here in Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. So you can understand why that would be the first 

response that the government issued. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it was later — a day later, Mr. Speaker — 



2060 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 2009 

where the Premier came out and pronounced that he gave the 

grade of a D. And he listed some of the reasons why he gave it 

a D letter grade, Mr. Speaker. And as many people watching at 

home and in this Chamber would have read in the paper, Mr. 

Speaker, the journalists doing the work here also noted that the 

D also stood for do-over. 

 

And they need to redo the interview and to set the record 

straight because the natural instinct and the natural tendency to 

just simply say to toe the party line and to do whatever the 

bidding of the Harper Conservatives are, Mr. Speaker, it‟s so 

instinctive and so natural — a second nature, Mr. Speaker — 

that it took a day for them to kick in and realize that actually 

this budget and the 13 or so Tories that we have in Ottawa 

working for us, supposedly, and speaking up for us actually 

isn‟t working out that well. 

 

And the hope that was referenced by the Minister of Justice 

about, oh this group of people are going to give the province a 

sweet deal and everything will just be great for us now — well, 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s not coming to fruition. There‟s some major 

concerns here with how Saskatchewan‟s being treated by the 

federal Conservatives, but that‟s not at all what we‟re hearing 

from the Wall government at this time. So we see a clear 

willingness, an eagerness to defend anything that comes out of 

Ottawa and the Harper Conservatives, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The last example that I would like to use on this, Mr. Speaker 

— in terms of highlighting the Sask Party‟s willingness to 

completely go along with ignoring legislation that‟s brought in 

by the Prime Minister, in this eagerness to defend, a willingness 

to defend, and go the extra mile to help out the federal 

Conservatives whenever they can — and this is from The 

StarPhoenix, Mr. Speaker, September 4, 2008. And the title of 

the article is “Sask Party gov‟t closely aligned with federal 

Tories.” 

 

And in this article the discussion was about whether or not an 

election would occur ahead of the legislation, outside of the 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, that was outlined; and the response 

that we had from the Sask Party government here in 

Saskatchewan was completely making excuses and 

rationalizing and defending the decision of the Harper 

Conservatives. And to quote from the article, Mr. Speaker: “If 

Harper does call an election, it will be despite the Conservative 

government‟s own fixed election date law that puts the next 

scheduled federal vote in October 2009.” 

 

And this is the important part of the article: “But Wall defended 

Harper, noting that the situation is complicated . . .”, Mr. 

Speaker. Going the extra mile, Mr. Speaker, to make excuses 

for why legislation should be ignored. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as I‟ve outlined a similar arrogance that we 

see from the Sask Party government and the federal 

Conservatives, as I‟ve talked about a similar attitude of my way 

or the highway, tough, like it or leave it, Mr. Speaker. As I‟ve 

illustrated, the complete eagerness to defend the decisions of 

the Harper Conservatives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know members in this House can agree, and 

people watching at home, that there is some serious doubt and 

seriousness, Mr. Speaker, about how seriously this Sask Party 

government will take their own legislation about the fixed 

election date. And it‟s how important they take that legislation, 

Mr. Speaker, how seriously they treat it. Whether they follow it 

has direct implications for Bill No. 59, An Act to amend the 

Election Act. Because it‟s only if you know the end date of the 

election, it‟s only if you know when the election will occur, it‟s 

at that point where the guidelines and the rules that determine 

appropriate government spending in departments, it‟s only at 

that time when you can make sense of the rules and the rules 

can have bite. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I‟m not satisfied and I‟m not comfortable with 

the other side‟s willingness or perhaps evidence of action that 

they‟re willing to follow the legislation. The legislation itself, 

Mr. Speaker, having talked about whether or not it‟s a good, 

whether or not it‟s a likely approach, an approach that will work 

well for this Sask Party government, there‟s also issues that can 

be discussed in the legislation to further length. Issues like what 

are the consequences if the legislation is not followed? What are 

perhaps, Mr. Speaker, some of the loopholes that might be 

present that would allow the government to get around these 

rules by ramping up spending in the previous years before the 

election year, if it‟s based on averages, Mr. Speaker? These are 

things that aren‟t being touched in the legislation. 

 

But I know, in speaking with some of my colleagues on this 

issue, I know there are other members who would like to 

discuss this for some time and look at other areas and perhaps 

explore some of the areas where I haven‟t had the opportunity 

to present this evening. So at this time, Mr. Speaker, I would 

move that I adjourn debate on Bill No. 59. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Massey 

Place has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 59, The Election 

Amendment Act, 2008. Is the motion adopted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 44 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 44 — The 

Agreements of Sale Cancellation Amendment Act, 2008 be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone . 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a 

pleasure to rise this evening and enter into the debate on Bill 

No. 44, The Agreements of Sale Cancellation Amendment Act, 

2008. It‟s an interesting Bill, Mr. Speaker. It would seem to set 

out some objectives in terms of simplifying or rebalancing or 

putting in certain safeguards on the question of what happens 

when you have an agreement of sale that is cancelled. 

Previously the Act, The Agreement of Sale Cancellation Act, 

that had been initially enacted in 1917. And of course, you 

know, for the many, many years and centuries before that, Mr. 

Speaker, there‟s been a great deal of common law that has 



March 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2061 

evolved around the entire concept of sale of land. 

 

The Bill as it was initially enacted in 1917 worked, I think, to 

put in safeguards against . . . In terms of balancing that power 

between buyers and sellers, I think it sized up the situation at 

the time, Mr. Speaker, and perceived an imbalance that 

favoured the sellers of land. And certainly if you look back at 

your history, Mr. Speaker, you know there are different of the 

land companies that were in operation in the decade previous 

and the kind of impact that they had on the province. And there 

was, you know, a need that was expressed in this legislature and 

was met with the Bill first passed in 1917. 

 

Since then, Mr. Speaker, perhaps as sometimes happens in these 

situations, there‟s been an evolution. The other law, the law of 

unintended consequences, has seen that perhaps the process 

right now as it stands is a bit unwieldy, wherein the only 

recourse that people have is to go to court, and perhaps there‟s a 

better way to pursue this remedy under the circumstances. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, another of the perhaps unintended 

consequences not foreseen in 1917 is the way in which people 

would be able to put very little money down and then 

essentially control the land in question, tie it up until the court 

proceedings have been undertaken, and then, you know, 

meanwhile the months and years have possibly gone by. 

 

So this seems to be a straight-ahead enough of a proposition. 

We‟ll be interested to hear what the officials have to say about 

it in committee, Mr. Speaker. It‟s also interesting to see how 

this will change past practice as it is added into The Land 

Contracts (Actions) Act, The Limitations of Civil Rights Act, 

and The Saskatchewan Farm Security Act. 

 

But again, Mr. Speaker, this, on the face of it, seems to be a 

fairly straight-ahead proposition. But the mind does wonder. 

You do wonder, Mr. Speaker, if it hadn‟t been changed since 

1917, why the change now? 

 

So we‟ll see how this goes as we gather further intelligence on 

this Bill, Mr. Speaker. We‟ll see how it goes in committee. But 

for now, I‟m going to move that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 

44. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 44, 

The Agreements of Sale Cancellation Amendment Act, 2008. Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 45 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 45 — The Credit 

Union Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again a pleasure 

to stand in the Assembly and speak to Bill 45, The Credit Union 

Amendment Act, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This Act makes amendments that will result in the makeup of 

the board, changes to the Credit Union Deposit Guarantee 

Corporation, Mr. Speaker, an organization, Mr. Speaker, that 

has been playing a very important role in Saskatchewan for the 

members of credit unions here since 1953. 

 

The changes, Mr. Speaker, that are being proposed in this 

legislation, a good amount of them, Mr. Speaker, are — as 

outlined by some of the other speakers on this issue — are an 

effort to ensure that the standards of the Credit Union Deposit 

Guarantee Corporation, Mr. Speaker, are up to current 

governance principles that are modern, that are effective; 

changes, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that the good work that the 

organization, the corporation has been doing since 1953 in 

protecting the deposits of the credit union members in the 

province, Mr. Speaker, changes to ensure that this good work 

can carry on for many, many more decades, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Clearly credit unions in this province and in this country and 

around the world, Mr. Speaker, play a very important role. Here 

in Saskatchewan, they have a very important history from both 

a social and a financial perspective, have been very influential 

in the way that the province has developed and the way that our 

communities have formed and the type of enterprise that has 

been able to occur throughout the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[22:00] 

 

It was, I guess, about over a year ago now, Mr. Speaker, I had a 

friend visiting Saskatoon, my home city where the good 

constituency of Saskatoon Massey Place is located. And this 

individual is originally from Vancouver Island and went on to 

live in the lower mainland for some time and now finds himself 

on the other coast of the country in Newfoundland. He came to 

Saskatoon for a visit and made the remark — perhaps 

sometimes it takes an outsider to be viewing your home ground 

to simply state the obvious — but said he couldn‟t believe the 

presence of the credit union system in the city and the important 

role that it is playing, simply by walking around the downtown 

streets of Saskatoon. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I know that situation is true for my city, but I 

know it‟s true for Regina. I know it‟s true for the many other 

cities and towns throughout the province where credit unions 

exist. We also see increasingly, in terms of the importance of 

the role of the credit unions to the social and the financial fabric 

of the province, an increasingly high number of buildings and 

branding opportunities that credit unions are pursuing and 

naming different locations, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It was actually by coincidence just last week that I had an 

opportunity to meet with a representative from the credit union 

system. And perhaps, Mr. Speaker, some of the other members 

in the Assembly have had this same opportunity, as part of their 

lobbying or part of their work, to ensure that all members of the 

Assembly are up to speed on the important issues facing the 

credit unions in the province and the important work that they 

do. 

 

I had opportunity to meet with a representative from a credit 



2062 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 2009 

union from Saskatoon, was there passing on the messages and 

the information from Credit Union Central, Mr. Speaker. We 

actually, he and I had the opportunity to discuss the Credit 

Union Deposit Guarantee Corporation. And I was pleased that I 

had been putting together a few thoughts on what to say about 

Bill 45 in order to have a more full and thorough conversation 

with this individual, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Given the recent turmoil that we‟ve seen in the financial sector, 

Mr. Speaker, around the world and increasingly with uncertain 

times here at home and within Canada, it‟s important that our 

financial institutions are there to be stable and to deliver the 

services to members and customers that they expect, Mr. 

Speaker. And given the financial times that we find ourselves 

in, I think it‟s particularly important that we take a close look at 

Bill 45 — a Bill that seeks to examine what the makeup of the 

governance structure and principles should be and will be, Mr. 

Speaker. It‟s important that we do get this right because in 

uncertain times it‟s necessary that people can have faith in their 

financial institutions. 

 

So in terms of an approach of this legislation of modernizing 

and ensuring that governance principles are up to the highest 

possible standard and doing the necessary work for 

Saskatchewan people, we certainly are supportive of that, Mr. 

Speaker, because we value the role of credit unions in 

Saskatchewan and we know that it‟s necessary for them to be 

strong, stable actors within our communities. 

 

We are pleased that consultation on this matter has occurred 

with Credit Union Central and CUDGC [Credit Union Deposit 

Guarantee Corporation]. We are pleased that they‟ve had input 

in this process, that their take has been considered, and we‟re 

pleased that it would appear many of the necessary steps in 

terms of modernizing the governance structure are taking place 

and are suggested properly in this legislation. 

 

That being said, Mr. Speaker, any time we look at governance, 

any time we look at the operation of organizations, it‟s very 

important that the right questions are asked. And that‟s the 

important role that the Legislative Assembly plays, comments 

that the member from Fairview was commenting on. It‟s not 

appropriate, Mr. Speaker, to simply trust them and, Mr. 

Speaker, just to assume that the right thing will be done. The 

role of the Legislative Assembly is to critically look at 

legislation and ensure that things are being done correctly. 

 

So any time you‟re looking at a governance structure, any time 

you‟re looking at the organization of a board and how rules will 

be made, how policies will be enforced, how regulations will be 

made, it‟s important to ask some questions about who will be 

on the board because, as we know, boards are as smart and as 

wise as the members and the organizations that they represent 

on the boards. So it‟s important to make sure that the proper 

people are going on to or going into the governance structure to 

bring the type of results that we need, the type of results that 

can ensure that credit unions can remain strong, effective pillars 

in our community. 

 

It‟s also important to ask how many people are getting on these 

boards. Is there the right mix of the different sides of debate 

present on the boards? Are there the right personalities, the right 

number of personalities present, Mr. Speaker, to have the kind 

of debate and thorough examination that‟s required when we‟re 

dealing with the important matters of personal finances, 

especially during uncertain economic times? If these things 

aren‟t done, Mr. Speaker, if we‟re not at peace and at rest with 

the makeup of the board or the backgrounds of people joining 

the board, the viewpoints that they express, then we could have 

problems, Mr. Speaker. And the last thing any member of this 

Assembly wants would be for the stability of individuals‟ 

finances during this uncertain economic time to be jeopardized. 

We want stability. We want security for individuals who are 

trusting credit unions to be doing what‟s right. 

 

The useful thing about having this organization, Mr. Speaker, in 

terms of how it relates to the credit unions within 

Saskatchewan, it‟s good that Credit Union Central and the 

Credit Union Deposit Guarantee Corporation can have this 

centralizing role of providing the structure, providing the rules 

to the local credit unions. Mr. Speaker, as we come from 

different communities, there‟s credit unions present in all of 

these communities. And credit unions are in many ways unique 

because they are able to reflect and respond to the local 

concerns and the local needs in a way that some other financial 

institutions aren‟t able to. So it‟s important to maintain the local 

uniqueness and autonomy of credit unions, but it‟s also 

important to ensure that if someone‟s going to a credit union in 

a small centre that they can be just as confident in their financial 

transactions with that credit union as can a member going to a 

chartered bank or a larger credit union in a bigger city. So it‟s 

an important role that the Credit Union Deposit Guarantee 

Corporation plays, most certainly. 

 

So as we look at the current governance structure — on this 

side, we‟re in favour of modernization — we‟re in favour of 

ensuring that the highest standards are there to guarantee that 

the credit unions are on a stable financial footing, but we want 

to make sure that the correct mix-up of the board members and 

the governance structure is in place. 

 

I know there are other members, Mr. Speaker, on this side of 

the House who would like to explore and discuss whether or 

not, in their opinion, this piece of legislation matches up with 

what the important role is that we need for the CUDGC to 

perform in the province. And given that there are other 

members who would like to speak to this, Mr. Speaker, I would 

move that we adjourn debate on Bill 45. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Massey 

Place has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 45, The Credit 

Union Amendment Act, 2008. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 50 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion of the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 50 — The 

Missing Persons and Presumption of Death Act be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 



March 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2063 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It‟s actually 

my pleasure today to stand and speak to Bill 50, An Act 

respecting Missing Persons and Persons Presumed to be Dead 

and Repealing The Absentee Act. That‟s what we‟re discussing, 

and I want to start, Mr. Speaker, by saying congratulations to 

the government for bringing this Bill. 

 

It looks like . . . It‟s a new Bill. It‟s a Bill that came about 

because the previous government put together a committee to 

look into the matter. The committee looked into it, made its 

recommendations, and I‟m firmly of the belief that the 

government followed those recommendations in the main. I 

won‟t say every single recommendation — I don‟t know that — 

but certainly in the spirit of it. So I say congratulations to the 

government. It looks like a good Bill. 

 

And frankly it‟s a very important piece of legislation because it 

sets out some new guidelines with respect to timeline for when 

you can apply for a trustee to look after the property. And 

there‟s some steps along the way, some guideposts. And in 

some instances it‟s the first time there‟s been, sort of, a 

guidebook for, if I can describe it this way, usually for families 

in a time of stress and distress because when they have someone 

who‟s gone missing for whatever reason — you know what? — 

the vehicle that they may have owned is still there. If they 

owned any real property, that real property is still there. And 

any of the family or friends are left to try and deal with it. 

 

And if there was, for instance, some rental property, well how 

would whoever‟s left with the pieces, what authorizes them to 

do things as basic as call a plumber if there‟s a problem with a 

furnace in the middle of winter? And who pays for that 

plumber? How would you collect rent, you know, on behalf of a 

missing person? Those sorts of details that we hope we never, 

ever have to deal with, but the reality of life, Mr. Speaker, is 

that some of us are challenged and have to deal with that, those 

very issues, at some point through our life. 

 

So there‟s no question that estate matters can be very, very 

complex. It‟s complicated. Heavens, often many of us don‟t 

even know what we want to leave in our estate or how we want 

to leave it, never mind having to go through the machinations 

where somebody has either gone missing or — there‟s no 

discreet way to say this — somebody may have died in the back 

woods on a camping trip and they just haven‟t found the body 

yet or somebody may have gone down in an airplane. My 

colleague for Regina Northeast says it‟s been known to happen, 

 

And a prominent family in the town I grew up with actually had 

that happen where one of their boys — found out later — he‟d 

disappeared. But it was, oh, crowding two years later when they 

found the plane, the small plane, in northern Saskatchewan. 

And it had been just a terrible ordeal for that family because 

they couldn‟t give up hope. There was always some hope that 

their son was camping, you know, was alive somehow. Anyway 

but that‟s the sort of thing that this allows us to deal with. 

 

The Act also calls for the repeal of The Absentee Act. And, Mr. 

Speaker, some of the things that we want to do is examine this 

Bill just to make sure that there‟s no gaps between the repeal of 

The Absentee Act and the passing and coming into force of this 

new Act respecting missing persons and persons presumed to be 

dead and repealing The Absentee Act. 

 

It is, I‟ve said, a complex Bill, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a five-part Bill 

with some 33 clauses. Again much of this legislation is brand 

new area and in an area of significant sensitivity. There are 

timelines for declaring somebody missing that are in this Act. 

There‟s timelines for applications to appoint guardians. There‟s 

timelines for the discharge of property guardianship, all sorts of 

nuances, all sorts of things that are going to be taking place in 

this Bill. 

 

In my perusal of the Bill, I noticed that there‟s one clause that 

deals specifically with land titles. It‟s long known by most of us 

that before any real property can change hands, you have to 

have the signature, the willing signature of the lawful owner of 

that property. 

 

[22:15] 

 

This Act outlines what the rules are for dealing with that very 

property and allowing for a land titles transfer given the right 

conditions, the certain conditions, time frames, and the 

application for guardianship. This allows for that more orderly 

transfer, if I can describe it that way, of property. 

 

Not surprisingly, the Bill also deals with if a missing person is 

found or returns, you know, was just away for . . . I won‟t 

surmise what all of the reasons that someone could be away for, 

but if a missing person comes back, this Bill deals with, for 

example, Mr. Speaker, if a missing person had a vehicle worth 

$3,000 and there was a guardianship appointment made and the 

time frames had gone by and the vehicle was simply not going 

to be used, it should be disposed of ultimately. 

 

If all of the hoops in this Bill are passed, are followed, all of the 

timelines and the guidelines, if someone buys that vehicle for 

something reasonably approximating fair market value . . . I 

used the example of a $3,000 vehicle. I‟m assuming if they 

bought it somewhere in that price range, you know, give or 

take, I don‟t know, 25 per cent. It doesn‟t say 25 per cent; that‟s 

just my common sense saying. But if somebody bought that 

vehicle and then the person returns, the missing person shows 

up, well the person who bought the vehicle still owns the 

vehicle. Raises some interesting questions, but I don‟t know 

how else you could conduct commerce, so to speak. How could 

you handle the assets of the missing person? 

 

So I‟m encouraged that the five-part Bill with 33 clauses is a 

genuine attempt at dealing with every machination, every 

potential that could happen. It sets the framework for how it is 

we would deal with missing people and how we actually come 

to the presumption of death for them, but there‟s some real 

questions with how this is going. 

 

The Bill has a notice required to property guardians re 

judgments and executions. The Bill speaks to outside claims 

being made, you know, for money owing presumably, and there 

are rules around how those claims can or cannot be made. 

There‟s very much to this, and it‟s a thoughtful Bill. But, Mr. 

Speaker, it clearly needs a little more time to look at it. 

 

There‟s rules respecting annual accounting of the estate or of 



2064 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 2009 

what the executor or administrator is dealing with. And as I 

said, there‟s a place where it calls for an annual accounting. 

There‟s even in this Act a provision where if the administrator 

doesn‟t provide the annual accounting, there‟s a provision 

where people interested in what‟s going on can apply through 

the courts, and the court can order or direct the administrator to 

do the annual accounting and share that in some fashion. 

 

There‟s places in this Bill for objections, statements of 

objection. If a person goes missing, there‟s an opportunity for 

someone who knew that person to object to them being called 

missing. I don‟t know on what basis, but at least you‟d have an 

opportunity to apply for some legal advice presumably and find 

out how you could actually object to that. 

 

There‟s opportunities for statements of objection. If on the 

presumption of death, you might have a spouse, for example, 

not willing to presume the death of their partner, and there‟s a 

provision to make sure that that spouse — and it doesn‟t have to 

be a spouse, but that interested person, if I can describe it — 

gets heard and gets a serious consideration about whether or not 

the person should or should not be presumed to be dead. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I notice on clause 8, there‟s an access to 

information clause. I did not read that specific clause, but I 

suspect it has something to do with our privacy laws and access 

to information and who should be allowed access to information 

about a missing and/or presumed dead person. There would be 

many people or some people that are legally entitled to know 

some of the details, and I have no doubt that there would be 

other people that would have no legal right to know it, and the 

person‟s business affairs would remain confidential. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is a place in this Bill, this thoughtful Bill, 

that deals with an order respecting fees. And there‟s a way that 

people involved in this matter can apply to the courts and get a 

court order respecting any fees that might be paid to the 

administrator or the executor of the matter. Presumably this 

would be a safety valve that would prevent people from saying, 

oh well, I‟ll be the administrator and I‟ll charge an outrageous, 

exorbitant fee. But it also would protect people from being 

named or appointed administrator and doing much work for 

absolutely no pay, and either way it‟s just not fair. 

 

So there‟s provisions to make sure that there‟s an ability to pay 

the administrator. I‟m not sure what happens, Mr. Speaker, in 

the case of where there‟s not enough assets to pull money from, 

but I‟m suspicious that there‟s somewhere in this that deals with 

a threshold of what those circumstances might be, and where it 

is that we should go with it. 

 

There‟s I see here a clause dealing with copies of orders to the 

Public Guardian and Trustee. And I actually read that clause, 

and I know that the Public Guardian be provided copies of this 

matter at no charge to the Public Guardian. And that‟s actually 

in the law, and I think that‟s a reasonable provision. But I‟m 

merely pointing out that this is a five-part Bill with 33 clauses. 

 

Mr. Speaker, because of the sensitivity around this whole area 

and because of the need to do a little more research and make 

sure that we get this right, because the last thing that I know 

that the government would want to do would be to hastily pass 

what should be a very good Bill. And it looks like this is going 

to be a very good Bill. I know I‟m looking forward to taking my 

place and voting for the Bill when the time comes. But we want 

to make sure that it‟s as good as it possibly can be, that the 

transition from when the repeal of an old Bill, The Absentee 

Act, when that is repealed, we want to make sure that there‟s 

just no gaps, that we can have a seamless transition, that we can 

just move from history — if I can describe it that way — into 

today and a Bill that, frankly, I think will serve the people of 

Saskatchewan very well for some time into the future. And I 

just really do look forward to that. 

 

You know I‟ve talked, Mr. Speaker, about there being 33 

clauses. I‟m looking forward to clause 33, which is the coming 

into force. That is going to be a very good and happy day for 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill, I just notice, also deals with the death of 

a property guardian, if you can imagine that. Can you imagine a 

situation where you have a missing person and then the 

guardian appointed, and then the guardian passes away? Then 

you‟ve really got a mess. This Bill is thoughtful enough that it 

actually covers the death of a property guardian. And it says 

under clause 14(1), “If a property guardian dies without a will, 

the public guardian and trustee may assume the position of 

property guardian and exercise the powers of the property 

guardian until a new property guardian is appointed.” 

 

Clause (2) . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . fairly straightforward, 

yes: “If a property guardian dies with a will, the executor of the 

deceased property guardian may assume the position of 

property guardian and exercise the powers of the property 

guardian until a new property guardian is appointed.” 

 

That one I‟ve got to read again. The third part of clause 14 says, 

“Immediately on assuming the position of property guardian in 

accordance with subsection (2), the executor shall give written 

notice of that fact to the public guardian and trustee.” 

 

There‟s just no question about this Bill being a well-intended 

Bill. It talks about the duty of the executor or administrator. It 

talks about the effect of presumption on property guardian and 

attorney, the status of property if the person is later found alive. 

And I talked about that in my example earlier of a $3,000 

vehicle, but it could just as easily be a building or a lot or some 

farm land or a cottage. Who knows what all missing persons 

might have? 

 

I know I was talking with my colleague, the member for Regina 

Northeast earlier. And he talked about some land that an RM 

[rural municipality] had, a missing person. This is some years 

back, and there was a missing person. And the machinations, 

the contortions, that this RM had to go through including 

RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] and a private 

investigator and so on, just so that they could effectively deal 

with that land, Mr. Speaker . . . I see you‟re on your feet. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Adjournment having been reached, 

this House now stands adjourned until 1:30 tomorrow 

afternoon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 22:30.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 46 — The Labour Market Commission Amendment Act, 2008 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2035 

 Bill No. 43 — The Trespass to Property Act 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2036 

 Bill No. 9 — The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 2008 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2054 

 Bill No. 49 — The Ambulance Amendment Act, 2008 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2055 

 Bill No. 59 — The Election Amendment Act, 2008 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2057 

 Bill No. 44 — The Agreements of Sale Cancellation Amendment Act, 2008 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2060 

 Bill No. 45 — The Credit Union Amendment Act, 2008 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2061 

 Bill No. 50 — The Missing Persons and Presumption of Death Act 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2062 

 


