




















































Hansard: November 19, 2009


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 17A  THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 19, 2009, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3705 

 November 19, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to introduce to you and through you three very important 

guests, and I would ask them to stand while they are being 

recognized. 

 

Sergeant Lorelei Rollings has been a member of the RCMP 

[Royal Canadian Mounted Police] for 14 years. She is currently 

a training coordinator in applied police science at Depot 

Division. Corporal Curtis Davis has been a member of the 

RCMP for 13 years. He is currently an applied instructor at the 

police science department. And Cadet Lisa Buller is originally 

from Winnipeg, Manitoba and is posted to Yorkton, 

Saskatchewan. She will graduate from the Depot Division on 

November the 23rd. If everyone would please welcome them to 

their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. With leave 

to make an extended introduction, please. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre has 

asked for leave to make an extended introduction. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and to my 

colleagues. I have a special group of seniors with us today. 

Tomorrow of course is National Housing Day, and seniors are 

very concerned about affordable housing. And so a group have 

asked me to present a petition which I will do later. 

 

But I wanted to make sure that we took a moment and 

acknowledged each one and the group that they represent. And 

they’re sitting in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, right above me over 

here. So I’ll ask each one to give a wave as I read out their 

name. 

 

We have some people from the Saskatchewan Federation of 

Union Retirees. We have Betty Pickering, Ron Monk, Fiona 

Bishop, and Chuck Ames. We also have a person from the 

Federation of Superannuates, the national association, Andre 

Nogue. We have Louis Wood from the Seniors Education 

Centre. 

 

And we have three people from the Saskatchewan Seniors 

Mechanism: Holly Schick, Joanne MacDonald, and Ian 

MacDonald. And the Seniors Mechanism played a huge role in 

the petition I’m about to present. 

 

And as I said earlier, tomorrow’s National Housing Day and it’s 

a day that we take to reflect on housing for everyone. And I 

would ask all members in this House to send a warm welcome 

to these seniors who’ve come here to watch our proceedings, 

and to their House. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone, the Minister Responsible for Advanced Education, 

Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

my great pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all 

members of this Assembly a group of young leaders, those who 

are engaged and inspiring in their work, assembled in your 

gallery, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would like to introduce four members of the Saskatchewan 

Students’ Coalition. President Jon Elder, president of the 

SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 

Technology] Students’ Association, Kelsey and Wascana 

campuses; President Kyle Addison, president for the University 

of Regina Students’ Union; Vice-President Katie Honey, 

vice-president external for the University of Regina Students’ 

Union; as well as Vice-President Chris Stoicheff, vice-president 

external for the University of Saskatchewan Students’ Union. 

And joining us a little later today will be Ms. Diane Adams, 

president for the First Nations University of Canada Student 

Association. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Students’ Coalition represents 

over 30,000 students across our province. This new student 

coalition exists to represent, serve, and support the academic 

community and career needs of Saskatchewan students through 

united provincial leadership. I’m looking forward to our 

meeting a little later this morning, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’ll ask all members of this Assembly to 

please join in with me in welcoming these young student 

leaders to their legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

the minister in welcoming Chris, Kyle, Katie, and Jon to the 

Assembly today, Mr. Speaker. Always a good day when student 

leaders are in the Assembly and talking about issues that matter 

to students, especially on a day like today when the topics being 

discussed are so relevant to the future of students here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I join with the minister in welcoming these individuals to their 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. While 

I’m on my feet, a couple of welcomes and an introduction. But I 



3706 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2009 

would like to join with the member opposite in welcoming the 

cadet and RCMP officers here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t matter where we are, whether it’s in 

Canada or beyond our borders. When we see the red serge, we 

feel a great deal of pride. So to have the officers here today 

joining us is a great privilege. And I would like to join with the 

member on behalf of all of the official opposition to say 

welcome and also thank you for the work you do on a 

day-to-day basis. 

 

And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 

introduce to you and through you a class that is sitting in the 

east gallery. These students go to a school that is about a block 

away from where I live. It’s Sacred Heart Community School, 

which is in the heart of South Hill in Moose Jaw. There is 14 

grade 8 students that are here with us today, and they are joined 

by teachers, Derek Hassen and Kyle Lichtenwald. I am very 

pleased, as all of us are, when we have an opportunity to have 

constituents, and especially students, that have taken an interest 

in the democratic process and have taken the time and effort to 

be here in the legislature to see the operation and some of the 

work that is done. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would ask all my colleagues to join with me 

in welcoming Sacred Heart grade 8 class. Thank you. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Today I 

rise to present a petition in support of affordable housing for 

Saskatchewan seniors. And we know that living costs, including 

housing, are having a major impact on Saskatchewan senior 

citizens and that Saskatchewan’s growing economy and housing 

market have translated into challenges for many renters, 

including senior citizens; that more affordable housing options 

would significantly help Saskatchewan seniors cope with the 

cost of living, especially those living on fixed incomes. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to act as quickly as possible to expand 

affordable housing options for Saskatchewan seniors. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these petitioners have come from a variety of 

communities throughout the province. In fact some are 

watching on TV as we speak. And I’ll just read off the 

communities: Unity, Stewart Valley, Swift Current, Warman, 

Saskatoon, Maidstone, Imperial, Eatonia, Watrous, Victoire, 

Dodsland, Dorintosh, Laird, Paddockwood, Englefeld, 

Colonsay, Asquith, Davidson, Love, White Fox, Whitewood, 

Esterhazy, Stockholm, Allan, St. Louis, Liberty, Frenchman 

Butte, Shaunavon, Christopher Lake, Meath Park, Sonningdale, 

Humboldt, Bruno, Lanigan, Wadena, Annaheim, Regina, 

Kindersley, and Moose Jaw. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

in support of a new long-term care facility in La Ronge. And 

the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately invest in the planning and 

construction of new long-term care beds in La Ronge. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by the good people of La Ronge and area. I so 

present. And as I have presented before, it has hundreds of 

signatures to this petition. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition in support of fairness for students here in 

Saskatchewan through the necessary expansion of the graduate 

retention program. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately expand the graduate 

retention program to include master’s and Ph.D. 

graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are from 

the cities of Saskatoon and Regina. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present yet another petition on behalf of rural residents 

of Saskatchewan who question why the Sask Party government 

is leaving them behind with respect to providing safe and 

affordable water, and who as of yet have not had any 

commitment from the Sask Party government. And the prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to financially assist the town of Duck 

Lake residents for the good of their health and safety due 

to the exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency, and that this government fulfills its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good residents of 

Duck Lake. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I stand today and present 

petitions in support of maintaining quality health care services. 

Mr. Speaker, we all hope that the Government of Saskatchewan 

recognizes the essential role of health care providers as valued 



November 19, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3707 

members of the health care team. Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads 

as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to commit to maintain quality health care 

services and job security for all public health care 

providers. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the petition is signed by residents of Humboldt, St. Gregor, 

Lanigan, and Bruno. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased today to 

rise and present a petition in support of affordable rents and 

housing for The Battlefords. The petitioners note that some 

Battleford area apartments have been given rent increase notices 

of 40 per cent and also note that rental accommodation in The 

Battlefords is diminishing or decreasing. Mr. Speaker, the 

petition prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to call 

upon the Government of Saskatchewan to develop an 

affordable housing program that will result in a greater 

number of quality and affordable rental units to be made 

available to a greater number of people throughout The 

Battlefords and that will implement a process of rent 

review or rent control to better protect tenants in a 

non-competitive housing environment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petitions are signed by residents of North 

Battleford and the town of Leoville. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of very concerned residents of 

Saskatchewan as it relates to the unprecedented 

mismanagement of their finances. I believe with the 

announcements here today that these petitions will continue to 

be received fast and furious, Mr. Speaker. The prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to start managing our 

provincial finances responsibly and prudently to ensure 

that it does not continue its trend of massive budgetary 

shortfalls, runaway and unsustainable spending, equity 

stripping from our Crowns, and irresponsible revenue 

setting. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Of course, Mr. Speaker, I’ve presented these daily, every day 

this session, from all across Saskatchewan, and today I present 

these from Regina and Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Rider Pride 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to recognize the Rider 

nation and our Saskatchewan Roughriders. It has been 33 years 

since the Riders have hosted the CFL’s [Canadian Football 

League] western conference final. And the excitement and 

anticipation for this weekend’s matchup against the Calgary 

Stampeders has taken over the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Roughriders have become one 

of the most feared teams in the league, in part because of the 

13th man. And Rider fans are recognized worldwide for their 

loyalty and their Rider pride. And often you can find a group of 

Rider fans following the team across the country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Sunday marks one of the most important days 

in Rider nation history. At this time the Riders sit atop the 

CFL’s western conference and are poised to make another run 

at the Grey Cup. 

 

As fans everywhere come together to support the Riders, they 

are bursting with optimism, enthusiasm, and pride. It has been 

reported that one out of every, or pardon me, it’s reported out of 

every dollar spent on CFL merchandise, 54 per cent is spent on 

green. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this weekend a sea of green awaits the Calgary 

Stampeders and the 13th man will be there to help our Riders 

win this game this weekend. Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the 

Rider nation and the 13th man, I salute Saskatchewan’s team, 

the people’s team, and my team — the Saskatchewan 

Roughriders. 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

RCMP Partners With Habitat for Humanity 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The RCMP 

stands for guard over Canada, protecting us from threats from 

within and without. But the force also does a lot of public 

service that doesn’t make the headlines, Mr. Speaker. But it 

plays an equally important role, which is why it is my honour 

today to be involved in the announcement of the Mountie 

house. 

 

The RCMP and Habitat for Humanity Regina are joining forces 

to build a home for a low-income family. The cadets from depot 

will build the home in what is just another example of selfless 

attitude of Canada’s national police service. This morning 

announcement, Mr. Speaker, will be impressive. The RCMP 

will be performing a unique display of dismounted cavalry drill 

created specifically for this auspicious occasion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the building of the Mountie house is also part of 

the $1 million our government announced for Habitat for 



3708 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2009 

Humanity province-wide. There’s been ground breaking 

province-wide, Mr. Speaker, as our government moves forward 

with local Habitat for Humanity groups to ensure all 

Saskatchewan people benefit from our province’s prosperity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, through partnerships with Habitat for Humanity, 

organizations such as the RCMP are helping low-income 

families realize a dream many of us take for granted — a home. 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mathematics Review 

 

Mr. Furber: — Well, well, well, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

recognize Saskatchewan’s first ever observance of 

Mathematical Sciences Awareness Week. The aim of this week, 

Mr. Speaker, is to interest people in honing their math skills. 

And given the numbers the government released today, never 

has an awareness week been more timely. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a university professor estimates that on average, if 

pressed to take a math exam immediately, the average person 

would score about a grade 6 level. Now I know, Mr. Speaker, 

that most people in Saskatchewan would score much higher 

than that, but that with these latest government figures, I can 

only assume that the Finance minister and the Premier are 

severely hurting the provincial average. 

 

The top recommendation for Math Awareness Week, Mr. 

Speaker, is for people to review math basics. So I’d like to 

review the Finance minister’s achievements in the four basic 

mathematical areas. 

 

First, addition. This minister has added millions in 

unsustainable funding to the provincial budget, increasing 

spending by 32 per cent over two years. 

 

Second, subtraction. This minister has taken away $2.3 billion 

from the rainy day fund and the Crowns in order to cover up 

miscalculations. 

 

Third, multiplication. Mr. Speaker, he’s got a multiple of 

excuses for blowing $2.3 billion that the NDP [New 

Democratic Party] left in the bank. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, division. With these latest numbers, 

the minister and his Premier have created the clearest possible 

division between the NDP record of prudent fiscal management 

and a record of a mathematically challenged government that 

deserves a failing grade of zero. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Achievements of Battlefords Community Organizations 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, over 

this past weekend I attended the opening of the Eagles Nest 

Youth Ranch in North Battleford. Our government provided 

approximately $1 million in funding to help construct this 

building. 

The new facility is going to help the city and its partners 

address the needs of local youth who are homeless or at the risk 

of being homeless. The building is going to be a therapeutic 

group living centre for up to 10 youth and has individual 

bedrooms, a central living area, an office space, in a culturally 

appropriate setting. This new facility demonstrates our 

government’s commitment to building brighter futures for some 

of Saskatchewan’s most vulnerable youth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would also like to congratulate the Battlefords 

Quarter Horse Club and chairman Ray Cox for organizing the 

second annual Santa Claus parade, and to my friend Herb Cox 

for providing me with a compatible mount for this event. 

 

This event had around 100 horses and riders along with an 

assortment of floats, cutters, and wagons. And the event was 

able to raise $9,000 for the Empty Stocking Fund to help 

disadvantaged families and children at Christmas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government appreciates the effort and 

dedication of CBOs [community-based organization]. They 

work tirelessly to meet the needs of the most vulnerable within 

our society. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

A Parable 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I want to share a little parable 

with the House and the people of Saskatchewan. I call it the 

parable of the spendthrift cheerleader. 

 

Once there was a cheerleader down on his luck. He had tried 

cheerleading for a right wing government in the 1980s but that 

ended in crushing defeat. In the 1990s he tried his hand at the 

private sector. Two companies started with big dreams, but both 

ended in bankruptcy. Alas the cheerleader, like many of his 

neighbours, began to question whether he could manage a 

two-house paper route. 

 

But then his luck changed. One day while out searching for a 

political career, he stumbled upon somebody else’s wallet. In it, 

he found $2.3 billion. Suddenly the cheerleader decided he was 

a great manager after all and began to spend the money with 

reckless abandon. And oh, it was fun — for him. But after a 

couple of years the money ran out, and all the cheerleader’s 

grand schemes sat unfinished like a herd of white elephants. 

 

Worst of all, when the owners of the wallet realized what had 

happened and came looking for him, he refused to stand up and 

account for his spending spree and mismanagement. He just left 

town. 

 

The moral of the little parable, Mr. Speaker: once a cheerleader, 

always a cheerleader. 

 

While it may be fun to spend somebody else’s money, one day 

the chickens will come home to roost. Somebody should warn 

the spendthrift cheerleader: you’ll have to stand up and account 

for your mistakes some day. You might as well come home and 

face the music. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 



November 19, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3709 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Regina Crime Stoppers Celebrate Anniversary 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, last evening I was honoured 

to attend the 25th Anniversary Gala for Regina Crime Stoppers. 

MC [master of ceremonies] Manfred Joehnck from CTV 

[Canadian Television Network Ltd.] Regina was great, and 

Sask Express did an excellent job of entertaining the crowd. 

 

Board members were recognized, along with current and 

surviving past presidents and received special recognition. 

 

Greetings came from Mayor Pat Fiacco — landslide Pat Fiacco, 

I would add. I was honoured to share his table, as well as 

Regina chief of police, Troy Hagen. 

 

Crime Stoppers began in 1984 and they have received over 

12,000 tips leading to 1,922 arrests which have solved 3,000 

cases. Additionally, over $9 million of stolen property has been 

recovered. Along with this, $5.8 million of illegal drugs have 

been taken off our streets. 

 

Mr. Speaker, inspiring speeches were firstly given by our own 

Saskatoon Northwest MLA [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly] on his life story and his 20-year involvement with 

Crime Stoppers. His speech focused on taking responsibility for 

our own actions and being involved to make a difference. 

 

Also Lorne Pavelick wrapped up the evening with his family’s 

inspiring story. He spoke of how they are dealing with the loss 

of their son, Misha, from a 2006 stabbing, how they are 

overcoming grief, seeking justice, and making a positive 

difference through Crime Stoppers. Standing ovations were 

received by both of the evening’s speakers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join with me in thanking and 

congratulating Crime Stoppers for 25 years, along with those 

involved for their efforts and continued success. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Contributions of Former Colleague Celebrated 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to celebrate the 

contribution made to the city of Regina, the province of 

Saskatchewan, and indeed the country of Canada by a former 

colleague of ours, Mr. Harry Van Mulligen. 

 

Last evening 300 friends and admirers took our hats off to 

Harry for his years of dedicated public service as a city 

councillor, an MLA, and a cabinet minister. Harry received 

plaudits from far and wide, Mr. Speaker, for his long and 

principled service in the cause of social democracy, with 

congratulations offered by people ranging from constituents of 

Regina Douglas Park to former Premier Roy Romanow to our 

current leader, and many more. 

 

Receiving the greatest praise of all however was Harry’s 

foresight in questioning this government’s grossly 

over-optimistic revenue projections in the March budget. Allow 

me to quote Harry’s prophetic words from March of this year, 

Mr. Speaker: “. . . wild revenue assumptions, out-of-control 

spending, and a mounting debt problem, this budget is all about 

short-term gain for long-term pain.” 

 

With today’s financial update, Mr. Speaker, the government is 

trying to take a mulligan on last year’s budget. How much 

better off our province would be if instead they’d taken a Van 

Mulligen. Mr. Speaker, Harry closed by saying, “The 

government would have . . .” 

 

The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Ruling on Scope of Questions 

 

The Speaker: — Before we move to oral questions, I yesterday 

indicated I was going to review question period and some of the 

questions. And I’d like to make this statement. 

 

Yesterday I undertook to review the questions asked during 

question period and rules pertaining to the scope of questions. I 

have now done this, and I am now prepared to rule on the 

matter. 

 

I find that the questions asked by the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow contravene rule 19(2) that states, and I quote, 

“Questions on issues not officially connected with the 

government, of a private nature, related to the Board of Internal 

Economy, caucus, party or political responsibilities are 

prohibited.” 

 

The member from Moose Jaw Wakamow asked the following 

question: 

 

My question is: was the Sask Party policy followed? And 

were these . . . [changes] brought to the attention of the 

party and the Kindersley constituency association? 

 

This question was then repeated. This question is clearly out of 

order. I would like to remind members that this rule was 

recently, rule 19(2), was recently adopted by the members 

specifically to exclude this type of question from question 

period. 

 

I would also like to remind members, I have some concerns in 

regards to the way questions have been presented and answers 

have been given. And I will be conferring through the two 

House leaders to their respective members. Thank you. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Management of Provincial Economy 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The mid-year 

report just released confirms the government’s March budget 

was in fact the most irresponsible budget in the history of 

Saskatchewan. It was a budget based on phony revenue 

projections, unsustainable runaway spending, and financial 



3710 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2009 

trickery designed to hide historic raids on both our Crown 

corporations and our public’s rainy day fund. 

 

In 2007 this government inherited $2.3 billion in the bank and a 

booming economy. Two years later, we have a billion dollar 

deficit on a summary financial basis and an economy that’s in 

the grips of recession. Mr. Speaker, can the minister explain 

how his government blew the boom and threw Saskatchewan 

into deficit? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, today we acknowledged 

in the mid-year report that potash revenues have suffered an 

extreme hit, if you like, going from a budgeted amount of $1.9 

billion to $100 million. Mr. Speaker, that is a significant and 

very, very dramatic change in the revenues of the province of 

Saskatchewan. I fully acknowledge that. I fully acknowledge 

that the government was inaccurate in terms of any kind of 

prediction of that event occurring. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if you look at a range of predictions, is what the 

government generally does when you’re trying to set a forecast 

for the future. We look anywhere from the most optimistic to 

the most pessimistic numbers, and we try to pick a number 

somewhere in the medium of those ranges. Mr. Speaker, if we 

would have taken the most pessimistic number of any forecaster 

in the world, we still would not have come up with the kind of 

numbers that have been impacted in the announcement today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this minister is denying 

accountability. This is a problem of their own making. The 

minister likes to talk about two stories in Saskatchewan. And 

there are two stories: his fantasyland budget and reality. 

 

Let’s look at his own budget documents released today. Yes, 

potash sales are down; we stated that last March. But also oil 

sales are down 46 per cent. Natural gas sales are down 55 per 

cent. Manufacturing sales are down 12 per cent. Building 

permits down, 24. Housing starts, down 54 per cent. Retail sales 

down. And instead of a clueless 2.1 per cent economic growth 

forecast in the March budget, we see the economy contracting 

by 2.9 per cent — shrinking. Everything else is going great 

guns, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When is this minister and this government going to face the 

facts and explain how they blew the boom and threw 

Saskatchewan into deficit? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve been saying the 

last couple of days in question period, there are two stories in 

this province right now, two significant stories. One is related to 

potash and the incredible impact these collapsing prices have 

had on the economy. But more important is, we’ve got to look 

at how Saskatchewan is faring, as compared to the rest of the 

world, in light of the whole recession that everyone is facing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this year to date there are some job statistics 

that I think are important. And Canada has lost 294,000 jobs in 

this period. British Columbia has lost 60,000 jobs. Alberta has 

lost 23,000 jobs. And Ontario has lost 172,000 jobs. In that 

same period of time, in this current period of time, 

Saskatchewan has grown 9,030 jobs, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is just but one example of the very positive 

news for the economy of Saskatchewan. People in 

Saskatchewan are optimistic about the future. 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — The member opposite can spin and 

cheerlead with part-time job statistics. This opposition is 

worried about the huge job loss of full-time jobs, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In the March provincial budget speech, the minister said, and I 

quote: “Our new budget is a balanced budget. This new balance 

is built on strong but cautious revenue estimates.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, which exactly were the cautious revenue 

estimates? Were they the potash revenue estimates that were off 

95 per cent, or the natural gas revenue estimates which were off 

67 per cent? Goodness help Saskatchewan if this crew had 

thrown caution to the wind. 

 

When is this minister and this government going to admit that 

they based their provincial budget on phony revenue estimates, 

runaway and unsustainable spending, and financial trickery to 

hide their raids on both Crown and the rainy day fund, the 

people’s assets of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, what the 

opposition doesn’t seem to understand is there’s a tremendous 

spirit of optimism and looking forward to the future out in the 

province of Saskatchewan. Every time we go home for a 

weekend, you run into the people of Saskatchewan, the real 

people of Saskatchewan who understand that this province has 

had an unprecedented growth. And it’s continuing . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I would ask that 

members give the minister the same opportunity of responding 

to the question without undue interference. I recognize the 

Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I indicated that the 

positive numbers in terms of job growth in the province of 

Saskatchewan, that is virtually unprecedented in any province 

in Canada facing this economic recession that the world has 

experienced. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is no doubt that there are more challenges 

ahead. But, Mr. Speaker, it’s remarkable that we’re continuing 

to benefit from the provincial economy. We have had a growth 

rate of population in Saskatchewan, for the first time in a 

tremendously long while, of 16,000 people in this province, Mr. 



November 19, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3711 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, those 16,000 people believe that there is 

a future in Saskatchewan for them, as we believe there’s a 

future in Saskatchewan for them. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Spin, spin, spin, and spin some more, 

Mr. Speaker. Things were good in Saskatchewan. That’s right. 

They were good. 

 

Mr. Speaker, also in the March budget speech the minister said, 

and I quote: 

 

There are those who have said that Saskatchewan today is 

an economic star of our country. If that is the case then 

. . . [let us be the] right kind of star. Not a shooting star 

burning bright for an instant and then fading away, but let 

us be a North Star, the one that you can set your compass 

by. 

 

Can you just visualize the pompoms waving gently to the 

hallelujah chorus over there? 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s time for a reality check. This government 

inherited $2.3 billion in their bank account, a booming 

economy. Two years later, we have a $1 billion deficit on a 

summary financial basis and an economy that’s in the grips of 

recession. Can the minister please explain to the people of 

Saskatchewan how this government blew the boom and threw 

Saskatchewan into deficit? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, there is no 

doubt that the Saskatchewan economy is in a decline, into 

negative numbers this year as it’s facing the most incredible 

challenge of the potash industry since 1972, Mr. Speaker. And 

we’re going to manage that and move our way through it 

because the people of this province are optimistic about the 

future. They understand that Saskatchewan is going to lead the 

nation next year. They’re going to be at the very strong 

economic growth after a one-year slowdown. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is incredible. All of the private sector 

forecasters are saying the same thing, that Saskatchewan is 

likely to lead the nation in economic growth next year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the potash industry is going to experience growth 

next year, as the industry is continuing to invest in 

infrastructure spending of over $7 billion, Mr. Speaker. They 

understand there’s a future of growth and optimism in the 

province. Why can’t those 20 members opposite understand 

that? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Support for Long-Term Care 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The mid-year financial 

report shows exactly where this right wing government chooses 

to cut spending when faced with a tight budget squeeze. Health 

care tops the list. Today the government announced it is cutting 

$122 million that it had announced for the construction and 

repair of Saskatchewan’s long-term care facilities. 

 

This government has money for insiders like Doug Emsley and 

Garnet Garven. It has millions for its two-week Olympic 

pavilion. It can afford $11 million to throw away on severance 

costs, but it cuts nursing homes for our seniors. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: what does this say about the Sask 

Party government’s spending priorities? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, certainly, you know, the 

mid-term financial report, which has been explained very well 

by the Minister of Finance, has some pressures. And, Mr. 

Speaker, the issue around long-term care couldn’t be further 

from what that member just said. She said they cancelled them, 

which couldn’t be further from the truth.  

 

But actually, Mr. Speaker, most people are believing that they 

can’t believe a word that that opposition says, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, because these long-term care facilities have been 

deferred. The money would not be spent in this fiscal year 

through the health regions. The communities aren’t ready, the 

scoping hasn’t been ready, Mr. Speaker. But I find it passingly 

strange that she would be so concerned about long-term care 

facilities now. When they were in government, they did very, 

very little to do anything about them. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Same old answer, Mr. Speaker: what did we do. 

He continues to have no answer for what he’s doing. 

 

The minister has said this announcement for the money for 

long-term care was made under a ready-for-growth initiative. 

Now he’s telling the people in the long-term care industry and 

the seniors and the health district, be ready for disappointment. 

It means this government is not going to get on with building 

and repairing Saskatchewan nursing homes this year. And their 

promise to do it next year is worth about as much as their 

budget forecasts. 

 

Let me ask the minister this. He says nothing is lost by 

deferring $122 million in spending. Is he admitting that he was 

incompetent to have included this amount in the March budget? 

Or is he claiming that seniors don’t really need quick action on 

nursing homes? Mr. Speaker, to the minister: which is it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the deferral of 13 

long-term care facilities across the province is simply that. It’s a 

deferral. The communities weren’t ready in a number of cases 

with their 35 per cent. The scoping hasn’t been ready, Mr. 

Speaker. So that money could either sit in the account . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I think it would be appropriate 



3712 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2009 

to allow at least the guests to even have an opportunity to hear 

the response. I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — So, Mr. Speaker, when the scoping is 

complete, the money will be there. And it’ll be paid as the 

projects proceed. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I cannot believe that that opposition now 

would criticize us for deferring for a year, Mr. Speaker, when 

they would announce for ten years, a hospital in Humboldt; for 

seven years, a hospital in Preeceville. And never followed 

through with those commitments, Mr. Speaker, until we became 

government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — And now, Mr. Speaker, he’s not following 

through with anything he’s promised. He can claim this is a 

deferral, but that’s just a politician’s word for a financial IOU [I 

owe you]. 

 

The cuts to health care don’t end with nursing homes. The 

government has also cut $95 million from the children’s 

hospital in Saskatoon and $3 million from the surgical care 

centre planned for Regina. Again all these projects have to go 

on our financial IOUs from the group that can’t count. Which 

shell is the pea under today? 

 

To the minister, Mr. Speaker: why should Saskatchewan 

families have to pay for the government’s financial 

mismanagement with cuts to vital heath care programs and 

services? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Well, Mr. Speaker, first of all, I tried 

to explain in the first answer, there is no cut. These are deferred, 

Mr. Speaker. Our government is committed to following 

through, number one, on the children’s hospital. That will be 

there when the money needs to be there, in long-term care 

facilities when the money needs to be there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But once again, we have an opposition that was in government 

for 16 years. In 1999, the official press release of a new hospital 

in Preeceville. Well, Mr. Speaker, 1999 announced. After two 

years of Sask Party government, tomorrow I’ll be there for the 

grand opening, Mr. Speaker. We’re following through on our 

word. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Support for Seniors’ Housing 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Most 

Saskatchewan seniors live on fixed incomes, and many have 

little income beyond old age security and the guaranteed 

income supplement. Well, we know we have a collective 

responsibility to ensure that the people who built this province 

enjoy a good quality of life in their retirement. 

 

But a review of the waiting lists for senior housing units across 

Saskatchewan and selected communities, based on the 

government’s own answers to written questions, indicate that 

the number of seniors waiting for spaces has increased from 

521 in January of 2008 to 781 in September 2009. That’s a 50 

per cent increase. 

 

To the Minister of Social Services: why have the waiting lists 

for senior housing increased so dramatically under this 

government’s watch? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — The answer is quite simple, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s because the province is growing and that housing 

has always been a challenge of a growing province. But we will 

meet that challenge because we will ensure that this province 

continues to grow. 

 

What have we done to help seniors with this particular 

situation? Well I have a number of senior housing units that we 

have opened since we’ve been in government. We also have 

increased the amount of affordable housing and senior housing 

that we have completed. We have completed over 500 units 

since we formed government. We currently have over 500 

under construction, and we’re in the development and planning 

stages of 600 more units. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have opened more housing in two years than 

the NDP did in three prior to the election. So, Mr. Speaker, we 

are addressing this issue. It does take time to build the housing 

units, but we’re doing it. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — I find that answer very interesting. And we can 

go on at the 500, 600 number that the minister likes to throw 

about, but that’s for another time. 

 

The figures I mentioned today are provincial totals. But it’s 

important to talk about the impact on individual communities as 

well. The number of seniors waiting for spaces in Swift Current 

has increased from 36 to 95. The average wait time is now 

seven and a half months. Yorkton, an increase from 36 to 74 

seniors with an average wait time of five months. North 

Battleford, an increase from 36 to 64 seniors. Yet there are 

currently no seniors’ housing projects under construction in any 

of those centres, and very few anywhere in the province 

actually, for that matter. These waiting lists are now so long that 

we’ll never reduce them unless we set targets and commit 

resources to the problem. 

 

To the minister: will she agree here today to set targets and 

commit dollars so that these seniors no longer have to wait for 

an affordable place to live? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — This is just another example of say 

one thing and do another because the NDP, when they were in 

government, refused to set targets. In fact we had a Health 



November 19, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3713 

minister who said, you know, we don’t want to set . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Minister Responsible for Social 

Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We had a 

Health minister who said, we don’t want to set targets because 

we may not be able to meet them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we understand that housing is an issue in our 

province. We have acted on most of the recommendations that 

came forward from our task force that we struck shortly after 

the election. One of those recommendations was to increase the 

income level for seniors to qualify for seniors’ housing. We are 

accelerating the number of housing units that we’re building 

throughout the province. 

 

But when it comes to seniors, I wonder when that member was 

sitting at the cabinet table, he wouldn’t want to talk about the 

seniors’ income plan because for 16 years the NDP did 

absolutely nothing about the seniors’ income plan. We 

increased it by 110 per cent, Mr. Speaker. And not only do they 

get the increased income from the seniors’ income plan, they 

also get the extra health benefits that come with it. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — I’m glad to debate the seniors’ income plan. I 

don’t know if the members opposite knew that over 3,000 were 

thrown off the seniors’ income plan this summer. That’s 

another issue we can talk about. 

 

We can talk about our health plan that we introduced, that was 

over $50 million that affected over 100,000 — 100,000 — 

seniors. So we’re very proud of our record when it comes to 

helping out the seniors. 

 

Well today, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen the consequences to the 

finances of this province by this government’s financial 

mismanagement. But I ask members to think for a moment 

about the many vulnerable people in this province who are 

ultimately paying the price for this government’s blunders. 

 

Too many seniors in this province are already having trouble 

making ends meet with the rising rents and the higher utility 

costs, like an 8.5 per cent increase in SaskPower rates last 

spring. And now this government has abandoned vulnerable 

seniors looking for affordable places to live. This government 

can toss out its rhetoric, but the fact is seniors now are worse 

off since this government came to power. 

 

To the minister: why are seniors looking for affordable housing 

paying the price for this government’s financial 

mismanagement? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

[10:45] 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, in the 16 years that the 

NDP did absolutely nothing with the seniors’ income plan, do 

you know what inflation rate was during that time? The 

inflation rate was 43 per cent. 

 

Instead of just increasing the income by 43 per cent, Mr. 

Speaker, we decided to increase it by 110 per cent. So we far 

exceeded the inflation rate of the neglect of the NDP. But when 

the member opposite talks about neglecting vulnerable people, 

well I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, what would he like cut? If we’re 

overspending, if we’re misspending, what would he like cut? 

We indexed an increase and indexed shelter rates . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Minister Responsible for Social 

Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Perhaps he could let us, this House 

know and let the people of Saskatchewan know what he would 

like cut if we are overspending foolishly. We increased and 

indexed shelter rates. We increased rental supplements. We 

adjust those every six months, so there’s been three adjustments 

since we’ve been government. 

 

We lowered income tax, taking 80,000 people, many of them 

seniors, right off the tax rolls completely. We introduced the 

low-income tax credit. Seniors were qualified for that as well. 

And if the member has more questions, I’d be more than happy 

for him to tell me other programs he’d like to see us cut. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Management of Provincial Economy 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my question 

to the Minister of Finance. We now know from the mid-term, 

mid-year financial report based on the budget of this year, that 

we now have the single most irresponsible budget in the history 

of the province. That’s now a fact. It’s on the record. As the 

member from Rosemont has raised, phony revenue projections, 

irresponsible and unsustainable government spending, trickery 

in taking money out of the rainy day fund, and stripping money 

out of the Crown corporations — all of this in the name of 

trying to pretend that the books of the province are balanced. 

 

My question to the minister: did the Premier make him write in 

the numbers, or is this his own idea of monumental mistakes of 

his own making? Is it his idea, or was it the Premier of the 

province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 

Opposition implies that we have spending out of control. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we have kept significant 

commitments to the people of Saskatchewan that I think are 

important. Because keeping your commitments to the people of 

Saskatchewan is something we understand, and the members 

opposite don’t. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have dealt with education property tax. We’ve 

dealt with municipal revenue sharing. We have a graduate 



3714 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2009 

retention program. We have nurse and physician recruitment 

and retention programs in place. Mr. Speaker, we’ve funded 

Avastin, a colorectal cancer drug that that opposition, when 

they were government, refused to consider to add to the 

formulary. We have a seniors’ income plan, social services rent 

and food indexing and housing initiatives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask the member opposite, which of those 

things are irresponsible? Which one of those things would their 

opposition not do? Would you throw the most vulnerable 

people over the side of the boat, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Question to the Minister of Finance. He 

knows that the deficit is now back. After 16 years of balanced 

budgets, the deficit is now back. Everyone in this province 

knows that the tax cuts announced by this government are 

deferred taxes and are now on the backs of our families to be 

paid with interest at a later date. That’s a fact. 

 

My question to the minister is this: he now admits that the 

phone calls from the Premier where he talked about moving 

money on weekends, that the Premier’s not responsible, that 

this is of his own making. Would he now do the honourable 

thing, because he’s responsible for the biggest mistake 

financially in the history of the province, do the responsible 

thing and resign his position and not wait to be asked by the 

Premier? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I said in 

my remarks this morning at the press conference announcing 

the mid-year report that Saskatchewan is doing very well 

compared to every other jurisdiction in Canada. Mr. Speaker, 

every province in Canada is experiencing the impact of the 

most severe recession since the dirty thirties. Mr. Speaker, our 

province is doing well, in relative terms, to any other 

jurisdiction in Canada and in North America. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that there are things that are difficult for 

the opposition to understand. They don’t understand that in the 

two years since we’ve been government, we have been able to 

reduce the debt by $2.6 billion in the province of Saskatchewan. 

Mr. Speaker, that is an important initiative because even today 

we recognize the fact that that has saved $15 million since the 

first quarter on interest payments. Very worthwhile things 

indeed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, it’s important to recognize the other 

things that we have done — $2.3 billion on infrastructure. Mr. 

Speaker, I want to recognize that these are important initiatives 

for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my final question to the 

minister. Mr. Speaker, I believe the minister and the members 

of government protest too much. I believe that the people of the 

province, when they see this monumental mistake, they will call 

this government to task. And I ask the minister one more time: 

will he take the responsibility, resign his position, before the 

Premier or the people of this province need to make that 

decision for him? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 

are very reluctant to talk about the reality of what the people of 

Saskatchewan believe. The people of Saskatchewan, in two 

polls that were commissioned and released two weeks ago, told 

. . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Minister of 

Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the people 

of Saskatchewan have said clearly that this administration, that 

this government is the best equipped to lead the province as it’s 

going forward. Mr. Speaker, the opposition is sitting there 

thinking that they have all the rightness of the world on their 

side. They also only have 17 per cent support in the polls, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition asked 

if I would resign my position. I said this morning, and I’ll say it 

again for the House: I would rather be the Finance minister of 

this province than any province in Canada. And I serve with 

pride. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. 

 

TABLING OF SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Before orders of the day, Mr. Speaker, 

it is my pleasure to submit supplementary estimates 

accompanied by a message from His Honour the Lieutenant 

Governor. 

 

The Speaker: — I ask members to rise to hear the message 

from His Honour the Lieutenant Governor. The message is as 

follows: 

 

The Lieutenant Governor transmits supplementary 

estimates of certain sums required for the service of the 

province for the 12 months ending March 31st, 2010, and 

recommends the same to the Legislative 

Assembly.[Signed] the Hon. Gordon L. Barnhart, 

Lieutenant Governor, province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Please be seated. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 



November 19, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3715 

answer to question 499. 

 

The Speaker: — Answer to 499 is tabled. 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

H1N1 Vaccine Delivery 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Thank you 

very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move: 

 

That this Assembly commends the provincial health care 

officials and health care providers of Saskatchewan for 

the strategic delivery of the H1N1 vaccine. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would now like to speak to the motion. 

 

It is a pleasure to join my fellow legislative members in 

commending the provincial health care officials and the health 

care providers of Saskatchewan for the strategic delivery of the 

H1N1 vaccine. 

 

It all started last spring when the first wave of the H1N1 

influenza strain began capturing the headlines all over the 

world, and Canada was no exception. It seems that everyone 

had their eyes turned to all the media outlets for the latest 

update on the H1N1 developments, especially as autumn grew 

near. 

 

Well I’m sure most Canadians were hoping they would stay 

healthy, and dedicated health care providers were putting their 

own health at risk as they experienced the virus head-on. They 

put their personal needs aside to help others, some who even 

contacted the H1N1 virus. 

 

With leaves changing colour and the air getting cooler, fall was 

right around the corner and so was the re-emerging threat of 

H1N1. Our Saskatchewan government teamed up with 

provincial hard-working health care officials and providers, 

knowing full well that they could never deal with the 

resurgence of H1N1 without them. 

 

You see, these are men and women who work tirelessly every 

day to save lives. Now many people call these individuals 

heroes, especially if they or their family members were also 

patients and have since fully recovered. Now as our government 

joined forces with these professionals, we were so honoured to 

be working with those who were doing what they could, doing 

their very best saving lives and improving people’s health. 

 

Saskatchewan has a team of health care officials and workers 

and professionals dedicated to pursuing a strategic plan for the 

H1N1 rollout. Now these dedicated health care individuals 

helped our government come up with a plan to vaccinate 

Saskatchewan’s most vulnerable, most susceptible residents 

first. Even as the disappointing news came at the end of 

October that all the provinces would be receiving significantly 

fewer dosages than were expected of the H1N1 vaccine, 

Saskatchewan was still in pretty good shape. 

 

Our chief medical health officer confidently said that our 

province would still have enough vaccine to immunize young 

children and pregnant and postpartum women. Now this was 

our first step of our rollout plan. Basically we would still be 

able to follow the original plan. If not for the strategic and 

thoughtful planning from our health care officials and 

providers, we would not have been so calm, cool, and collected, 

even in the eyes of difficult and frustrating news. 

 

Now as fall arrived and the vaccines were delivered across 

Canada, each province, along with Saskatchewan, began rolling 

out their own vaccination plans. The week of October 26th, the 

delivery of H1N1 vaccine in Saskatchewan began. Now we 

focused foremost on health care workers and remote and 

isolated communities. And on November the 2nd our rollout 

expanded. Vaccination clinics began targeting children six 

months to less than five years of age, pregnant women, and 

women of four weeks post partum. As of November 5th, 

school-aged children from kindergarten to grade 6 were also 

eligible. 

 

Meanwhile many other provinces, like Alberta for example, 

encountered difficulty and criticism as they unleashed their 

H1N1 plan on a first-come, first-served basis. And all of us 

have had the opportunity to see the long lineups on the 

newscasts. 

 

[11:00] 

 

Now as their health care workers were working tirelessly, the 

clinics faced very long lineups, wait times, and charges of 

queue-jumping. Now it quickly began a difficult situation for 

most of those involved in the vaccine rollout. Now that wasn’t 

happening in Saskatchewan. 

 

On October the 29th, The Globe and Mail article noted: 

 

Clinics are already overwhelmed by demand, with some 

healthy Canadians jumping to the front of the queue 

despite the pleas of health-care officials to let those more 

likely to develop complications from the virus get 

vaccinated first. 

 

The vaccine shortage left provincial health officials scrambling 

to visit their plans. So as some Calgarians were waiting 

upwards of six hours in line to receive their shots first, people in 

Saskatchewan were only waiting minutes. Other provinces 

across Canada started following Saskatchewan’s every move as 

we carefully and methodically rolled out our vaccination plan. 

 

Those provinces who decided to open clinics for everyone who 

wanted a vaccination were stepping back and re-evaluating their 

plan and looking to Saskatchewan as a model, and we have our 

dedicated health care workers and professionals to thank for 

that. Now they were realizing the importance of targeting those 

high-risk groups just as Saskatchewan had begun in the 

beginning. 

 

Alberta Premier Ed Stelmach said lineups have been longer in 

Alberta because the province decided to make vaccine available 

for all residents off the bat, not just high-risk groups. And then 

they quickly realized our province wasn’t facing the problems 

they were — no long lineups, no all-day wait times, and also no 



3716 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2009 

queue-jumping. All the while Saskatchewan’s local newspapers 

took notice, and reported on the patience of our province’s 

people and the professionalism of our health care workers. 

 

On October 30th the article in the Regina Leader-Post said, 

“Saskatchewan’s approach — getting the vaccine to high-risk 

groups first, seems to be the right one.” Now the article goes on 

to say that, “It would not be helpful, as the NDP Opposition had 

suggested, to dilute the strategy by opening the vaccine clinic at 

the University of Saskatchewan where several H1N1 cases had 

been reported.” 

 

National papers took notice of our diligence and thoughtful 

rollout plan as well. On October 31st, a Globe and Mail 

editorial said: 

 

. . . one would have hoped that such a methodical 

approach would beget a logical vaccine rollout, one that 

would have, yes, placed high-risk individuals, pregnant 

women, aboriginals, children under five, [and] people 

with chronic lung issues, at the head of the queue. 

 

Articles were noting that Saskatchewan was ahead of the curve 

because our plan caused no extra, unwanted, unnecessary stress. 

Saskatchewan was quickly becoming a national leader. In all 

the frenzy, we continued rolling out our plan, smoothly and 

steadily at a steady pace. We opened up vaccine clinics to other 

high-risk groups based on available vaccine and the most 

current information we have received about the H1N1 

tendencies and patterns. We have followed every move. 

 

Now the week of November 9th, after receiving 60,000 

additional dosage, vaccine clinics were expanded to include 

people under the age of 35 with underlying health problems. 

Now once those additional doses were administered, about 30 

per cent of Saskatchewan’s population is now vaccinated. 

 

Regional health authorities were reporting that there has been a 

good turnout and the uptake of the vaccine has been very high. 

Now our high turnout may be partly due to the Ministry of 

Health covering the cost of antivirals for anyone who presents 

with a prescription to the pharmacy. 

 

As H1N1 second wave continues throughout the province, 

Saskatchewan’s toll-free health information line hired 

additional registered nurses and opened more phone lines to 

field inquiries about the virus and vaccine program. The 

HealthLine — which is available 24 hours a day, seven days a 

week — provides guidance on such topics as how to address flu 

symptoms and when to call the physician or pay a visit to the 

emergency room, and the locations and the time for local H1N1 

vaccination clinics. HealthLine and HealthLine online gives 

people another choice for their health care and improves access 

for basic health information and advice, including vaccination 

clinics. 

 

It was reported in November that calls to the HealthLine 

increased steadily, doubling the average of previous months. 

Staff complements at the HealthLine have been increasing and 

direct messaging systems implemented to deal better with the 

surge of calls related to the H1N1. 

 

It is because of these registered nurses — the friendly voice on 

the other end of the phone — that many questions have been 

answered, fears have been quelled, and anxiety has been eased. 

As they say, knowledge is power and we are working hard to 

empower our communities. 

 

As the rollout underwent, all Saskatchewan residents were 

continually urged to be diligent with infection prevention 

measures such as frequent hand washing, coughing and 

sneezing into the crook of one’s elbow, and staying home if one 

is feeling ill. We also have www.health.gov.sk.ca as constantly 

being updated with the latest up-to-date vaccine clinic 

information. 

 

People are not only taking notice of Saskatchewan’s 

vaccination rollout plan, but they are also applauding our plan. 

And I have stated before, our government gives credit to those 

on the front line, our health care workers. 

 

So when Murray Mandryk, a political columnist for the 

Leader-Post, acknowledged our smooth and relatively painless 

rollout, we again give credit, and give credit where credit is due, 

to our health care providers. Murray Mandryk’s column reads: 

 

So why have things gone better in Saskatchewan than in 

other provinces? Well it largely has to do with a thing 

called process and the fact that the Saskatchewan Party 

government’s health minister wisely . . . listen to those 

with some expertise on how to develop the best protocol, 

rather than listen to those who find it necessary to twist 

. . . health issue into [every] disjointed argument on how 

private delivery of health care would somehow be better. 

 

Now we also applaud those men and women who are working 

hard to make our rollout a continuous success right here every 

day. We have complete faith in our health care providers. They 

are working diligently to roll up their sleeve, after sleeve, until 

everyone who wants a vaccination has a vaccination. 

 

We are looking around this great province and we see our 

people living healthy and happy lifestyles. We will surely 

remember, over and over again, the valiant efforts of the hard 

working men and women in our health care system. To all of 

you, we are forever grateful. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the motion is: 

 

That this Assembly commends the provincial health care 

officials and health care providers of Saskatchewan for 

the strategic delivery of the H1N1 vaccine. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion presented to the Assembly by the 

member from Regina Qu’Appelle Valley reads: 

 

That this Assembly commends the provincial health care 

officials and health care providers of Saskatchewan for 

the strategic delivery of the H1N1 vaccine. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There is no doubt that 

the people who provided the service for H1N1 delivery have 



November 19, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3717 

been . . . It’s been commendable and they have worked above 

and beyond the call. But before we applaud ourselves too soon, 

there are many things that have to be addressed in this debate, 

as well as after in other forums. 

 

There are several issues that cannot be ignored that happened 

during this, and are still happening because we’re not done yet. 

And I had this brought home to me very quickly the other day 

when my nephew’s baby was taken to the pediatric intensive 

care unit, unable to breathe. So we simply can’t rest on our 

laurels any time too soon. 

 

One of the first things that was really apparent about our 

delivery here in Saskatchewan is that it was extremely 

confusing to everybody who was out there waiting. And 

somehow or other, what we knew in April didn’t translate well 

to an on-the-ground plan in September. And it certainly added 

to the angst and the uncertainty and certainly the worry and 

anxiety of people out there who did not know where they would 

fall in this sequence of vaccinations. 

 

And it didn’t get very much better for quite a while. The 

websites were inaccurate. They were certainly not consistent, 

and people who were actually wondering about different 

questions that affected them in particular had nowhere to go for 

those answers. One of the things I stressed in an early press 

conference was that we should have a dedicated hotline so 

people could phone and ask the particular questions. 

 

I have two files of people’s names and questions who have 

asked me what the answer should be to their particular question. 

Some of these questions you wouldn’t want to ask publicly 

because you wouldn’t want to raise people’s concerns, but there 

has to be a way to answer those questions. And many, many, 

many of those people who emailed me, phoned me, and 

contacted me personally did not have a way to have those 

questions answered. 

 

So there has to be at the end of this, at the end of this H1N1 

episode here, this pandemic, we need to have a way to look at 

what we learned. And I hope what we learned is that we need to 

start our communications early and get them consistent and 

have them delivered across the province from a central voice, 

and not leave it up to every individual health district to do 

whatever they have decided at their local level. That really 

confused people. Not only did it confuse them, it really made 

them angry that a neighbouring district could have this done at 

this time, where in their district they could not. 

 

One of the many, many things that was brought up in questions 

that people had and asked me was the high risk that some 

people live with — people that had heart transplants, people 

who are living with partial lungs. All those people were pushed 

to the back, further back than they thought was certainly 

necessary. They looked at who was getting some of the 

vaccines that were given out sooner than what they were told. 

They had no way . . . And they were very, very, very scared 

because their particular conditions, like a heart transplant, 

you’re immunosuppressed. They were worried that they would 

die as they waited in line. 

 

One of the main problems, not only for when they would get 

their vaccine, one of the things that was brought up was that 

they had to stand in line with a great deal of the public. And that 

put them at even higher risk. There was certainly suggestions 

and certainly made by different physicians that because they 

dealt with people, these doctors dealt with people who were 

very high risk, that there should have been some mechanism for 

those doctors to deliver the vaccine out of their offices. 

 

And I do know that the argument was that the vaccine had to be 

stored at a certain temperature. It had to be transported a certain 

way. It had to be mixed and delivered within a certain time if it 

was mixed because each vial contained 10 doses. I know all that 

and the people know all that. 

 

But the doctors had those patients’ names on file. There should 

be some mechanism in the future when we deal with a 

pandemic — which we will likely be doing again — that we 

should have some mechanism to allow individual doctors who 

identify patients that are very high risk, allow them to have 

some of the vaccine. 

 

This would certainly make a difference in many, many, many of 

the files I have for people who had their individual problems 

that were not addressed. And they were certainly afraid from 

their day-to-day living. They could not go out. They could not 

attend events. They could not work. They were told to stay 

home, frankly, by their doctor because they were at such high 

risk. Yet they were not addressed in a timely manner. 

 

Many of the things, the questions that came out were the 

firefighters. They were attending scenes with other heath 

providers who were already vaccinated. And why weren’t they? 

Same with the police. Some of the strange things — a pilot 

taking nurses up north for the nurses to vaccinate the people up 

north, couldn’t be vaccinated himself. So we seem to have had a 

fair amount of rigidity in our processes that didn’t allow for 

individual circumstances or group circumstances, like very 

high-risk people. 

 

[11:15] 

 

And there were certainly concerns in the classrooms and in the 

schools. Teachers were not happy and parents were not happy 

with the way the school situation was addressed. K to 6 

[kindergarten to grade 6] in the same school as 7 and 8, the 

questions from the parents were, what about the 7 and 8’s? 

They’re in the same school as the K to 6. What about the 

teachers who are teaching in those classrooms and exposed? 

What about the teachers’ aides? None of that was addressed. 

 

And granted we had a protocol and we kept to it, but there were 

certainly questions that were asked and have still not been 

answered. 

 

So when we do our review of what we learned, we need to have 

all those things addressed so that we are better prepared next 

time because there’s going to be a next time. We’re better 

prepared; we don’t have people who have gone, sort of, 

underground to voice their complaints. They think that there’s 

no one to speak for them because they are speaking . . . They’re 

trying to save themselves or their family, their immediate 

family, and there’s no one listening to them because we’ve, sort 

of, gone back behind the protocol and the process and have 

turned off their concerns. That isn’t fair, Mr. Speaker. 



3718 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2009 

We do have some of the young children . . . It’s been too late 

for the caregivers of young children. That came on too late. 

Another thing we should have learned. We only vaccinated 

children from six months to under five years. But then it was 

determined that parents of children under six months were 

bringing home the vaccine so they needed to be vaccinated. 

Another thing we’ve learned. We should make sure we put that 

in our file. 

 

And the geography of when the vaccines were available. That 

was really a very hard thing for people to accept, that because 

of where they lived determined how or when they got the 

vaccine. And there was so much confusion about, could you go 

to another district? And if you got there, then their processes or 

protocols were different. We need to have a consistent, 

across-the-board standard when this happens again. Another 

thing we have to know that we’ve learned, and we have to build 

on what we’ve learned. 

 

One of the things that I certainly think was missing is that we 

should have had a dedicated hotline up right away. I’ve talked 

to nurses who have been called, and this isn’t what they do. 

This isn’t a nurse in a primary health centre. They’ve been 

called for questions. They felt that they were basically 

abandoned with having to answer all the questions that could 

have better been answered on a dedicated hotline. 

 

The staffing of the HealthLine were stressed and overstressed 

because the questions coming in to them were basically flu 

related. And other questions of other health problems were 

taking second, third place. We could’ve avoided that by having 

a dedicated hotline. 

 

I know some of the districts took up another suggestion that I 

made in my late September press conferences to triage people 

away from the general emergency. There was way too many 

people coming in to emergency departments because they had 

no other place to go. And we’ve said to people, come forward if 

anything like this is happening or if you feel worried — because 

this flu attacks quickly and progresses quickly. So come 

forward. 

 

Well when they came forward, they could only come to 

emergency departments, and if we had triaged them off of the 

regular emergency departments it would have saved our 

emergency departments a lot of stress and overwork. And a lot 

of the backup in hospitals that eventually started cancelling 

elective surgeries was because of people coming into 

emergency. We need to learn that and do that better. 

 

We also need to, as I’ve said, please be flexible. People that 

called me had no answer except no, that’s not how we’re doing 

it. That doesn’t work for a person who has a heart transplant or 

is living with a partial lung or is waiting for a kidney transplant 

or is diabetic and is 64 and has all kinds of other problems. It 

doesn’t work for women who are trying to get pregnant and 

don’t know whether they should or not continue that trying 

because, if they get the vaccine, then what? There’s no answers 

for those questions unless you have a dedicated hotline and 

people staffing it who know the answers. 

 

And it certainly isn’t a good idea to expect everyone to line up 

en masse. There has to be a way to deliver the vaccine for 

people who can’t stand in line in a great big public building. I 

had a woman tell me her mother — even though she was 

certainly compromised — she could bring a walker and have a 

chair there, but she had to go to the bathroom every five 

minutes. She couldn’t stand in line in a major public facility. 

There has to be some way to address all the anomalies that 

we’ve seen with this. And we hope we have learned from that. 

 

The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. I recognize 

the member from Moose Jaw North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

commend the health officials and health care providers in this 

province and appreciate the responsibility that they have 

accepted in face of the H1N1 pandemic. 

 

Pandemics have been a devastating fact on humanity over the 

centuries, and I guess perhaps it’s okay to be a little afraid. 

Millions have died. As we look back in history, the first 

influenza pandemic was recorded in 1580, and since then 

influenza pandemics occur every 10 to 30 years. History has not 

been kind, but it has been educational. 

 

The Black Death between 1348 and 1350 was one of the 

deadliest pandemics in human history. The Black Death killed 

between 30 and 60 per cent of Europeans’ population, and it 

took 150 years for Europe’s population to regain. 

 

The Asiatic flu in 1889-1890, about 1 million people died in 

that pandemic. And I remember my grandfather, who was a boy 

in England, talking about it. The Spanish flu of 1918-1919 

affected another estimated one-third of the world’s population. I 

remember my grandmother talking about that, as neighbours 

died while she was pregnant with my father. Some estimated 

the total that were killed in that pandemic was 1 million 

worldwide. There was more deaths than the entire toll of the 

World War I. 

 

The Asian flu of 1957-58 caused about 2 million deaths 

globally. The Hong Kong flu of 1968-69 killed an estimated 1 

million people worldwide. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as pandemics occur every 10 to 30 years, it wasn’t 

surprising — but still somewhat alarming — when the H1N1 

outbreak was first observed in Mexico last April. The Mexico 

government reacted appropriately and closed most of Mexico 

City’s public and private offices and facilities to try to contain 

the spread of the virus. The actions of the Mexican government 

are to be commended; however, the virus quickly spread 

globally. And on June 11 the World Health Organization 

declared the outbreak as a pandemic. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at that time our government was alertly preparing 

to contain the pandemic threat of H1N1. Fortunately the 

summer months presented an opportunity for research to plan, 

anticipate, and get prepared. As the Canadian government 

ordered vaccine, the health organizations and officials were 

devising a plan to research, to educate, and to contain the H1N1 

virus. The provincial health care officials and health care 

providers began working with the health regions to be prepared. 

 

H1N1 is a new virus, largely an unknown, and more of a 

moving target, so to speak. Being prepared is the ultimate 



November 19, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3719 

importance. However, being prepared for exactly what was 

somewhat of an unknown. But, Mr. Speaker, the provincial 

health care officials and health care providers worked together, 

devising a pandemic plan for H1N1 vaccinations for all 

Saskatchewan’s residents. Health care officials and health care 

providers worked diligently to be ready. 

 

In my own constituency earlier this fall I met with Cheryl 

Craig, the CEO [chief executive officer] of the Five Hills 

Health Region. She talked a lot about the plan that they were 

putting in effect. I felt assured at the end of our discussions that 

we were well-placed to expect the unexpected and be ready for 

the second wave of H1N1. Just for an example, at the Moose 

Jaw Hospital, among other things, a separate entrance had been 

opened for H1N1 cases so that not to affect other sections of the 

hospital. The virus is here. However, our best efforts are in 

place to contain it and eventually to eliminate it. 

 

In Saskatchewan every resident will have the opportunity to be 

vaccinated against the H1N1 influenza virus during the coming 

weeks, all without costs to them. The plan is in place, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s a good plan, the Saskatchewan plan, and it’s 

working. Health regions have begun flu clinics for groups 

considered to be at high risk of complications from the H1N1 

influenza. There are no long lineups as in other provinces. 

People are not being sent home without being vaccinated. 

 

Saskatchewan health care officials and providers continue their 

plan as they target high-risk groups. The reason for targeting 

high-risk groups rather than an aim for a mass immunization 

plan is twofold. First Saskatchewan, like all provinces, is 

receiving H1N1 vaccine in batches as vaccines become 

available. The second reason for targeting is that health care 

providers want to be sure that high-risk groups were the first to 

receive the vaccination. Flu clinics for high-risk people are 

organized in priorities. These are advancing according to the 

plan as vaccines do become available. 

 

While some provinces have been overwhelmed by demands for 

the H1N1 vaccination, the Saskatchewan model is looked upon 

as an effective, efficient model and is being adapted in other 

provinces. The success of the vaccination program can only be 

attributed to the skills, the professionalism, and the hard work 

of Saskatchewan health officials and health workers. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, in a rush to judgment, the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview is quoted in the Leader-Post as saying, 

“There are a lot of questions that need answers really soon even 

if the public in your poll says they are confident that we are 

going to be prepared.” Mr. Speaker, these are the words of 

someone who has little faith in our health care providers and 

workers. The member from Saskatoon Eastview also used the 

rhetoric of an alarmist in an attempt to score political points by 

saying that she is stunned, shocked, worried about this 

government’s response to the H1N1. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me say this. Our health officials and providers 

have demonstrated they perform their jobs with the utmost care 

and professionalism. Fortunately for the people of 

Saskatchewan, we have the best health care officials and health 

care providers in the country. These health care officials and 

providers are immune to the political games played in this 

House. And their handling of this, the largest pandemic 

vaccination process in the history of this province, is nothing 

less than superb. 

 

Saskatchewan health care officials and providers continue to be 

successful as they target high-risk groups, Mr. Speaker, rather 

than offer mass vaccinations. And during the coming weeks, 

every Saskatchewan resident will have the opportunity to be 

vaccinated against the H1N1 influenza virus. 

 

This is a serious situation, Mr. Speaker. We have to work 

together as a province. We have to work together, because 

influenza pandemics can be scary. They can be deadly. But with 

the help of all of the citizens of this province and the help of the 

workers in our health care field, we can win this battle. It won’t 

be easy. There’s a lot to be considered. There’s a lot to be done 

and we need the co-operation of everyone. 

 

The health care providers have put in clinics for the people of 

Saskatchewan and are conducting them according. And it’s the 

best system that has been put in place across Canada. Everyone 

is looking at us as a model, and it is because our health care 

providers have done their work. They have been prepared. 

They’ve known what could be coming, and they are prepared 

for it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

High risk is being protected. It is very important that we do the 

plan according to the plan and as the vaccines become 

available, Mr. Speaker. And they ought to be commended for 

the work that they have done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, pandemics can be frightening. They are 

frightening. They’ve caused millions of deaths over the 

centuries, but we in Saskatchewan are prepared. We’re facing 

the difficulty. Mr. Speaker, if we have learned anything, if we 

have learned anything from history it is this: that pandemics are 

not to be taken lightly in any way, and the best is to be prepared 

the best way we can in every respect. And our health care 

providers have done that. The provincial health care officials 

and the health care providers have done an exceptional job in 

the preparation and delivery of the H1N1 vaccination. And, Mr. 

Speaker, they are to be commended for all their efforts in this 

plan. Thank you very much. 

 

[11:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to join in the debate today and to offer some 

compliments and to salute the good work of the provincial 

health care officials and health care providers in this province 

for the strategic delivery of the H1N1 vaccine. 

 

No one in this House disputes the diligent efforts and the long 

hours and the hard work put in on the part of health care 

professionals in Saskatchewan, both in the . . . you know, 

particularly in the front lines out there delivering the vaccine, 

but also in terms of the planners within the Department of 

Health and the work that they’ve done in coordination and 

leadership of the province-wide effort. 

 

So as to the letter of the motion: 



3720 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2009 

That this Assembly commends the provincial health care 

officials and health care providers of Saskatchewan for 

the strategic delivery of the H1N1 vaccine. 

 

We on this side I don’t think have any problems with the black 

letter of that and certainly the spirit of the resolution. 

 

What we do have some frustration with, Mr. Speaker, is the 

way that efforts made on the part of the opposition to ask for 

clarity, to ask, you know, valuable questions in terms of the 

rollouts, the way that is derided by the other side as somehow 

playing politics with a serious issue. And so again, Mr. Speaker, 

we don’t think asking questions like, to quote from our health 

care critic, the hon. member from Saskatoon Eastview, in terms 

of saying things like: 

 

When will Saskatchewan take delivery of the vaccine and 

how many doses will . . . [Saskatchewan] be getting? 

Where will it be administered and by whom? Is there a 

priority list of recipients or is it a first come, first served 

[basis]? Is there a plan . . . to replace health care providers 

if they become too ill from the virus? Are there specific 

plans for the vaccine to reach remote areas of the 

province and First Nations? Junor asked [to quote from a 

press release], These are important questions that the 

people of the province deserve answers to. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the . . . One of the jobs of 

an opposition to do is to, you know, ask those important 

questions. And particularly in the circumstance around the 

H1N1, the pandemic, this is a time when, as the member from 

Regina Qu’Appelle Valley has said, knowledge is indeed 

power. And in terms of communicating that knowledge to the 

people of Saskatchewan, we want this government to be as 

crystal clear in that communication of the knowledge as is 

possible. 

 

So when questions are raised with us as the official opposition, 

we’re certainly going to raise them in the forums available to us 

to ensure that we are getting that clarity on the process around 

H1N1 to ensure that we do have details to present to the people 

of the province, so that they can take that power over the 

securing of their own health and health care delivery. 

 

I guess that there are a few things I want to make sure in my 

brief time up in this debate, Mr. Speaker. I want to particularly 

pay homage to the work of the Chief Medical Health Officer, 

Dr. Moira McKinnon. This is a public health official that has 

provided unquestioned leadership on this file despite, you 

know, succumbing to the illness herself, soldiered on through 

that, and is a real model of diligence and thoughtful public 

health delivery. 

 

I know that she leads the team that has worked tirelessly to 

ensure that these efforts around addressing H1N1, both in terms 

of the delivery of care but also in terms of the delivery of the 

communications, to ensure that people have the knowledge. 

They’ve worked diligently and tirelessly on this file. So we 

really want to salute them for those efforts despite, you know, a 

very challenging circumstance. 

 

And I guess I want to go on record as an MLA to say that we’re 

glad that the government did pay attention to the professionals 

in this regard, that they did listen to expert advice, and that they 

did let the health care officials work in terms of best practice 

and work in terms of the way that they saw best fit to deliver 

this care to the province. So we hope that that respect for advice 

from people that know the files the best, that respect for advice 

from people on the front lines in the delivery of health care, we 

hope that that tendency continues on, Mr. Chair of Committees. 

 

I also note that Dr. David Butler-Jones, the chief official for 

public health — again he’s one of the predecessors for Dr. 

McKinnon in public health in Saskatchewan — gone on to do a 

good job nationally. And I think nationally you have a fairly 

clear example of what happens when you get perhaps 

miscommunication, perhaps a poor connection between the 

officials on the one hand and the political oversight on the 

other. And certainly there have been issues raised on the 

national stage in terms of the rollout of the response to H1N1 

and I think — I hope — that we’ve learned some of the lessons 

from that federal experience here in Saskatchewan. But 

certainly the work of Dr. David Butler-Jones, again having done 

tremendous work in the province of Saskatchewan, going on to 

the federal stage to do a good job given the circumstances in 

this instance, we look on that with great interest. 

 

I think that in Saskatchewan we also benefited from the 

experience in Manitoba. And so I want to salute the leadership 

nationally on this file by then Premier Gary Doer who, at the 

premiers’ gathering earlier in the summer, said that, you know, 

this is an issue that is the Mack truck coming around the corner 

and that people have to be prepared, because when there’s an 

emergency like this, emergency preparedness is key to the good 

response. So again I’m glad that there were leaders like Premier 

Gary Doer out there making sure that the seriousness of this 

issue was well communicated and that people were responding 

appropriately. 

 

I also want to communicate our congratulations from this side 

of the House, and perhaps from members opposite as well, 

congratulations to the people like those on Cowessess First 

Nation and the good work of Chief Gordon Lerat, people like 

band manager Alvin Delorme Jr. and the work that they’ve 

done in terms of the response on Cowessess to the H1N1 threats 

— being held up as a model in terms of emergency 

preparedness. And the response that they put forward certainly 

has been examined on the national stage, and we’re very proud 

of the work that they did on Cowessess. 

 

And we’re very proud as well of the work that the Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations have done in terms of working 

with the members of the federation in terms of ensuring that 

their membership, that their chiefs, that their First Nations are 

well acquainted. 

 

And we also note with great interest, Mr. Chair of Committees, 

that FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations] felt the 

need to go forward with their own call centre to ensure that 

there was good information being provided to the First Nations 

in this province as the health questions came in for them on 

H1N1. 

 

So I guess in the accounting of how things . . . You know, we’re 

not through this yet, Mr. Chair of Committees. But we await the 

accounting of the costs of this preparedness effort, of this 



November 19, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3721 

response to H1N1, and we’ll be interested to see if there are any 

dollars that flow in terms of helping to ensure that we’ve got a 

good response across the piece in this province for all First 

Nations and for all citizens of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I’d be remiss if I didn’t bring forward a call that I’d 

received on the weekend from an elder in the city of Regina 

who’s a member of a First Nation, who’s got diabetes fairly 

severely, who’s in a wheelchair, who’s had a leg amputated, 

and who’s been a leader for her community and for the people 

for many, many years. And as you can imagine, Mr. Chair of 

Committees, in terms of getting to the clinic to get the vaccine, 

she got to the clinic, they said that her underlying health 

concerns did not meet the criteria so they had sent her on her 

way, and without informing her of when she should be coming 

back. 

 

And again, we realize that this is a massive response effort 

that’s called on. We’ve got people working tremendous hours, 

but in terms of the concern that this individual had about the 

way that her case was being responded to and, you know, on the 

face of it, some very valid concerns being presented, we know 

that in terms of this massive response to H1N1 there’s room for 

improvement, to be sure. 

 

So we await the debrief; we await the accounting. But above all, 

Mr. Chair of Committees, we know that this has reached into 

many lives in often a tragic way, and we salute the work of our 

front-line health professionals and the health care system in 

responding to this crisis. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from Lloydminster. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair of 

Committees. It’s my pleasure to speak on the H1N1 rollout and 

what I would call an admirable job done by Moira McKinnon, 

our chief medical health officer, and the staff and the team that 

she assembled around her. 

 

We first heard about H1N1 here in the spring. Really it came 

out of nowhere and people weren’t sure what was going on. 

People didn’t know if it was a new disease, what it was. Very 

quickly — and I think it’s a testament really to the society we 

live in and the fact that we have the scientists that can identify a 

disease very quickly. They can come up with a vaccine in a 

matter of months which is relevant to the disease, and within a 

span of several months that vaccine can be tested. You know, I 

think that that is maybe the crux of this whole situation here. 

The expectations of our health care system are phenomenal and 

I think in this case it pushed it to the limit but, Mr. Speaker, in a 

tough situation I think that the members of Saskatchewan’s 

health organizations, the staff that work here in Saskatchewan 

have really worked admirably. 

 

The balance I speak of is to do a mass vaccination, Mr. Speaker, 

to almost every member of society potentially, by the time the 

rollout is complete. If that vaccine protects people from the 

offending disease, that is great. If there is some hidden 

component that the testing on the front end wasn’t substantial 

enough, the ramifications of that could be very devastating to 

society, Mr. Speaker. So I know health organizations, 

companies such as GlaxoSmithKline which is the supplier here 

in Canada, did as extensive and exhaustive of a study on the 

side effects of their potential vaccine as they possibly could to 

ensure the safety of the people that were taking it, Mr. Speaker. 

Doing that pushed back their release date to a point which made 

it very challenging for the provinces in Canada, and I would 

think jurisdictions around the world, to get it pushed out before 

flu season hit. 

 

And that is why it was essential that Saskatchewan had a 

coherent plan, that that plan was based on facts, on details, and 

for a purpose. And I can stand here today with the view of 

hindsight — we’re still in the middle of it — but I can with 

hindsight look at the start of the rollout and say, you know, 

there was a lot of pressure to cave in, to throw our hands in the 

air and go willy-nilly. But our health organization, our chief 

medical officer and her staff, did the right thing. They had a 

very good and well-thought-out plan and they stuck to it. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the pressure to do otherwise was great. I 

know a young lady that has two small kids and she came to me 

and said, in Alberta they’re doing everybody. You know, why 

can’t I take my kids right now and get them vaccinated? Now 

this was in the first week of the rollout when health 

professionals in Saskatchewan were getting their vaccines. And 

it was very clearly stated from Saskatchewan Health that, in the 

case of a pandemic, the people that need to be the front line are 

the health care workers and that they would be done first so that 

as this disease progressed, as the flu season came in, that core 

group would be there to support the rest of society. 

 

Where in Alberta, lineups were huge. I knew people in Alberta 

that were my age that would go in and get a flu shot before it 

was available in Saskatchewan for my own kids. And I got 

several calls on that because my riding’s right on the border. 

And what I would express to people is, you know, this is a very 

difficult situation for everyone but we will be judged in the 

future on how we act today. If this thing becomes a devastating 

pandemic and it turns out that we haven’t done the most critical 

groups first, we will be judged very harshly. 

 

And I think that we have seen in those jurisdictions where it 

was open, wide open to the public off the bat very . . . I don’t 

want to say very quickly. But with some sober second thought 

and maybe a view of the good work that was done here in 

Saskatchewan, we have been viewed as a leader, and our model 

has been copied by virtually everyone. 

 

And I’ve heard this morning . . . I knew that we had done an 

admirable job and are still working towards our ultimate goal of 

supplying vaccine to everyone in the province, but that Canada 

is one of the leaders, if not the leader in the world, for the 

rollout of this vaccine. And in Canada, Saskatchewan is the 

leader. 

 

[11:45] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that puts us pretty much in a world context 

where we’re in maybe the best country for proportion of people 

that have got the vaccine. And in Canada, Saskatchewan is 

really a shining example of a structured, well-thought-out, 

methodical plan. And my credit goes out to all those involved 

that stuck to their guns at the start of this, Mr. Speaker. 

 



3722 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2009 

Now I would like to, Mr. Speaker, take this opportunity to bring 

up where some of the pressure was coming from — some 

justified but some not justified as whether what we had laid out 

at the start was the right thing to do or not, Mr. Speaker. And I 

don’t have to look very far to where, I think, maybe some 

inappropriate comments came from. In the speech we heard 

earlier from the member from Saskatoon Eastview, and I’m 

quoting from her — I jotted it down as she was speaking here 

not 20 minutes ago — that she had questions from people that 

you would not want to ask publicly because you wouldn’t want 

to raise those alarms in the public. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that flies somewhat in contrast to some of 

the questions she asked here in this very legislature. On October 

28th, this was in her question. Now “This raises the questions of 

a pandemic . . . [racing] across campus . . .” Now she’s worried 

about alarmist statements, Mr. Speaker? She’s raising the 

concern that “This raises the question of a pandemic . . . 

[racing] across campus for a full month before the vaccination 

. . . [are ready and] available for the faculty and . . . [staff].” 

 

Mr. Speaker, that, I think, is inflammatory statements that could 

very well, in her words, alarm the public. She wasn’t satisfied 

with that on the 28th of October, Mr. Speaker. So on the 29th 

she again brought it up and said, “Yesterday I asked the 

minister if, in the face of a full-blown pandemic . . . the 

University of Saskatchewan students [would] be able to . . . 

[address] the H1N1 vaccination before November 24th.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, twice, two consecutive days, she raised the spectre 

of a full-blown pandemic, then was advocating that we give up 

on our well-thought-out plan and go willy-nilly, chasing our 

tails, Mr. Speaker. Now we’re talking about extremely serious 

subject matter here where the health care of society — of 

society, Mr. Speaker — is under concern. And we’re having the 

Health critic advocating giving up on a well-thought-out plan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to bring into this debate, just for 

context, Mr. Speaker. The member that was asking those 

questions is a registered nurse, has served the people of 

Saskatchewan as a nurse and knows the health care system and 

the importance of sticking to a plan and getting people 

vaccinated, Mr. Speaker. Most nurses would understand that 

health care professionals, nurses included, are the front lines. 

That if this thing were to go sideways and were to become a 

disastrous pandemic — which I think that we’re grateful seeing 

that through the good work as well as a little bit of luck we are 

going to potentially avoid that — but if that were to have 

happened, having our nurses vaccinated would be key. Having 

our doctors, having the support staff in our health care centres 

vaccinated would be fundamental to getting through. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, looking through a couple other questions 

that I thought may not have met the criteria of being a 

reasonable and responsible debate, Mr. Speaker. The member 

on October 28th, no, on October 27th, Mr. Speaker, and I quote 

from the critic of Health, “Today a caller into the Sask 

HealthLine was put on hold for almost 30 minutes . . .” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when asked in a scrum afterwards who this 

caller was, it was a staffer. At the start of a pandemic in 

Saskatchewan as it’s rolling out, that member thinks it’s 

appropriate, a former nurse thinks it’s appropriate to have a 

staff member call and tie up the HealthLine. 

 

Now there are people with true concerns about this issue, 

potentially about many other things, that need to talk to a nurse 

on the HealthLine. And just so she can ask a question in 

question period, she has a staffer tie up the HealthLine, Mr. 

Speaker. I think that is inappropriate. Now I think it’s 

inappropriate and I think a nurse ought to perform at a higher 

level, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think that it’s important that we look at where we are now and 

going forward. I think we’ve shone enough light on what may 

be alarmist questions at the most inappropriate time for the 

people of Saskatchewan to make a rational plan moving 

forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I would just like to take my remaining moments to say that I 

have had a lot of interaction with the health care system 

recently. I have two little girls. They’ve both been vaccinated. I 

have a wife that has asthma. She has got her vaccination, Mr. 

Speaker. And I know there was a lot of apprehension, because 

she was listening to the news that the lineups were going to be 

big. 

 

In Lloydminster on the Alberta side, there were massive lineups 

and people were turned away. There was a lot of fear in 

Lloydminster community that when Saskatchewan started their 

rollout, it would be a similar situation. And it was a great relief 

to me as a father, Mr. Speaker, that when my little girls went for 

their vaccinations they stood in line for about 15 minutes and it 

was a good system. There was forms printed off ahead of time 

and, Mr. Speaker, I really want to applaud the members of our 

health care system. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

and I appreciate the opportunity to rise today to enter into this 

debate on this important motion. I think that it’s an important 

one that . . . I may be a little premature and I know that we’re 

still in the midst of the pandemic, and we’re not quite sure how 

it’s all playing out. And I do think on one hand, though, the 

sentiment behind it is worthy. And we do think the health care 

officials, provincial health care work officials and providers are 

doing an outstanding job in many aspects. But as my colleagues 

on this side have said, that until there’s a debrief, a complete 

debrief and lessons learned, then we can bring out the 

congratulatory remarks. 

 

I think that this is an important topic, though, because for 

Canadians and people right around the world who’ve been 

watching the news, these are the stories that we remember. And 

I think it’s important that we have a discussion around this 

because I do take exception to some of the comments that have 

been made from the government side, a comment like 

willy-nilly. 

 

You know, as a teacher, and I still am a teacher, and I know that 

when you’re dealing with crisis situations where people are 

feeling high anxiety, that I don’t think there is such a thing as a 

bad question. It’s how we deal with the questions. I don’t think 

that you dismiss people out of hand and say, listen, that’s the 



November 19, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3723 

wrong question; you don’t ask that question right now. We 

know that was the old way of doing things, but I think a more 

appropriate way is understand that there’s anxiety expressing 

itself in all sorts of different ways. 

 

And on this side, I hope those folks on that side get questions. I 

don’t know if they do. They don’t seem to respond in a way to 

say that they kind of have asked those questions to the minister 

and to the right officials. But on this side, we have our certain 

channels that people expect us to use. It’s our role as opposition 

to hold the government and the public service accountable and 

make sure it’s transparent. 

 

And whether the member from Moose Jaw North likes it or not, 

that’s our job. And we will do a very good job of it. They can 

try to make us not ask those questions. They can try to push us 

around and not ask those questions. But we will ask the 

questions that people are asking us because that’s our job, and 

we take it very seriously. You know, and I have some 

questions. And I’ll talk about my own particular sector with the 

CBOs, but I’ll get to that. 

 

But I know people do have a lot of anxiety, and I know that the 

member for Saskatoon Eastview has championed the causes of 

many people who have anxious moments thinking about this. 

And we think about the long lineups in Calgary, and that 

thankfully didn’t happen in Calgary . . . or happen here. It 

happened in Calgary. 

 

But we had anxious moments. I know the folks up north, there 

was a weekend where people were wondering, what’s going to 

happen? Where was that information? And the information 

wasn’t right on the spot. We had questions about the website — 

what was happening to the website? 

 

Now it’s our job to ask that question. And I know there was 

high anxiety right across Canada. I think it was the summer 

when Health Canada, in preparation for the pandemic, actually 

sent out body bags to Manitoba, created huge anxiety. Huge 

anxiety. Not a good thing. We have to learn from those lessons. 

And of course some of the deaths that we have heard, we think 

of the young boy, the hockey player in Toronto. 

 

And as parents, we wonder, the tragic events, are there lessons 

from that? Are there lessons? And of course the young scientist, 

the up-and-coming scientist — I think it was 38 years old — 

actually there was a Saskatoon connection. Tragic, tragic. How 

could that happen? How can that happen? So I think we’re all 

looking forward to when this passes, when this pandemic is 

over, and we can look back and have a debrief and say, so what 

are the lessons learned? What could we do better? It’s so 

important to do that. 

 

And so I do take exception to the fact of saying, as the member 

from Regina Qu’Appelle Valley would say, have complete 

faith. I think you should have faith. You should believe in your 

professional health officials, and we do. But I think they should 

be prepared to hear our questions and should not be offended 

when we do have questions. We’re trying to do this and make 

sure this rolls out as smoothly as possible. But our job as 

opposition is to have those questions. 

 

So I take exception to comments like willy-nilly and addressing 

this as if it’s in the past tense. It’s not over. It’s not over. We 

hope it’s well on its way to being over. But thinking about this 

as if it’s done; it’s not done. And clearly we have much more 

work to be done. 

 

A couple of points I would like to raise, and I did not hear 

answers from the government side on this. And it really sort of 

focuses on the idea that this is all about the health officials and 

the health workers and vaccinations, and that’s the only thing 

that we had to do and then the whole thing would be solved. 

Clearly there’s many different layers to it. 

 

And as the critic responsible for CBOs, I actually raised these 

questions through a press release. And the press release came 

out October 2, and it was entitled “NDP questions H1N1 

preparedness in CBO sector.” I had several questions raised to 

me from the CBO workers. And some of them were around, 

what would happen in group homes? Was there information 

about what would happen in group homes — both in terms of 

workers being sent home if they felt they had H1N1, or if they 

were required to stay in the group home if they were 

quarantined? There wasn’t information flowing about what 

would happen. And that was a particular issue in rural 

Saskatchewan where many group homes are, and there just isn’t 

the workforce to support the kind of situations that might have 

arised. 

 

The other issue that the CBO sector, the folks raised — and, 

you know, I raise petitions every once in a while about wages in 

the CBO sector and some of the working conditions those folks 

have — the questions they asked me were around sick pay. 

Many of these people are dealing with low wages and in having 

a tough time making ends meet. Many of us, and I’m in this 

group, who have a very good sick pay arrangement as teachers, 

we get 20 days when we start the first day of work each year. 

So we can accumulate sick days quite easily. 

 

People who work in the CBO sector, they don’t have that. They 

may have a day and a quarter, a day and a half per month. And 

they have to work that month before they get the day and a half, 

and they accumulate it that way. It was going to be a challenge 

for a CBO, for the worker themselves who should be staying 

home if they were sick, what do they do? How do they make 

the ends meet? And also for the CBO organization themselves, 

well what do they do to make sure the job gets done? 

 

Now I want to take a minute, I know this time goes by pretty 

quick. And the other issue that I wanted to raise, and the other 

thing was CBO sectors, making sure that they were getting 

vaccinations in a timely fashion too, that they were considered 

priorities as well. And I know many weren’t. And I know it’s a 

tough job deciding who’s on the priority lists or not. But many 

of them felt, because they were working with people, they 

should have been considered a priority. 

 

The other issue, question I wanted to raise was particularly 

relevant to those in social services, families, especially those 

with young children who receive social assistance. Somebody 

had thought of a very innovative idea that many of us take for 

granted, that we have in our medicine chests different things, 

like Tylenol. That if we’re not feeling well, we can take a little 

Tylenol and control our fever. And little things like that, that we 

take for granted. Or even having a thermometer to know if we 



3724 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2009 

have a fever. 

 

Unfortunately those families who are on social assistance 

cannot receive any benefits like that. And I think it would have 

been something, when we do the debrief, I’ll raise this with the 

minister. Is there circumstances where we can see that they get 

kits, like a thermometer, a bottle of Tylenol, something like 

that? Not very much, but all of us, many of us take for granted 

that we have in our medicine cabinets at home, but people on 

social assistance don’t have access to. They just don’t have that 

cash. And if they do, and if it’s outdated, if the medicine is 

stale-dated, it becomes a real challenge. So there are some real 

questions. 

 

And I do think that while in many ways this motion is in order, 

and I do think the health care officials and health providers have 

done a great job, that I cannot support the motion because I do 

think it’s a little early yet to do it. And I do think that in fact if 

we were to congratulate people, I think it should be the whole 

provincial government. Because many people are working right 

across the board to make sure public servants are doing their job 

day in and day out to serve the people of Saskatchewan — led 

by health care officials, led by health care officials for sure. 

 

But let’s not just keep it into silos. Too often we think of health 

care issues in silos. And this may be an example of that because 

this goes beyond just vaccinations. It goes beyond how do we 

serve the public day in and day out? How do we take care of 

families day in and day out? 

 

And so with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know there’ll be lots of 

questions here today, and I have a few myself. But I do want to 

let you know that I will be voting against this motion. And with 

that, with the points I’ve raised, I thank you very much. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — We move now to the 

question session. I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair of 

Committees. Many Saskatchewan residents are concerned and 

have questions about H1N1. A good source of answers is a 

health care provider because these workers have first-hand 

knowledge and training to answer such questions. 

 

But too often the members opposite believe that they have all 

the answers and that they know what’s best for those on the 

front lines without actually spending any time on the line. Mr. 

Chair of Committees, we should be listening to our health care 

providers because they know what they need, and they know 

what is happening regarding H1N1. 

 

Mr. Chair of Committees, my question is to the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview: will she quit insulting front-line health 

care providers by pretending to be the expert, and instead 

support and listen to the actual health care experts? 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair of Committees. 

The fact that I’m a registered nurse, and a currently registered 

nurse, has given me and continues to give me access to all kinds 

of health providers who I talk to on a regular basis. And when I 

had a press conference and released a statement on September 

3rd, that was in response to the questions and the concerns I 

was receiving from those health providers across the province. 

That was public health nurses, managers, long-term care, 

primary health care, nurse practitioners, laboratory 

technologists. Everybody was saying they weren’t ready. They 

didn’t know what the plan was going to be. That was September 

3rd. 

 

And I continue to raise questions that are given to me to raise 

on behalf of the public who actually expect that, as our job, that 

we should be responsive to their needs and ask their questions. 

There have been questions that I haven’t asked in public 

because those questions may be a bit more pointed and should 

be asked somewhere else. And I’ve asked them of public health 

officials. I’ve tried to keep my questions responsible, and I 

think the people that ask them expect that and got it. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from Elphinstone. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Obviously we’ve got a lot of questions, Mr. 

Chair of Committees. My question is for the member from 

Moose Jaw North. I wonder, does he agree with the member 

from Saskatoon Northwest who has heckled over from his chair 

that for the member from Saskatoon Eastview to use the word 

“pandemic” in conjunction with H1N1 is somehow 

fearmongering? And furthermore does that member recognize 

that pandemic H1N1 influenza immunization is the head of the 

consent form that’s being handed out by the Ministry of Health 

and in fact is part of properly describing in the situation as it 

presents? Thank you, Mr. Chair of Committees. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from Moose Jaw North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, you 

know I thank the opposition member for his question. However 

it’s somewhat irrelevant to the topic at hand. And I just want to 

say that I think our health care workers are doing an admirable 

job of planning and executing the program that they have put in 

place for the pandemic. And as we can see, that this is being 

very well executed across the province in a timely fashion, and 

it’s going to be for the benefit of all the people of 

Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from Biggar. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Naturally we 

never hear anything positive from the opposition members, and 

frankly we don’t even expect it any more. However, Mr. 

Speaker, we found ourselves this year in new territory having to 

formulate and execute an H1N1 vaccination plan. In response 

our health care officials and providers continue to roll out the 

largest pandemic vaccination process in the history of the 

province. And that, Mr. Speaker, is commendable. 

 

In light of this situation, we are beginning to wonder if it’s too 

much to hope for some positivity from the members opposite. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to ask the member from 

Regina Elphinstone-Centre where everything that these public 



November 19, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3725 

servants have accomplished so far, will the NDP quit these 

petty political games and applaud their efforts? 

 

[Applause] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — I’ll tell you about the applauding that I have a 

problem with, Mr. Chair of Committees, is the 

self-congratulation in the applause that breaks out, you know, 

any chance they get over there in terms of the serious issues that 

we face in this House. 

 

We’ve talked about the good work that’s being done by the 

public servants. We’ve talked about our agreement with the 

spirit of this motion. And we’ve talked about the long odds that 

are being faced by the front-line health care workers and the 

people doing the emergency preparedness to respond 

adequately to this situation. 

 

What we take exception to, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that these 

people like to preach, oh we’re not going to play politics with 

this. But the fact that, you know, not sentences later, there they 

go again in terms of trying to play games with a serious issue 

that the people of Saskatchewan have some very reasonable 

questions that they put to us and expect to be raised in this 

Chamber. 

 

So in terms of the member’s question, we’ve got a problem 

with the self-congratulatory approach that these people take to 

any kind of issue that raises its head in this province. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And my 

question is to the member from Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. Mr. 

Speaker, the provincial government has some responsibilities, 

the federal government has some responsibilities for the rollout. 

And health care providers on the front line who may have some 

connection to both federal and provincial governments had 

some questions early in this process. 

 

And I’m wondering if the member opposite knows how much 

consultation occurred between federal and provincial 

governments on the rollout of this. Specifically, Mr. Speaker, 

we have an individual who is a health care provider, does 

contract health care work for First Nations clients through 

Prairie North Health Region. But she was denied the vaccine for 

health care workers because she was neither treaty nor an 

employee of Prairie North Health, even though she was dealing 

daily with high priority clients. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair of Committees. 

I thank the member opposite for the question. 

 

The provincial and federal governments have worked very 

closely together, have had lots of meetings, and are very well 

prepared for the rollout of the vaccine. The province has 

received an additional 50,000 doses of vaccine on Monday of 

November the 16th, bringing the total to 320,400 doses received 

to date. 

 

As you can see, Saskatchewan is getting a very large number of 

dosages. Over 34 per cent of our population have been 

vaccinated against H1N1, and our province is paying attention. 

Thank you very much. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from Prince Albert. 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. A recent poll 

found that around two-thirds of the Saskatchewan population is 

satisfied with how their provincial government is dealing with 

the vaccination rollout. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, a Leader-Post columnist questioned why 

the vaccination plan is going better in Saskatchewan than in any 

other province. He answered his own question by saying, and I 

quote: 

 

. . . the Saskatchewan Party government’s health minister 

wisely decided to listen to those with some expertise on 

how to develop the best protocol, rather than listen to 

those who find it necessary to twist every health issue into 

a disjointed argument on how private delivery of health 

care would somehow be better. 

 

Mr. Deputy Chair, the public and the media are proud of our 

health care officials and providers. 

 

The question is to the member from Saskatoon Eastview: why 

is she advocating the vaccination of perfectly healthy, low-risk 

individuals, such as the opposition MLAs she’s been lobbying 

for, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that have no underlying risk factors 

versus the great job that the ministry officials are doing getting 

the vaccine out to the high-risk population in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair of Committees. 

Interesting in the member’s comments were that two-thirds of 

people are happy with the rollout of the vaccine. He fails to 

mention that one-third obviously aren’t. And those are the 

people that we are getting the calls from and that want their 

voices to be heard as well. And I think that to deny them that is 

certainly undemocratic. 

 

And it doesn’t, it doesn’t, it obviously doesn’t have any, it 

doesn’t have any relevance here. People want to have a 

democracy. They want to be able to be heard. And that’s the job 

of the opposition — to bring their questions forward and their 

concerns forward, which is what we are doing and what we will 

continue to do. Thank you. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My 

question is to the member from Moose Jaw North, I believe. 

Given the fact that you’ve been touting what the Sask Party’s 



3726 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2009 

been doing in terms of trying to resolve the H1N1 challenge, 

what additional resources has this government afforded to the 

three northern health districts and the First Nations 

communities to battle the H1N1 threat, given the isolation 

factor, overcrowding of homes, the fact that it is a high-risk 

group, it’s a large population . . . 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — The member’s time has 

elapsed. Time for the 75-minute debate is expired. We move on. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 607 — The Public Safety, Security and Protection Act 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair of 

Committees. It’s with great pleasure I stand this afternoon to 

talk about a very important issue for the people of the province 

of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 607, An Act to provide for the Public 

Safety, Security and Protection of the People of Saskatchewan, 

is a very important piece of legislation. Mr. Speaker, it is 

raising the bar. It is a move to achieve a new standard in 

Saskatchewan for the protection of the people of our province. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, what this allows us to do in this Bill is to 

provide a greater level of protection and security for the citizens 

of our province, the people who we are all elected by, the 

people we are all accountable to. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 

should all want to provide an environment for the citizens of 

our province that allows for the maximum, maximum protection 

that we can in providing for the public safety, security, and 

protection of our citizens. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m going to talk for a few minutes about 

the preamble. The first whereas clause says, “WHEREAS 

Saskatchewan’s public employees are employed by the people 

of Saskatchewan.” Mr. Speaker, simply recognizing that those 

people who work for any agency that is paid for by the tax 

dollars of the people of this province work for those very 

people. They don’t work for the government. They don’t work 

for the official opposition. They don’t work for their managers. 

They don’t work for a health district. They don’t work for the 

Public Service Commission. They don’t work for a government 

department. They work for each and every citizen of the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is an important thing for all of 

us to remember on a daily basis as we make decisions about 

things, about issues, about legislation, about direction — that 

every decision we make and that they implement is for and 

about the people of our province. It’s not about the government. 

It’s not about the opposition. Those civil servants, those health 

care workers, those teachers, they work for the people of the 

province, and it’s the people of the province that pay them. 

 

The second whereas clause says, “WHEREAS Saskatchewan’s 

public employees have a duty to work for and in the best 

interest of the people of Saskatchewan.” Mr. Speaker, this is 

something that every public employee in this province I think 

understands, that they’re there to serve the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan, that they’re employed by those 

people. 

 

[12:15] 

 

And I think the public employees in our province take that very 

seriously. They understand that their actions on a day-to-day 

basis affect the lives of the people of this province. And I 

believe that the public employees in our province take that 

extremely seriously, whether it’s in our educational systems, 

whether it’s in our health care system, in the public service, in 

our Crown corporations, Mr. Deputy Speaker, or in the 

Legislative Assembly Service, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We all are 

here, and those employees, like ourselves, are there to provide a 

service for the people of the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the third whereas clause says: 

 

WHEREAS Saskatchewan public employees should not 

be punished in any manner for acting in the best interest 

of the people’s public safety, security and protection [Mr. 

Speaker]. 

 

And I think that’s something we each as citizens of this 

province, but in particular as those elected by those citizens of 

the province, should take seriously. Mr. Deputy Speaker, those 

public employees who are paid by the people of Saskatchewan 

should never face, should never face a threat or an action 

carried out by their employer as a result of trying to protect the 

safety of the people of the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And if we as legislators don’t provide that level of security to 

those employees, that level of protection to those employees 

that allow them to do their jobs without fear of being punished 

in some manner, then we’re not doing ours. And, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I would undertake to say to my colleagues in this 

Assembly on both sides of the House, we have to do our jobs 

before we can expect others to do theirs. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Bill provides for those employees 

a new level of protection. It’s raising the bar. It’s establishing a 

new standard of transparency in government. It allows 

employees to bring to either their deputy ministers or head of 

agencies, going above their managers without fear of any type 

of ramifications or punishment, to go to their deputy minister 

above the chain of command, to the head of their Crown 

agency, to the principal or president of a SIAST campus. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it allows employees to ensure that issues 

dealing with public safety, the security or protection of the 

people of our province, that you have no fear for making those 

issues public — making them public to those officials only 

though that are named in this Bill. It doesn’t allow them to go to 

the media, doesn’t allow them to take it to the TV or to the 

radio or to the newspaper. But it allows them to make that 

information known — if it’s in the interest of public safety, the 



November 19, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3727 

people of the province of Saskatchewan — to four identified 

groups. And, Mr. Speaker, that is something that every citizen 

in our province should expect of their public employees and 

that we as the leaders, we as the members of this legislature 

should undertake to ensure. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Bill — its short title is called The 

Public Safety, Security and Protection Act — its powers and its 

legislative authority only covers issues that are in the interest of 

the public safety, protection, and security of the population and 

of our citizens, of our friends and neighbours, our colleagues, 

the people who live in our cities, towns, villages, and farms 

across Saskatchewan. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if one of our public employees 

believes that an action being undertaken by a public entity, or 

for that matter a private entity which they regulate, puts at risk 

the safety, security, or protection of any individual, they have a 

right to make that known. They have a responsibility, I would 

argue, to make that known.  

 

And we have a responsibility to protect that individual if they 

make it known. That individual, that public employee should 

face no ramifications, no discipline, and should not be in any 

way afraid, under threat — afraid, under threat, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker — to make known something that should be made 

known as long as it’s made known to the proper authorities as 

indicated in this Bill. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Bill is broadly encompassing of 

government agencies and government employees, public 

employees in the province of Saskatchewan. It would cover 

those that are covered by the Public Service Commission and 

departments and agencies of government. It would cover those 

employees employed in Crown corporations, whether they be 

Treasury Board Crown corporations or, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a 

Crown investment agencies, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It would 

cover employees — including being your managers, deputy 

ministers — all employees, if they made a disclosure to one of 

the four groups of people in the interest of public safety. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it would also encompass employees 

employed in our regional health authorities, in our school 

boards, and in other agencies, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that are paid 

for with the people’s money, Mr. Deputy Speaker — people 

that are employed by the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it would also apply to employees of 

the Legislative Assembly, the very employees who work in this 

institution, the institution in which we have the opportunity to 

serve and be part of. Mr. Deputy Speaker, those employees also 

have a right to protection when in fact they were to make a 

disclosure in the interest of protecting the public of the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to go through in some detail, so 

that members on both sides of the House understand, what level 

of protection we’re looking at affording to people. And I’m not 

going to pretend this is not a new bar, a new standard, a 

standard that my colleagues on this side of the House clearly 

understand we will have to live with when we are government. 

We know the standard which we will have to live with when we 

form a government. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to very clearly . . . Under the 

“Protection” section 4(1), it says: 

 

No employee to whom this Act applies shall be 

disciplined, terminated or otherwise sanctioned as a result 

of acting in the interest of the public safety, security and 

protection of the public in the manner specified below. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ll now read into the record those 

specifications: 

 

For greater clarity, no employee shall be disciplined, 

terminated or sanctioned in any manner for providing 

information to: 

 

(a) a deputy minister, chief executive officer, Crown 

president, or the head of any agency, covered by this 

Act; 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what this allows an employee to do is 

step above their front-line manager. If their front-line manager 

doesn’t want to listen to their concern, to take that concern to 

the head of their agency, whether it be the deputy minister of a 

department, whether it be the president of a Crown corporation, 

or be it the Chair of a regional health authority . . . chief 

executive officer, pardon me, of a regional health authority, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. It allows that employee the avenue to go to the 

very top of that agency without fear of ramifications or penalty, 

punishment, or sanction as a result of making that information 

known to the top official in that agency. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that provision is not afforded employees 

today in the province of Saskatchewan in all cases in these 

public agencies, and it should be. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it would also make it acceptable and 

allowable for information to be provided to an independent 

officer of the Legislative Assembly so that if a child protection 

worker in the Department of Social Services had grave concerns 

about an action being taken and its potential impact on children 

or on a specific child, if they believed it put at risk a child and 

that child’s safety and security was at risk, that social worker 

could in fact go to the Children’s Advocate and not fear any 

ramifications, punishment, or action from their department. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m fully prepared to acknowledge that is 

greater protection than provided employees today. But it’s 

raising the bar. It is making the actions of senior government 

and the actions of government employees and agencies more 

transparent. You can no longer hide behind the fact that people 

don’t know because if it’s wrong, it’s wrong. And when an 

employee knows it’s wrong and it puts at risk a citizen of this 

province, they have a right to make it known. We’d all have to 

live with it. 

 

And there would be some growing pains with those changes, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. There would be some growing pains as 

you change the standard, you raise the bar. But once it becomes 

the standard and becomes accepted as the standard, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, it would be no different than it is today, except we’d 

have a much more open and much more transparent 



3728 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2009 

accountability of both the political level of government, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker — those of us who stand in this Chamber today 

— as well as the senior officials in our departments. We can no 

longer hide behind the fact we can suppress information, that 

we could suppress the well-being and knowledge of the people 

of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the third group that you would be able to 

divulge information to in the interest of public safety, so that 

there could be accountability of those who are responsible for 

putting at risk the public, would be members of the Legislative 

Assembly — us, the very elected people of the province of 

Saskatchewan, the population of the province of Saskatchewan 

elected for that purpose. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it would allow, as happens every day I 

might say, as happens every day to us as members of the 

legislature, we receive complaints, information, and concerns 

raised by our constituents. It’s happening today. But what it 

does is provides a protection if a senior manager or a minister 

or coal workers dislike the fact that that information was made 

public. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, what’s wrong with that? What is wrong 

with protecting people who are acting in the interest of the 

protection? I need to reiterate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is for 

issues dealing with the public safety, protection, and security of 

people. It’s not any issue. It’s not any issue, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. It’s those issues that are dealing with the public safety 

of the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if you don’t like your boss, it doesn’t 

mean you can run around and do these types of things, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. There has to be, there has to be an issue that’s 

in the public interest, and an issue that’s about protecting the 

public safety, security and safety of a citizen or group of 

citizens. It isn’t carte blanche — anybody can do anything. 

We’re dealing with a very narrow area. We’re dealing only with 

the area of the public safety, protection, and security of the 

people of our province. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the fourth area or fourth group of 

people that you could give information to without fear of 

discipline or ramifications would be the police or appropriate 

law enforcement agencies, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Now the police are the law enforcement agency that comes to 

mind for most people. But within government there are many, 

many other agencies that are tasked with enforcing parts of 

legislation, or in fact enforcing parts of the law, and that could 

be the Environment department in the areas of water protection, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. It could be the Environment department in 

concerns the protection of the spread of, an example, disease or 

influenza of some form through the animal population that may 

be passed on to the human population — things that are of the 

public interest for their own health and safety, security, and 

protection. 

 

So that if you have a concern that something is not being made 

public that should be made public, that’s not being dealt with 

that should be dealt with, and it could affect the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan and it could endanger their safety or 

security, Mr. Deputy Speaker, then you have a right to make it 

known. 

 

Clause 3, under the protection section, Mr. Speaker, says: 

 

Employees may provide information to any of the above in 

the interests of the public safety, security and protection of 

the people of Saskatchewan if they believe the information 

will help provide for the public safety, security and 

protection . . . 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s pretty straightforward. It’s talking 

about providing additional security for the people of our 

province. 

 

[12:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, clause 5 of the Bill talks about saving harmless 

employees. The actual wording is, “Every employee to whom 

this Act applies shall be saved harmless from any discipline, 

termination or sanction by their employer.” Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, it just is there to ensure that the full breadth of 

protection is provided. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, clause 6 binds the Crown by this Act. 

Once this passes and becomes law, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this in 

fact binds the Crown. It binds every one of us in this legislature. 

It binds our departments and agencies to protect employees so 

that they can help protect the people of this province without 

any fear or threat of discipline or sanction, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

For greater certainty, section 7 clarifies what happens if there 

were in fact a conflict between two pieces of legislation, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, if there is more than one Act that covers the 

area under discussion, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It says, 

“Notwithstanding any other Act or law [so notwithstanding any 

other Act or law that’s in place], this Act . . . [will prevail] 

where there is a conflict between the provisions of this Act and 

any other Act or law.” So, Mr. Speaker, it makes it absolutely 

clear. It makes it absolutely clear that if there is another Act or 

law that may apply, so that there be no conflict as to what rights 

the individual has, this Act supersedes and overrules. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Act is there to help protect the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan. I think each and every one of us in 

this Assembly should be prepared and willing to support the 

protection of the population of Saskatchewan. That, after all, is 

what we’re elected for, Mr. Speaker. We are elected by our 

constituents to act in their interest. And the public employees of 

the province of Saskatchewan are employed by the people of 

Saskatchewan to act in their interest. They’re employed to act in 

the interest of providing for the safety, security, and protection 

of them. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think it’s too much to provide a level 

of security to those public employees so that they can discharge 

their duties without fear, so that they do not have to fear 

ramifications from a senior official of government, from a 

minister’s office, from their colleagues, or from others, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, section no. 8 allows for the making of regulations 

because, as with all pieces of legislation, there needs to be in 

regulation generally some greater detail and clarification so that 



November 19, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3729 

you can in fact put how these individual clauses will be applied 

in greater detail and in greater understanding. 

 

So this clause 8 says, “The Lieutenant Governor in Council may 

make regulations.” So the Executive Council of the government 

can make regulations. 

 

Clause (a) says, “providing for the proper and effective 

administration of this Act according to its purpose and intent.” 

So like any Bill, it allows the Lieutenant Governor in the case 

of the cabinet of the day to put regulations in place to actually 

put this piece of legislation in force. 

 

And it says, “providing for any situation or circumstance that 

falls within the ambit of this Act but not specifically addressed 

in this Act.” So it gives the opportunity for the cabinet or the 

Executive Council to be able to in fact clarify and expand upon 

the clauses contained in this Act in a manner which is intended 

by the intent of the Act and giving greater clarification. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the final clause is the clause bringing 

the Act into force. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, people may say, why at this time do 

you feel that you need to bring forward an Act that provides 

greater protection for public employees in the disclosure of 

information involving the public safety of the people of 

province of Saskatchewan? Well, Mr. Speaker, there’s a 

number of reasons. One is that we have a government today 

who has stated that they will in fact hunt down who releases 

information and they’ll discipline them. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we have not had that situation for many, 

many years. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have had a government in 

the past, up until 2007, that undertook a public policy direction 

that said, no we weren’t going to punish public employees for 

disclosing information. We weren’t going to make victims of 

those who were acting in the interests of the public. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can tell you today that on many 

occasions the members opposite, now the government, as they 

brought forward information that was provided to them by civil 

servants, by public employees, clearly stated — this 

government when they were in opposition — that the 

government had better not, had better not dare, had better not 

dare punish somebody for bringing forward information that the 

public had a right to know about. 

 

And I can remember a number of very specific cases, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that members opposite raised that issue, 

including the current Premier on several occasions. And I could 

read into the record those very strong speeches made by the 

Premier and by other members of the former opposition that are 

now current cabinet ministers.  

 

But there was one fundamental difference between then and 

now. And that fundamental difference is this, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker: the former government undertook publicly not to 

punish anybody. And I want to state this very clearly. The 

former government undertook publicly not to punish anybody 

for providing information to any of these four groups listed in 

this Bill. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, today we don’t have that undertaking from 

the government, so employees are in fear, Mr. Speaker. They’re 

in fear of making information known that should be made 

known in the public interest. They’re afraid to do their own jobs 

because there may be ramifications as a result of doing the very 

thing they’re employed to do, which is protect the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I wish I wasn’t standing today having to say 

this. I wish that we were all bigger than having to look at who 

we can punish for forcing us to do our job sometimes or 

questioning why we didn’t do our jobs. Because ultimately we, 

we the elected representatives of the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan, have final accountability. We are the ones that 

are accountable. We are elected by our constituents. We are 

elected by the people of the province of Saskatchewan, and we 

are answerable to them. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, this Bill which is simply practice — past 

practice, I would argue — will provide a certainty for public 

employees. I think a certainty they have a right to have, a 

certainty that we should all want them to have. Because, Mr. 

Speaker, it may result in some embarrassment from time to time 

if an employee takes information to the police or to an 

independent officer of the legislature or to one of our colleagues 

in this Assembly. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if it’s done in the 

interest of our safety and our security, Mr. Speaker, in the end 

we should be proud that that person was willing to do so.  

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, at the end of the day, this Chamber and 

this Assembly is not for us and it’s not about us. It’s about the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan and what we 

collectively do to make their lives better, to provide for their 

public safety, for their security, and for their protection. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I indicated very early, this is raising the bar. It’s 

establishing a higher standard. It’s an increase in transparency 

like we don’t afford to the public today. It allows those people 

who work in our public agencies the ability to question what 

we, Mr. Speaker, what we as legislators might do, the decisions 

we may make as the members of the Executive Council. But, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we work for the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan, and we should not be afraid to be held 

accountable by the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has been a leader. 

Saskatchewan has historically led in providing protections for 

our citizens, for our employees, and within our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many members may not know and understand that 

the first human rights code in Canada, the very first human 

rights code in Canada came from this legislature. That’s 

fundamental protection today that citizens across this country 

experience and have as a daily protection. The very first version 

of a human rights code in Canada was developed in this 

legislature and passed in this legislature. Now that’s significant. 

It’s very significant that this province was the leaders in 

developing a human rights code, for developing protection for 

people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many of my colleagues may not understand as 

well that the first trade union Act in Canada was enacted in the 

province of Saskatchewan, that the first right to bargain 



3730 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2009 

collectively, the first right to provide those safeties and 

securities to employees in the right to bargain collectively and 

to act collectively when the employer failed to bargain in good 

faith, Mr. Speaker, were provided again in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And why were all those firsts done in the province of 

Saskatchewan? Because this province has believed, and its 

people and its leaders and its legislators have believed, in the 

importance, in the importance of providing protections for 

citizens so that they not fear. So they have no fear in doing their 

jobs and standing up for themselves, for being different, Mr. 

Speaker, for being able to publicly, publicly address an issue 

that may not be popular, that may not be liked by others. But we 

provided those protections, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, today this Bill No. 607 is before the 

legislature. I would implore my colleagues on both sides of the 

House to be prepared to pass this piece of legislation. Because, 

Mr. Speaker, I think if you’re not willing to pass a piece of 

legislation that says you won’t punish somebody for doing their 

job, for perhaps questioning what we as legislators do, for 

letting the people of the province of Saskatchewan be aware of 

what we’re doing, that today may be able to be hidden, by 

making government more transparent and open and accountable 

to the people who elected us here, Mr. Speaker, then maybe we 

shouldn’t be here. Mr. Speaker. Maybe we should not be here 

then. 

 

[12:45] 

 

And this is going to be a test. Because, Mr. Speaker, I’m going 

to undertake to ensure that this Bill is broadly distributed 

around Saskatchewan and to the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan so they understand what’s being proposed. This 

Bill is about their protection, about their safety, and it’s about 

government giving up some of their control in order to provide 

greater protection for the people. And it’s about us being more 

accountable to the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what’s wrong with that? What’s wrong with 

the people having more control over their own lives? What’s 

wrong with providing a greater protection to public employees 

so they in fact can challenge their very employers if they need 

to? I’m not saying over anything, Mr. Speaker. We’re talking 

on a very narrow band of issues that provide for the safety and 

security and protection of the population, whether it be from a 

threat, a direct threat, or an indirect threat. 

 

But if those threats exist, those employees should have the right 

to make that threat known to their deputy minister, in the case 

of a government department; over their manager’s heads, to the 

head of a Crown corporation, if it’s in a Crown corporation, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker; to the chief executive officer of a health region 

if it’s in a health region; to an independent officer of the 

legislature, be it the Information and Privacy Commissioner, be 

it the Children’s Advocate, be it the Ombudsman, agencies 

which have a responsibility, Mr. Speaker, to this legislature, as 

well as to the people of the province of Saskatchewan. But they 

are agencies that are there to ensure that we as members of the 

legislature and the government does its job right. 

 

So if a social worker believes a child is at risk, that social 

worker should have the right to go to the Children’s Advocate 

without any fear, without any fear, Mr. Speaker, of discipline or 

sanction from their employer. They should also have the right to 

go to their member of the legislature and provide them that 

information. The member of the legislature can raise that issue 

with the minister responsible so that the public can know that 

the government’s being held accountable if and when 

something is being done. There should not be fear, the public 

employee doing their job, a public employee making known to 

appropriate authorities listed in this Act of potential 

wrongdoing that affects the safety, security, or protection of the 

population. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I once again want to talk about the four groups of 

people that information could be provided to, to ensure that 

there is accountability and transparency and to allow for the 

protection of the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the first . . . And logically, in a logical step, the 

first group you go to of course is the deputy minister or chief 

executive officer, Crown president, or the head of any agency 

under which is covered by this Act, but also the agency which 

you’re employed by. If you have a particular problem and you 

believe your manager that you’ve talked to isn’t examining the 

issue the way it should be or, in fact, and under that failure to 

examine it puts at risk the safety, security, or protection of a 

single member of our society, Mr. Speaker, or multiple 

members, you should have a right to go to the head of the . . . 

the ultimate head of the agency and say, look, this is my 

concern. And they go over the head of their individual manager, 

maybe two or three levels above their manager even, Mr. 

Speaker. They should fear no discipline, ramification, 

punishment and, Mr. Speaker, should never, ever — even in the 

worst of scenarios, Mr. Speaker — ever be concerned about 

losing their job for doing their job. Mr. Speaker, if you’re doing 

your job, you shouldn’t be punished. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the second group are the independent officers of 

the Legislative Assembly who are employed by this legislature 

— not by the government, not by the opposition, but by the 

entire legislature as an oversight of the very actions of the 

government. They are here to be independent of a government 

so they can hold the government accountable. So that if an 

employee once believes that an issue is putting at risk an 

individual or group of individuals, they have a right to go to the 

Ombudsman or to go to the Children’s Advocate, Mr. Speaker, 

and have that issue looked at by an independent third party and 

have it raised publicly by that independent third party to hold 

the government accountable for what they have done and not 

done. But that’s their job as well, Mr. Speaker. That is their job. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the third group of people is, of course, members of 

the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, all of which are 

elected by their constituents to represent them in this Assembly. 

Mr. Speaker, provide information to a member of the 

Legislative Assembly so they can raise it, to hold the 

government or an agency accountable, is what their job is. It’s 

their job. So you should not be punished for providing 

information, increasing transparency, or to hold a government 

accountable for what they’re doing or not doing if it affects 

your safety, security. Mr. Speaker, it’s unbelievable that in 2009 

we’re talking about a Bill that’s about protecting people in 

doing their very jobs. 



November 19, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3731 

And, Mr. Speaker, the fourth group that you could disclose 

information to in the interest of public safety, of course, would 

be a police force or an appropriate law enforcement agency. 

And, Mr. Speaker, that could include conservation officers in 

the Department of the Environment. It could include in some 

cases perhaps a fire commissioner in the event of rental 

properties without appropriate smoke detectors, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But all these things, this issue covers only issues that deal with 

the protection, security, and safety of the public. But it protects 

the employees for disclosing that information if in fact their 

own agency, responsible for enforcing and regulation, aren’t 

acting, because we have the opportunity as members of the 

legislature to act in the best interest of the people of 

Saskatchewan. In fact we don’t only have the opportunity, we 

have the responsibility to, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, why am I doing this? Well one, I believe 

good public policy needs to be examined from time to time. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’ve said from the very onset of this debate 

that this is in fact a new standard. It raises the bar. But it raises 

the bar in the interest of protecting the people of our province. 

And why would any one of us not want to do that? I would 

challenge my colleagues on both sides of the House to tell me 

why they wouldn’t want to raise the bar and why they wouldn’t 

want to protect the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I can assure you, I can assure you that we are 

going to . . . Mr. Speaker, I can assure you that we’re going to 

force this to a vote. And the members opposite will get the 

opportunity to vote, whether they have any interest in protecting 

the people of Saskatchewan or not. And, Mr. Speaker, I think 

the people of Saskatchewan will have a great deal of interest in 

how their elected representatives respond to this. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, why are we doing this? Why am I doing 

this? I’m doing this because I raised an issue in this House. I 

raised an issue in this House that was about the safety of the 

people of this province of Saskatchewan, and the minister’s 

response was not about protecting the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan. His concern is about how did I get the 

information. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the current government sat in opposition for 

many years and got many, many brown envelopes and raised 

many issues in this Assembly. And not once, not once when the 

official opposition was in government, was an individual 

punished for it. Nor should they. Nor should they. But what we 

have today is a minister responsible . . . And get this, Mr. 

Speaker, the Minister Responsible for Corrections, Public 

Safety and Policing, the minister that is actually responsible for 

public safety saying that he will do anything in his power to 

find out who released that information and that he will be 

punished. 

 

Then my colleague, the Leader of the Official Opposition, 

asked the Premier about the witch hunt. And the Premier said 

they would undertake their investigation. They’d find the 

individual and they’d punish the individual. Mr. Speaker, that’s 

sad. It’s really sad. And today a young man sits at home that’s 

been on administrative . . . I will admit the government is 

paying him to sit at home because they believe he may have 

released the information. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to say today publicly in the 

House, on the public record, on the public record, and I can 

defend the public record, Mr. Speaker. I ask them to challenge 

me publicly, because I’ll prove it that three days before this 

individual accessed the computer apparently, I had that 

information here in the building and shared it with others who 

can confirm it. Not others from my caucus, Mr. Speaker, others 

from the media. 

 

So we have an individual today with two young children at 

home and a wife who doesn’t know whether he’s going to have 

a job a month from now, who’s worried because he’s been sent 

home because he supposedly gave me information. That’s 

shameful. How would you like — or any member of this 

Assembly — like to be in that situation, not knowing about 

their future employment, their children worrying about what 

their family’s future is about? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, my understanding is this 

individual admits he accessed a computer. But, Mr. Speaker, 

they can check what time he accessed the computer. They can 

check what he accessed because our systems allow that to 

happen. And I can prove that three days prior to him accessing 

the computer, I had that information. 

 

But this guy’s sitting at home. This young man’s sitting at home 

and his family’s worrying. That’s not fair. That’s not right, and 

every member of this Assembly should be concerned about that. 

Because, Mr. Speaker, the law must not only seem to be done, 

Mr. Speaker, it must be perceived to be done appropriately. 

And, Mr. Speaker, this man’s family is very, very concerned. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as I conclude my remarks, I urge my 

colleagues on both sides of the House to pass this legislation, to 

understand that we set the examples, to understand that by 

creating fear in any citizen or any public employee is not the 

right thing to do. We have a responsibility to the population of 

Saskatchewan. We have a responsibility to our constituents. We 

have a responsibility to those who are employed by us. But, Mr. 

Speaker, this is our opportunity to in fact carry through with our 

words. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this time I would like to move second reading 

of Bill No. 607, An Act to provide for the Public Safety, 

Security and Protection of the People of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — Being the hour of adjournment, this Assembly 

is adjourned until . . . The member has moved second reading of 

Bill No. 607, The Public Safety, Security and Protection Act. 

However, being now the hour of adjournment, this Assembly 

will recess until Monday afternoon at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 13:00.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3705 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3705 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3705 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3705 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3705 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3706 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3706 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3706 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3706 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3706 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3707 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3707 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Rider Pride 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3707 

 RCMP Partners With Habitat for Humanity 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3707 

 Mathematics Review 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3708 

 Achievements of Battlefords Community Organizations 

  Chisholm .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3708 

 A Parable 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3708 

 Regina Crime Stoppers Celebrate Anniversary 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3709 

 Contributions of Former Colleague Celebrated 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3709 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 Ruling on Scope of Questions 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3709 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Management of Provincial Economy 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3709 

  Gantefoer ....................................................................................................................................................................... 3710, 3713 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3713 

 Support for Long-Term Care 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3711 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3711 

 Support for Seniors’ Housing 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3712 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3712 

TABLING OF SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3714 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3714 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3714 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 H1N1 Vaccine Delivery 

  Ross ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3715, 3725 

  Junor .............................................................................................................................................................................. 3716, 3724 

  Michelson ....................................................................................................................................................................... 3718, 3724 

  McCall ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3719, 3724 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3721 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3722 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3724 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3724 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3725 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3725 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3725 



 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 607 — The Public Safety, Security and Protection Act 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3726 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium Development 

Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

 Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

Government House Leader 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. James Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Capital Commission 


