




















































Hansard: November 23, 2009


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 18A  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 23, 2009, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3733 

 November 23, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

The Speaker: — Members, before we move forward with 

introduction of guests, just a comment I‟d like to make. We‟re 

currently experiencing audio system technical difficulties. And 

one of the processors that‟s responsible for the mikes is 

currently not functioning, which means even though the mikes 

are configured to alternate between the two processors, when 

you stand to be recognized, your mike may not be functioning. 

 

So just keep an eye on the light and see which mike closest to 

you . . . Hansard will be turning on the mike that‟s closest to 

you to pick up so that your comments can be heard. Just for 

your information. 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a 

great honour to introduce to you and through you some very, 

very special guests who have joined us in your gallery today. 

Mr. Speaker, we had a chance to honour them earlier on today 

at a brief press conference. They are the recipients, the first 

recipients, of the Scholarship of Honour, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And as I said in my remarks earlier today, there are just some 

. . . a sentiment I wouldn‟t mind sharing with this Assembly, 

though it does come I admit from an American source, from the 

second inaugural of Lincoln‟s, when he said this. And I quote: 

 

. . . let us strive on to finish the work we are in, to bind up 

the nation‟s wounds, to care for him who shall have borne 

the battle and for his widow and his orphan . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is the spirit behind the government‟s 

Scholarship of Honour which is made available to those 

veterans who have returned from active service since 2001, so 

principally veterans of the Afghanistan mission. And, Mr. 

Speaker, there are 11 individuals who have already received the 

scholarship, and I‟d like to introduce them to members of the 

Assembly today. 

 

The scholarship is for $5000, and again it‟s for those returning 

from active duty since January of 2001. And it‟s for all 

post-secondary educational pursuits: tech schools and our 

universities. And you don‟t have to go to university or tech 

school here in the province of Saskatchewan, it‟s just available 

to those Saskatchewan heroes who have served. 

 

And so I‟m going to read the names of those who are here to 

receive the honour on behalf of those who are not. I‟ll start with 

those who are here, and then read the list of names of recipients 

who just couldn‟t make it today. And I‟m going to ask them 

each to stand while I read their names. 

 

I‟ll begin with MacKenzie Driscoll from Swift Current; Tyler 

Matthies, Regina; Joseph or Dan Mackenzie from Saskatoon; 

Danielle Grace, Winnipeg; Todd Duhaime, Saskatoon; and Neil 

Bird from Regina. 

 

There are some who could not be here today, and those include: 

Brendan Clancy, of Martensville; Shane Iverson of Winnipeg; 

Kurt Popescue of Regina; Michael Bellegarde of Vancouver; 

and Scott MacBean of Saskatoon. 

 

And then joining these heroes here today, these recipients of the 

scholarship, are members of their family and also friends who 

have joined them in support. We‟d just like to welcome them all 

to their Legislative Assembly and thank them again for their 

great service to our province and to our nation. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On 

behalf of the official opposition, I would like to join . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . I won‟t take it personally, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

On behalf of the official opposition, I would like to join with 

the Premier in welcoming the scholarship recipients here today. 

It‟ll become readily apparent in a few minutes that there are 

many things that we do not agree upon in this Assembly, even if 

I have to go to a different microphone to make that clear, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But I think there‟s one thing — well, there are many things — 

but there‟s certainly one thing today that we have a consensus 

on in this room, and that is the pride we feel in the young, 

mostly young, Saskatchewan people who have taken up the call 

of service to their country and served and are continuing to 

serve in the mission in Afghanistan. And so on behalf of the 

official opposition, I want to join the Premier in welcoming the 

recipients to their Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood River, the 

Minister Responsible for Corrections and Public Safety. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you 

and through you to the Assembly, I‟d like to introduce some 

very special guests seated in your gallery today. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I‟d ask that these special guests stand and be 

recognized when I introduce them. 

 

Representing the northern drug and gang unit is RCMP [Royal 

Canadian Mounted Police] inspector Mercer Armstrong. 

Inspector Armstrong has been with the RCMP since 1988 and is 

currently stationed at “F” Division working as a support 

services officer. As part of his current position, he played a 

major role in the development of the northern drug and gang 

unit. 

 

Representing the combined forces special enforcement unit is 

Inspector Gary Hoedel with the Regina Police Service. 

Inspector Hoedel joined the Regina Police Service in 1974 and 

has been an integral part of the CFSEU [combined forces 

special enforcement unit] since 2008. 

 

Representing the integrated child exploitation unit is Detective 



3734 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2009 

Sergeant Patrick Nogier with the Saskatoon Police Service. 

Sergeant Nogier is in his 17th year of service with the 

Saskatoon Police Service and is currently serving as a 

provincial coordinator for the ICE [Internet child exploitation] 

unit. 

 

I would invite all members to help me in welcoming these 

special guests to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave 

to make an extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has asked for leave for an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

seated in your gallery today is a number of very special people 

who have spent years volunteering for their local housing 

authorities. Earlier today I had the honour of presenting these 

individuals with an award recognizing the many years of 

service they‟ve given to their communities and to Saskatchewan 

as a whole. Among them were eight people who received 

recognition for 25 years of service and those that are with us 

today, if they could give a wave when they hear their name. We 

have Barbara Torwalt of Leroy; Joyce Haas of Kelvington; 

Deanna Schafer of Mankota; Victor Delhommeau of Luseland; 

Marilyn Welcher of Welwyn; Sheila Marsh of Welwyn, Patrick 

Farrell of Creelman; and Beatrice Struthers of Ogema. 

 

Three more people with us today received recognition for 30 

years of service. They are James Dushire of Wilkie; Larry Shaw 

of Morse; and Donna Selinger of Lampman. 

 

And the very special service today went to Julie Gerwing of 

Lake Lenore receiving recognition for an amazing 35 years of 

service. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as you can see, there are also others here today 

from Wilkie, Lake Lenore, Creelman, Welwyn, Kelvington, 

Lampman housing authorities. They too deserve our praise for 

the time and energy that they have volunteered to build a better 

province. The provincial government and the Saskatchewan 

Housing Corporation truly value the dedication and hard work 

of all of our housing volunteers throughout the province. 

 

Overall, Mr. Speaker, we have 1,500 volunteer board members 

within the Sask Housing Corporation network. So, Mr. Speaker, 

I ask all members to please join me in welcoming these 

individuals to their legislature and thanking them for their years 

of service to our province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 

would like to join with the minister in welcoming the special 

guests who have spent numerous years, that‟s quite an 

accomplishment — some 35, 30 years on volunteer boards. 

Really that‟s what makes our Saskatchewan communities so 

strong and vibrant, and housing is such an important part of our 

communities. And so I too, on behalf of the opposition, join in 

with the minister in welcoming them to their legislature. Thank 

you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟d like to join with 

the Minister for Public Safety and Corrections in welcoming the 

guests from the RCMP here today. I think they are from the 

police services. 

 

I think it‟s very, very important as a northern member that the 

work that you‟re undertaking on behalf of many northern 

people is very much appreciated. So I‟m sure I speak with the 

member from Cumberland, as well as the two northern MLAs 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly], and that we wish you 

best of luck. 

 

And many northern people do feel alone, Mr. Speaker, in this 

battle. So I wish the RCMP very much success and to remain 

vigilant in your duties as a northern drug and gang unit, and the 

enforcement strategy comes into effect. Thank you very much, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gives 

me a great deal of pleasure to rise today to present a petition on 

behalf of concerned citizens in Saskatchewan who are 

concerned over the condition of Highway 123. This highway is 

in northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and northern 

Saskatchewan is a little bit unique as far as their highway 

structure is concerned. Most communities there only have one 

highway — one to come in on, the same one to go out on. So 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to read the prayer here now: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to commit to maintaining and repairing 

this highway. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And this petition is signed by the good folks of Cumberland 

House. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition that speaks to the issue that Saskatchewan 

renters are facing. And it‟s really an awful combination of 

rising rents and very low vacancy rates in many communities 

across the province and that many of these renters have had to 

suffer or are in the process of going through rent increases that 

are doubling their rents in some very extreme cases. And, Mr. 



November 23, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3735 

Speaker, the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to consider enacting some form of rent 

control with a view to protecting Saskatchewan renters 

from unreasonable increases in rent. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I so present on behalf of Saskatchewan 

citizens. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

a petition in support of wage equity for CBO [community-based 

organization] workers. And we know that workers in 

community-based organizations in Saskatchewan have 

traditionally been underpaid, and many continue to earn 

poverty-level wages. 

 

We know that these workers care for and provide valuable 

services to some of the most vulnerable members of our society 

such as persons living with mental and intellectual disabilities; 

women and children in crisis; low-income, at-risk individuals; 

young children; youth; Aboriginal; immigrants; and visible 

minority people. And I‟d like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

development and implementation of a multi-year funding 

plan to ensure that CBO workers achieve wage equity 

with employees who perform work of equal value in 

government departments. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these folks come from Saskatoon and Regina. 

Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

in support of a new long-term care facility in La Ronge. And 

the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately invest in the planning and 

construction of new long-term care beds in La Ronge. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by the good people of La Ronge and area. I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition in support of fairness for Saskatchewan 

students through the necessary expansion of the graduate 

retention program. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately expand the graduate 

retention program to include master‟s and Ph.D. 

graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are from 

the city of Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present yet another petition on behalf of rural residents 

of Saskatchewan who question why the Sask Party government 

is leaving them behind with respect to providing safe and 

affordable water, and who have yet not have had any 

commitment of assistance. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to financially assist the town of Duck 

Lake residents for the good of their health and safety due 

to the exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency, and that this government fulfills its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good 

residents of Duck Lake, Prince Albert, and Regina. I so present. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I stand and present a petition 

in support of maintaining quality health care services. Mr. 

Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan ought to recognize 

the essential role of all health care providers as valued members 

of the health care team. And, Mr. Speaker, in order that that 

recognition mean something, that the government has to have a 

commitment to adequate funding and the installation of good 

faith bargaining to the collective bargaining process. And the 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to commit to maintaining quality health 

care services and job security for all public health care 

providers. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the petitions are signed by residents of Duck Lake and 

Rosthern. I so present. 



3736 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2009 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m pleased today to 

rise and present a petition in support of affordable housing and 

rents for The Battlefords. Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to call 

upon the Government of Saskatchewan to develop an 

affordable housing program that will result in a greater 

number of quality and affordable rental units to be made 

available to a greater number of people throughout The 

Battlefords, and that will implement a process of rent 

review or rent control to better protect tenants in a 

non-competitive housing environment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by residents of The 

Battlefords. I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Green Week Celebrates Roughriders Win 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well for the 

second time in three years, the Saskatchewan Roughriders are 

heading back to the Grey Cup, Mr. Speaker. That‟s the first 

time that‟s happened since the 1960s. 

 

Now a couple of weeks ago I remember listening to Jim 

Hopson, and he was doing an interview and talking on the radio 

about how they worked to instill a culture of winning 

throughout the entire Roughrider organization from the 

management down to the coaches, and of course through all the 

players and the staff. 

 

A culture of winning means that this team has a quiet 

confidence that probably wasn‟t there just a few years ago. It 

means you don‟t see them dancing around in the end zone after 

a touchdown. There‟s not a lot of excessive celebration. There 

is a quaint, quiet competence to them. It means they don‟t get 

down when they‟re down by 10 points. They don‟t panic if 

they‟re down by just a touchdown and a field goal. They just 

get to work and get the job done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while the team has quiet confidence, the fans are 

anything but quiet as we saw last night, as I was able to see last 

night at Mosaic. It was truly amazing, the fans playing a part as 

the 13th man with the thunder sticks and the cheering that 

occurred. This week that sea of green became a tidal wave that 

washes over the entire province of Saskatchewan, and it‟s going 

to spill all the way over to Calgary for the Grey Cup. 

 

And so we‟re declaring, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan, Green 

Week. I am encouraging everyone to wear their Rider green to 

work or to school and, most importantly, to Calgary on the 

weekend. Let‟s see if we can make McMahon Stadium, Mr. 

Speaker, a home field game for the Grey Cup champions. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

Roughriders Vie for Grey Cup 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am proud to rise 

today to congratulate the Saskatchewan Roughriders, the 2009 

Western Division Champions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the entire province was watching yesterday as the 

Riders stomped the Calgary Stampeders, winning 27 to 17 over 

our rivals to the West. 

 

The atmosphere at Taylor Field was electric. Over 30,000 Rider 

fans flocked from across the province, donning every kind of 

green attire they could find — wigs, green KISS costumes, 

superhero underwear in some cases, and the infamous melon 

heads. The 13th man was definitely a factor in the win. The roar 

of 30,000 noisemakers, horns, thunder sticks, and crazed fans 

yelling at the top of their lungs was deafening. 

 

After the game, an army of green took over the Green Mile on 

Albert Street. With horns blaring, fans whooped and hollered 

and waved flags, jerseys, and anything green they could find. 

They braved the cold for a few more hours just to show their 

support for our team. 

 

And now we‟re off to the Grey Cup, Mr. Speaker, for the 

second time in three years. Rider fans are optimistic, 

enthusiastic, and ready for a win next week. I‟m sure the hunt 

for Grey Cup tickets is already on across the province and 

difficult to find. Next weekend fans will be out in full force at 

the game in Calgary. And when we bring home the Grey Cup, 

the province will be ready to celebrate again. 

 

Mr. Speaker, congratulations to the Saskatchewan Roughriders, 

the 2009 CFL [Canadian Football League] West Division 

Champions, and soon-to-be Grey Cup champions. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 

 

Saskatchewan Scholarship of Honour  

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The men and 

women of the Canadian Armed Forces make the greatest 

sacrifice by putting themselves in harm‟s way in distant lands. 

We should always honour those who fight for our values and 

freedoms. 

 

One way we are honouring our soldiers is with the 

Saskatchewan Scholarship of Honour. This $5,000 scholarship 

is given to current or past residents of Saskatchewan who 

actively served in military operations, either as a regular force 

member or as a reservist in the Canadian Forces after 

September 2001. It‟s also available for the spouse and/or 

children of severely injured or deceased soldiers and can be 

used at any recognized Canadian post-secondary institution. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today we honour the 11 men and women who 

received the scholarship this year. This includes Scott McBain 

of Carnduff in the Cannington constituency. Scott‟s father 

passed away a couple of years ago, and I know both Scott Sr. 

and Sylvia were and are very proud of their son. This 

scholarship of honour is our way to give back to those selfless 

individuals and their families by providing valuable financial 

support for post-secondary education. 



November 23, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3737 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan‟s brave men and women have a 

long history of serving our country so that we have the 

opportunity to pursue our dreams as Canadians. And through 

this scholarship, we will be helping our soldiers to continue and 

fulfill their dreams. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Preeceville and District Health Centre Expansion  

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I was proud to attend the grand 

opening of the Preeceville and District Health Centre last 

Friday. This project provides 40 long-term care beds, improved 

facilities, and state-of-the-art technology. 

 

Last Thursday the Minister of Health triumphantly announced 

how the Sask Party government was so proud of this facility, 

suggesting that they deserve the credit for its construction. But 

this initiative was not spearheaded by the Sask Party 

government. I remind the members opposite that it was under 

an NDP [New Democratic Party] government that the 

Preeceville hospital was planned, funded, and supported. 

Construction began in 2007 before the Sask Party came to 

power. 

 

In his press release last week the Health Minister says, and I 

quote, “The Government of Saskatchewan is committed to 

creating safer, more comfortable environments for patients, 

long-term care residents and health providers . . .” 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, their actions don‟t match their 

words. 

 

In their mid-year financial update, the government cut $122 

million from the Health budget, removing funds for 13 

long-term care facilities across the province. We can see the 

facts, Mr. Speaker. These were cuts in funding, plain and 

simple, and you can bet the people waiting for long-term care 

facilities in 13 communities can see the facts too. 

 

People in Saskatchewan do not want their health care provided 

on a hope and a prayer, like Sask Party budgeting. People want 

health care provided on hope they can trust under a prudent 

NDP government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Saskatchewan Police Forces Protect the Public  

 

Mr. Hickie: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan police forces and 

the RCMP are doing a stand-up job protecting the people of 

Saskatchewan from criminals. The Saskatchewan contingent of 

the combined forces special enforcement unit, which brings 

together members from the Regina, Saskatoon, and Prince 

Albert police services as well as the RCMP, investigated 12 

criminal organizations between April of 2008 and March 2009. 

These investigations led to the removal of over a quarter million 

dollars worth of illicit drugs from our streets through seizures 

and undercover investigations. More recently, Mr. Speaker, this 

same unit arrested 55 individuals and laid 290 charges over the 

past seven months. They also removed 20 firearms from the 

streets. 

Mr. Speaker, our northern drug strategy is producing results as 

well. In the past two months, various amounts of marijuana, 

cocaine, and related materials have been seized. As well, those 

responsible for trafficking are now facing charges. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the internet child exploitation or ICE unit, 

which began work in October of 2008, is protecting the children 

of this province. The ICE unit is currently involved in 100 

investigations relating to child pornography, child exploitation, 

and the luring of young children. Again, Mr. Speaker, this unit 

is comprised of the Regina, Saskatoon, and Prince Albert police 

services and the RCMP. 

 

Our men and women in blue are making Saskatchewan safer. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Management of Provincial Expenditures 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

welcome the Premier back to next year country. Because he 

wasn‟t here to join in the standing ovation his members gave to 

the billion dollar deficit, the Premier may not realize that his 

cabinet ministers have been busy rebranding the province once 

again as next year country. 

 

After admitting he had irresponsibly overestimated growth in 

the province‟s economy back in March, do you know, Mr. 

Speaker, when the Minister of Finance predicted boom times 

would return? Next year. After confessing he had recklessly 

overestimated revenues from potash, Mr. Speaker, do you know 

when the Finance minister predicted recovery for that sector? 

Next year. 

 

And it‟s not just the Finance minister, Mr. Speaker. Thanks to 

the government‟s mismanagement, the Health minister has had 

to admit that funds for long-term health care facilities, 

long-term care facilities have been deferred. And do you know 

until when, Mr. Speaker? Next year. That‟s right, Mr. Speaker, 

along with the children‟s hospital, the surgical care centre, and 

the health sciences complex, these long-term care facilities have 

all been relocated to next year country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hope the Premier enjoys his stay in next year 

country until the people of Saskatchewan replace the pretend 

premier of next year country with a real Premier of 

Saskatchewan in 2011. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Saskatchewan Multicultural Week 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Multis e gentibus 

vires, “from many peoples, strength.” That‟s the motto of this 

great province and reflects our government‟s commitment to 

multiculturalism. “From many peoples, strength” not only 

speaks to Saskatchewan‟s past, but also speaks to our future as 

we collectively go forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with our impressive population growth over the 



3738 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2009 

past 12 months, we‟re welcoming more people to 

Saskatchewan. These people are from all over the world, and 

they bring with them their unique cultures and traditions. These 

new residents of Saskatchewan are adding to our province 

multicultural mosaic. 

 

The Multicultural Council of Saskatchewan believes that 

education and interaction are keys to better understanding and 

fostering positive cross-cultural relations. In support of this 

goal, the Multicultural Council of Saskatchewan has created an 

information sheet and quiz titled, “Ways to welcome 

Saskatchewan‟s multicultural week.” These quizzes are a 

powerful tool which will enable a new wave of understanding 

in the next generation that will usher in an age of 

multiculturalism unlike anything we‟ve ever seen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to encourage everyone to take some 

time out this week and enjoy a different cultural experience and 

whether to spend time with a new family, they‟re new to 

Canada, or volunteering with the Open Door Society. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Management of Provincial Economy 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier: 

in light of the mid-year financial report which confirmed last 

week that the March budget was in fact the most irresponsible 

provincial budget in the history of the province, has the 

Premier, has the Premier asked for and received the resignation 

of the Minister of Finance? And if not, why not? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the answer is no, 

and here‟s why. Under this Minister of Finance, Mr. Speaker, 

the Government of Saskatchewan has delivered historic income 

tax cuts — 80,000 fewer people paying income tax in the 

province. Mr. Speaker, under this Minister of Finance, historic 

reduction in education property tax. Mr. Speaker, under this 

minister, long-awaited municipal revenue sharing. Mr. Speaker, 

under this Finance minister, 40 per cent less debt and the 

strongest economy in the country. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, question to the Premier. We 

know that the tax cuts are now a deferred tax, with interest. 

That‟s what‟s happening here in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

[14:00] 

 

In 2007, this government was left $2.3 billion in cash and a 

booming economy. Now the Premier says that the reason he 

hasn‟t asked for the resignation is because he‟s responsible for 

the mismanagement of the economy of this province. And I 

want to ask him, as a result of that, is he taking full 

responsibility for the unprecedented fiscal incompetence of this 

government? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, when we took office, Mr. 

Speaker, when we took office two years ago, the debt of the 

province of Saskatchewan was $6.8 billion. There was $1.2 

billion in the savings account. Today there is $4.2 billion in 

debt and $600 million in the savings account. That‟s a net 

improvement in the position, the financial position of this 

province of $2 billion in two years. 

 

And no, we don‟t take credit for that on this side of the House. 

The credit belongs to the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier. 

With that kind of math, it‟s no wonder we‟re in trouble 

financially in this province. Mr. Speaker, we know the Premier 

decided last week to get out of Dodge and leave the province 

and not stand by his minister to defend the fiscal incompetence 

of his government. 

 

But what‟s more worrisome is, in a telephone interview from 

Washington, he said, and I quote, “. . . I‟m satisfied with the 

current budget . . .” My question to the Premier: which part of 

this budget are you satisfied with? The 95 per cent miss on 

potash, the 67 per cent miss on natural gas, the 5 full percentage 

point miss on GDP [gross domestic product], or is it the $1 

billion deficit that you‟re so proud of? Which of that part of the 

mess are you proud of? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — There are two stories in this budget, Mr. 

Speaker. There is potash and there is everything else. Mr. 

Speaker, oil revenues are coming in above what was projected 

by the government, Mr. Speaker. A number of sources have tax 

revenue coming in above what was projected by the 

government, Mr. Speaker. There‟s a challenge in potash — 

there‟s no question about it — the likes of which we haven‟t 

seen in, I think, about 35, 37 years. Mr. Speaker, since 1972, 

when I was in grade 2, has there been so little potash sold in the 

province. 

 

We will meet the revenue challenge that that presents and we‟ll 

do so on the strength of this fact. When we took office, there 

was 6.8 billion in debt, 1.2 billion in the savings account. Today 

there‟s 4.2 billion in debt, 600 million in the savings account. 

That‟s an improvement in the financial position of 

Saskatchewan through an historic recession, mind you, of $2 

billion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — The arrogance of this Premier and this 

government is getting a little irritating for many Saskatchewan 

families, and I might add in the November 21st Leader-Post, 

maybe starting to irritate some of the press. I want to give a 

quote: 

 

What was truly most disturbing [about] . . . the complete 

and total lack of humility we saw from this Saskatchewan 



November 23, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3739 

Party government, which should damn well be 

embarrassed by its own incompetence right now, rather 

than celebrating. 

 

. . . the Sask Party government still doesn‟t seem to know 

how stupid it‟s been — and that‟s truly . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order, order. We have, even in quotes, 

we have been reminded over and over again by Speakers that 

we were not to use language that would be confrontational and 

have respect to the Chamber of the Assembly and the decorum 

in the Assembly. 

 

I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier 

is this: in light of the irritation that many Saskatchewan families 

have for the arrogance of this government when they‟ve made 

this much of a mistake on the finances of the province, will the 

Premier simply rise in his place and apologize to the people of 

the province for taking the province from boom to bust and 

from surplus to deficit? Will he do that? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s almost as if the hon. 

member opposite wants there to be bad news in the province of 

Saskatchewan. I‟ve heard this comment about boom to bust too 

many times. Is this the position of the member . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member has just said 

that the province of Saskatchewan is in bust. That‟s what he 

said, even though last week we know that manufacturing output 

in this province is number one in Canada. Even though we 

know today, Mr. Speaker, that our employment record is 

number one in Canada, the lowest unemployment rate in the 

midst of a global recession. The lowest rate per city is in 

Saskatoon. The second lowest is in Regina. 

 

We have historic and sustainable tax cuts, reduced debt in the 

province of Saskatchewan. I was away for a few days last week; 

that member‟s been gone for 10 years and things have changed 

in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this province continues to grow. The forecasters 

are saying we will lead the nation in growth next year. There 

are the challenges of potash to deal with, Mr. Speaker. We will 

meet that challenge and we will do so on the strength of the 

strongest provincial balance sheet in the federation. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Consideration of Supplementary Estimates 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — The Premier is right about one thing. 

When I left in 2000, we had a premier who had the books 

balanced and we were making money and we had a surplus in 

the budget. That‟s not true today. I agree with him on that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, earlier today I wrote to the Premier demanding 

that the government extend the sitting of the legislature for 

eight sitting days so that we could review in detail the 

supplementary estimates so we avoid this kind of a financial 

fiasco in this set of budget documents. To the Premier: has he 

had time to review that request, and will we be sitting for those 

extra eight days? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just to add a little 

bit to the public record, when that member left 10 years ago 

with the NDP in charge, this province had amongst the worst 

job creation records in the country, and we were losing people. 

Witness where that member went, Mr. Speaker. We were losing 

people to the province of Alberta. Today we have the lowest 

unemployment rate in Canada, Mr. Speaker. Today, Mr. 

Speaker, we are experiencing the fastest population growth in 

50 years in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟ve heard about the member‟s proposal for 

further debate on supplementary estimates. I think that‟s a 

reasonable proposal. I think the wrong way to go about it would 

be to add taxpayers‟ costs in terms of sitting days. What we‟re 

prepared to do today, Mr. Speaker, if the opposition wants, is 

extend the hours of this sitting. We can sit till midnight on 

supplementary estimates if the opposition wants to. We can 

begin today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Premier. 

He will know that he‟s presented supplementary estimates that 

amount to a new budget. That includes $293 million in 

spending cuts in 19 departments and agencies, and $65 million 

in additional spending in eight departments and agencies. And 

what we want to indicate today, Mr. Speaker, is the opposition 

will not be rubber-stamping these numbers without asking and 

getting answers to the questions around these spending 

increases and spending cuts. 

 

The last time the government was unable to bring a budget to 

vote in the Assembly was in 1991 under his former boss and 

predecessor, Grant Devine. Is he going to be following that 

example yet one more time of his former boss and mentor, 

Grant Devine, in not having a vote on these budget numbers? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, as you will know, 

supplementary estimates is about additional spending not in the 

original budget. It‟s about $65 million is the amount we‟re 

talking about here on a $10 billion budget. Hardly a new 

budget. 

 

However we‟ve seen the proposal from the member opposite. 

We‟re willing to extend the amount of debate for supplementary 

estimates. We‟ll sit till midnight. We could sit in the morning as 

well, Mr. Speaker. If we get two committees going, we could sit 

for 54 hours. The members opposite can ask questions on . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 



3740 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2009 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — We could sit for an additional 54 hours over 

the next two weeks so members opposite can ask questions on 

supplementary estimates, Mr. Speaker, and then I would expect 

a vote on supplementary estimates. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Children’s Hospital in Saskatoon 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The government‟s 

financial mismanagement has forced them to cut $95 million 

from the children‟s hospital in Saskatoon. In her 2009 budget 

speech, the member from Regina Wascana Plains said her 

government would deliver on their promise for a children‟s 

hospital, while the member from Saskatoon Northwest said he 

was embarrassed because Saskatchewan is the only province 

without one. I wonder how embarrassed the government is now 

because they had to cut funding to the hospital. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government has $1.5 million to spend on 

insiders Doug Emsley and Garnet Garven, but they have no 

money to invest in the children of Saskatchewan. 

 

Will the minister tell us when the children‟s hospital will open 

its doors? Or is it one of the many projects that will be a 

casualty of the government‟s financial mismanagement? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we committed to a 

children‟s hospital when we were in opposition. We‟ve 

committed to a children‟s hospital since we‟ve been in 

government. We have started the plans working on the 

children‟s hospital, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Saskatoon Health Region, where the hospital will be built, 

is not in the position to expend all that capital this budget year, 

Mr. Speaker. Five million dollars has been left in that budget so 

that they can continue on the scoping process and the 

development process of a children‟s hospital, Mr. Speaker — 

which I will tell you is a lot further ahead than after 16 years 

when they talked about it but never would put a cent behind it, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Moose Jaw Hospital Project 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This 

government‟s fiscal mismanagement has plunged Saskatchewan 

into a $1 billion deficit and now they‟re cutting projects left and 

right. Everywhere you look you can see projects like the 

children‟s hospital or the surgical care centres that have been 

cancelled. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Moose Jaw are wondering where our 

expansion to the Moose Jaw Hospital project is. Even though 

during the 2007 election the now Premier showed up in Moose 

Jaw and he said, the Moose Jaw expansion was a top priority, 

we have not seen any action on the file for the last two years. 

And now we see, with this billion dollar deficit, that programs 

are being cut across the province. 

 

My question: how much longer are the people of Moose Jaw 

going to have to wait for this project to begin? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, this line of questioning 

is very interesting and I hope they continue on this line of 

questioning because what it really does do is it accents the 

absolute deterioration of our health care facilities across the 

province under the NDP government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are left picking up the pieces, whether it‟s a 

children‟s hospital that they‟ve talked about in Saskatoon, 

whether it‟s a facility in Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I‟d like to ask the members to 

allow the minister the same opportunity to respond as the 

member was given the opportunity to ask the question. I 

recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to the 

Moose Jaw facility, $450,000 has been given to Five Hills 

Health Region to develop the scoping and look at what facility 

is needed in Moose Jaw, whether it‟s a revamping of the facility 

that‟s there. So that work is being done. To say that there has 

been nothing done couldn‟t be further from the truth, Mr. 

Speaker — $450,000 has been delivered. 

 

But it‟s interesting that they would talk about next year country. 

Whether it was in Humboldt, whether it was in Preeceville, 

many other facilities were announced on the eve of an election, 

like in Preeceville in 1999. And then the minister, former 

minister, had the nerve to go for a photo op, a spade in the 

ground as a grand opening, Mr. Speaker, as an opening just 

before the ‟03 election. It was all about politics on that side, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Saskatchewan Hospital in North Battleford 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Saskatchewan 

Party government has made promises and commitments to the 

people of Saskatchewan, and one of those promises was to build 

a new mental hospital in North Battleford. Two years after the 

Saskatchewan Party came to government, the people of North 

Battleford, the Saskatchewan and Canadian mental health 

associations, the members of the hospital family council, and 

the people of Saskatchewan who care about vulnerable people 

in our care, are still waiting for a new mental hospital. 

 

Through the government‟s own mismanagement and 

incompetence they are running a $1 billion deficit and we are 

seeing 95 million cut from the children‟s hospital in Saskatoon, 

32 million cut from the health sciences centre, and no action on 

the Moose Jaw Union Hospital. To the minister: when will 

construction begin on the Saskatchewan Hospital at North 



November 23, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3741 

Battleford? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the North Battleford 

provincial hospital is like many other facilities in the province. 

That facility is 100 years old. It‟s been through many 

administrations and really should have been replaced many 

years ago — many, many years ago. 

 

Our government has asked the Prairie North Health Region, 

along with the Ministry of Health — along with Corrections 

and Public Safety because it‟s a multi-use facility — to look at 

what needs to be done there. There‟s some scoping going on 

there, Mr. Speaker. Some plans are being developed as to what 

that facility should look like as we move forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:15] 

 

But you can see by the line of questioning — and I‟m sure there 

may be more to come — about the deterioration of our 

infrastructure in Saskatchewan, it has been left in a terrible 

shape, Mr. Speaker. As money becomes available, we will get 

the projects done. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Funding for Long-Term Care Facilities 

 

Mr. Furber: — Nothing is deteriorating more quickly than 

people‟s confidence in this government to keep their word, Mr. 

Speaker. Last February when the minister announced $152 

million in long-term care facility funding, he said: 

 

In many cases the condition of the existing facilities is . . . 

not up to the standards that seniors deserve . . . meeting 

today‟s building standards is incredibly important to 

ensure the safety and comfort of residents . . . 

 

On Thursday he cut $122 million for long-term care facilities 

— almost the entire budget. And it was axed because of fiscal 

incompetence, Mr. Speaker. One of the facilities was Pineview 

Terrace in Prince Albert. 

 

My question to the minister is this: why is his government now 

compromising the safety and comfort of Saskatchewan‟s senior 

citizens? Why do they target seniors for their own 

mismanagement and incompetence, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity 

over the first couple of years as being the Minister of Health of 

touring many of the facilities across Saskatchewan, whether it 

was in Rosetown or Biggar or Watrous, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I‟ve been in many of the long-term care facilities, and I would 

say these are people‟s homes. They are not adequate for people 

to live in. Mr. Speaker, this didn‟t happen last year or the year 

before. These facilities have been deteriorating for many, many 

years, Mr. Speaker. If the members opposite, and especially the 

member from Prince Albert, feels that it was such a priority for 

our government to replace, where were they over the last 16 

years? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

School Construction 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, the government has cut 31 

million for education capital projects. While we have a number 

of questions concerning a variety of education projects, today I 

want to focus on St. Mary‟s Community School. St. Mary 

School was this government‟s answer to pulling the already 

committed funding to Station 20 West. The Greater Saskatoon 

Catholic School Board wants to break ground and begin 

construction on St. Mary‟s in the spring. 

 

We know the government has almost 900,000 to spend on spam 

king, Doug Emsley, but what we don‟t know is if they have 

money for St. Mary‟s School. To the minister: can the school 

board tender the project in time to start in the spring, or has the 

money for St. Mary‟s School been axed like the money for the 

children‟s hospital and the health science centre, to name just 

two? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

am very pleased to answer on behalf of government about some 

great things that have been happening in education, which 

includes the St. Mary School. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since this government became the government of 

the day, we have allocated $303 million to capital construction. 

That‟s an incredible amount of money, Mr. Speaker, and, Mr. 

Speaker, there are many projects, there are many . . . Mr. 

Speaker, there are 22 major projects that are under way. 

 

I can tell the member opposite that currently we‟re constructing 

in Porcupine Plain, Oxbow, St. Anne School in Prince Albert, 

Maple Creek, Turnor Lake. Mr. Speaker, other projects are in 

design stage like Humboldt Collegiate, like Duck Lake, like St. 

Mary‟s, like Nutana, like E.D. Feehan, like Scott Collegiate, 

like Churchill High School, like Balcarres, Mr. Speaker. The 

Humboldt elementary, Douglas Park, Hafford, Arcola 

elementary, Campbell Collegiate, Elrose community school, 

Weyburn Comprehensive, Wascana Community School, and 

Monseigneur de Laval school, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Funding for School Councils 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 

Saskatchewan Association of School Councils receives $34,000 

per year. Now this organization has been serving the parents of 

Saskatchewan since 1938. That‟s 71 years. 

 

The Saskatchewan Association of School Councils is the voice 

of parents in public education. It presents the parents‟ views and 

perspectives to government. Parents are able to influence 

legislation, policy, and programs through the SASC 



3742 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2009 

[Saskatchewan Association of School Councils]. On Friday 

they learned from the government that their $34,000 per year 

grant was going to be cut next year. 

 

To the minister: has your government mismanaged our 

province‟s finances so badly and become so miserly that you 

have to cut $34,000 from this organization that has existed in 

the province of Saskatchewan for 71 years? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the member is right. For 

many, many years there has been changes in the education 

system. There have been amalgamations. There have been 

restructurings of school divisions. And under the former 

government, the . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Under the NDP when they were in 

government, they decided to restructure. We now have 29 

school division. And in each school, Mr. Speaker, we have a 

system called a school community council. That is different 

than what the member opposite talks about. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‟re trying to ensure that schools and parents 

and people have an opportunity through their school community 

council, Mr. Speaker, to be heard. That is the system that that 

group over there put in place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‟re working with that system, because we 

believe, we believe that the school community council is very, 

very important. And through the Saskatchewan School Boards 

Association, which I met with, Mr. Speaker, last week to ensure 

they would understand why we believe that it is the school 

community councils that are important to the structure of 

providing top quality education in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Social Services Caseloads and Initiatives 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. For 

months the government has shrugged off the loss of thousands 

of good paying, full-time jobs, and denied Saskatchewan was in 

a recession. But the mid-year financial report indicates, and I 

quote, that “Social Services is up $13.4 million from budget 

primarily due to higher-than-expected Saskatchewan Assistance 

Plan caseloads.” 

 

When this government came to office, social assistance 

caseloads were the lowest they had been since 1990, and were 

down 37 per cent since 1994. Now at a time when the 

government said that we were experiencing record prosperity, 

caseloads are beginning to rise again. To the minister: why are 

the most vulnerable people in our society suffering because of 

this government‟s mismanagement of our economy? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mismanagement, Mr. Speaker, of our 

economy is far, far, far from the truth of what‟s actually 

happening in Saskatchewan. And if the member opposite would 

remember, last year there was an incredible decrease in the 

number of cases that came through, clientele within my 

ministry. And we‟re now seeing a slight increase of that year 

over year. But in the two years that we‟ve been government, the 

decrease is still quite astounding at a time that we have a higher 

population than we‟ve seen in how many years — 50 years. So 

therefore, Mr. Speaker, as a percentage of population we still 

are quite low with the welfare numbers within our province. 

 

But I would like the member opposite to just answer for me, 

since he thinks we‟re misspending so badly, what should we 

have done? Should we have not increased and indexed shelter 

allowances? Should we have not increased and indexed rental 

supplements? Should we not adjust them every six months? 

Should we not lower income tax for the low-income people? 

Should we not have introduced the low-income tax credit? 

Should we not have increased the Saskatchewan employment 

supplement? Should we not have increased the seniors plan? 

What would he not have done? If he thinks this is misspending, 

Mr. Speaker, what would he cut? 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 500 through 531. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 500 to 531 tabled. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 112 — The Justices of the Peace 

Amendment Act, 2009/Loi de 2009 modifiant 

la Loi de 1988 sur les juges de paix 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 

second reading of The Justice of the Peace Amendment Act, 

2009. Mr. Speaker, the purpose of this legislation is to extend 

the age of retirement for justices of the peace from age 65 to 

age 70. Justices of the peace serve an important role in 

Saskatchewan‟s criminal justice system. To ensure that we have 

a sufficient number of these individuals has become a priority 

for this government. Consequential amendments will also be 

made to The Traffic Safety Court of Saskatchewan Act to extend 

the age of retirement of traffic justices of the peace. 

 

Justices of the peace are most often retired people, generally in 

their 50s and early 60s. They are well educated, have an 

abundance of life experience, and in most cases have held 

responsible jobs where they are required to make serious and 

complex decisions. Once hired, these people undergo formal 



November 23, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3743 

training and apprentice with another Justice of the Peace to gain 

some practical experience. If these individuals are appointed 

within only a few years of the current retirement age of 65, by 

the time they are fully trained, they are forced to leave the 

position. By extending the age of retirement further, we will 

take advantage of the services these individuals provide for a 

longer period of time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in addition these amendments will remove the 

prohibition barring practising lawyers from acting as justices of 

the peace. Members of the province‟s legal profession are prime 

candidates for this position, Mr. Speaker. The amendments 

continue to prohibit lawyers from acting as justices of the peace 

where they are in a conflict of interest such as practising 

criminal law or acting for or against either the provincial or 

federal government. 

 

Lastly, Mr. Speaker, we have made several housekeeping 

amendments to modernize the language used in the Act. Mr. 

Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The Justices 

of the Peace Amendment Act, 2009. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved second 

reading of Bill 112, The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 

2009. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the 

member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I have gone through the legislation and read the 

explanatory notes. And while I appreciated the minister‟s 

comments about the rationale for why changing retirement age 

and the kind of a quick overview of the process that we use for 

recruiting justices of the peace, I would have to agree that a 

majority of this piece of legislation seems to be housekeeping 

— making some minor adjustments as far as I can see to 

naming and definitions that are within the Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are a number of people that I have to speak 

to in regards to this and I know that some of my colleagues are 

interested in making comments also in The Justices of the 

Peace Act. And at this time, Mr. Speaker, I would adjourn 

debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Moose Jaw Wakamow has 

moved adjournment of debate. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 113 — The Justices of the Peace 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2009 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 

second reading of The Justices of the Peace Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2009. Mr. Speaker, the purpose of this 

legislation is to make amendments to seven other Acts made 

necessary by the amendments in The Justices of the Peace 

Amendment Act, 2009. Consequential amendments were 

required where these seven other Acts refer to either 

“non-presiding” or “presiding” justices of the peace, as those 

terms are removed in the proposed amendments in The Justices 

of the Peace Amendment Act, 2009. 

 

All individuals occupying this position will now simply be 

referred to as justices of the peace. These consequential 

amendments update the affected Acts accordingly. Mr. Speaker, 

I am pleased to move second reading of The Justices of the 

Peace Consequential Amendments Act, 2009. 

 

[14:30] 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved second 

reading of Bill 113, The Justices of the Peace Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2009. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

I recognize the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I think we can all tell by even the short comments that 

the minister made, this piece of legislation is fairly 

straightforward. Consequential amendments with the previous 

Bill will make the necessary changes, I believe the minister 

said, in the seven Acts that are associated and where there needs 

to be some amendments made to. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don‟t see any major problems with this, but 

again it is something that we need to go through in a little more 

detail, or I need to go through in a little more detail. So at this 

time I would adjourn debate on The Justices of the Peace 

Consequential Amendment Act. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Moose Jaw Wakamow has 

moved adjournment of debate. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 114 — The Small Claims 

Amendment Act, 2009/Loi de 2009 

modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur les petites créances 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 

second reading of The Small Claims Amendment Act, 2009. Mr. 

Speaker, Saskatchewan‟s small claims court is a division of the 

Provincial Court of Saskatchewan. Its mandate is to decide civil 

disputes concerning lesser amounts without all the formalities 

of the superior courts. In other words, it is a people‟s court. 

 

The limit of a claim that can be heard in small claims is 

$20,000. The parties can and often do appear without lawyers. 

In 2005, case management conferences were added to the small 

claims process. These sessions greatly assist parties in preparing 

for the trial, and some have resolved the issue without the need 

for a trial. 

 

The time has come to make some additional improvements to 

enhance the effectiveness and efficiency of our small claims 

system. In this Bill we are proposing four changes. The first 

clarifies the power of a judge at a case management conference. 



3744 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2009 

The current Act provides that a judge can make any appropriate 

order against a party who does not attend the case management 

conference. The amendment will explicitly add the power to 

order a judgment against a party who fails to appear. 

 

Secondly a change is being made in the way that parties are 

notified that there is a claim made against them. It is very 

important for the person to have actual knowledge of the claim. 

Accordingly the amendments will require that the document 

that begins a claim, called a summons, must be served 

personally or by registered mail. 

 

Next a new section is being added to permit a judge to consider 

evidence that may not strictly speaking be considered legal 

evidence under the law, but that the judge considers to be 

credible and trustworthy. This is designed so the parties who are 

not represented by lawyers and do not know the laws of 

evidence can still present their case. The judges of the small 

claims court will be able to determine whether the evidence 

should be considered. For example written repair evidence and 

evaluations of property may be considered without the person 

who prepared them being required to give evidence. 

 

Finally, the amendments address an issue that exists in the 

legislation respecting the setting aside of default judgments. A 

party now can get a judgment in the absence of the other party 

and can begin enforcement procedures. However the other party 

can at any time apply to the court to set aside the judgment and 

have the issue determined at a trial, provided that the judge is 

satisfied that the reasons for not appearing in the first place are 

reasonable. 

 

This is a necessary protection for the party who for good 

reasons was unable to be present. However it creates 

uncertainty for the party who did attend if the application to set 

aside the judgment is made at a much later date. For that reason, 

the amendment places a 90-day time limit on the ability to set 

aside a judgment. 

 

In addition there are several housekeeping amendments to 

correct terminology or clarify references. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Small Claims 

Amendment Act, 2009. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved second 

reading of Bill 114, The Small Claims Amendment Act, 2009. Is 

the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a 

pleasure to rise and add a few comments to Bill 114, The Small 

Claims Act, 1997. Mr. Speaker, going through many of the Bills 

that we‟ll deal with today, really the majority of changes have 

to do with housekeeping and maybe updating some of the 

outdated terminology. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, there was a particular piece in The Small 

Claims Act that did kind of jump out at me. And it had to do 

with, the minister made comment to it, I guess, when he 

referred to the small claims court as people‟s court, and the 

issue of: “A judge may make any appropriate order . . .” not 

only making the appropriate order, but making the decision as 

to what is considered allowable evidence in these cases. 

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, when it is the people‟s court, and where 

there may be people that aren‟t represented, and I think often, 

Mr. Speaker, people are not represented by a lawyer when they 

go to small claims court. And for many it may be last resort for 

an issue that may seem small in some instances, but I‟m sure to 

those individuals it is very important, and it may be of great 

consequence to them personally. 

 

So it‟s very seriously that some people will go to small claims 

court to seek a judgment in some issue that has arisen. It may be 

financial of varying extent. And I guess the minister had said 

quite clearly that there are maximums that are allowed within 

small claims court, but it is people‟s court.  

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it‟s important when we see these initiatives 

come forward, when a judge has a flexibility to make a decision 

on what‟s allowable as evidence in those claims, and that he or 

she takes into consideration that it may not be evidence in the 

purely legal sense, but that it is important to the case that is 

being put forward, and that it does make allowances that small 

claims court is the people‟s court, Mr. Speaker. And that it has 

fair consequence to many people that will take cases or claims 

before small claims. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, while there is a few other changes that are 

addressed here: powers of the judge in case management 

conference, and the decisions that are put forward or handed 

down or brought down; the notification that will happen in the 

case of a claim and how that should and should not be done, 

and what kind of limits there are on the notification; and the 

new section again for allowable evidence; and also the issue of 

setting aside judgments with timelines and other issues that 

need to be dealt in that area. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, with the clarification and updating of the 

Act, I want to at this point in time adjourn debate on the issue. 

And I know that there are a number of my colleagues that also 

want to make comments, but at this time, Mr. Speaker, I move 

that debate be adjourned. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Moose Jaw Wakamow has 

moved adjournment of debate. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 115 — The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2009 

(No. 2)/Loi n
o
 2 de 2009 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour 

du Banc de la Reine 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 

second reading of The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2009 

(No. 2). This Act makes five amendments to The Queen’s 

Bench Act, 1998 to address a number of matters. 

 

One amendment allows for enforcement of monetary penalties 

and cost awards made by agreement on international trade 



November 23, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3745 

panels in the same way as judgments of the Court of Queen‟s 

Bench. Manitoba, Quebec, Alberta, and the federal government 

have all passed legislation respecting enforcement of panel 

awards of costs. All provinces have made a commitment to pass 

legislation to provide for enforcement of the agreement on 

internal trade panel awards as is proposed in this legislation. 

 

The current trustee Act includes provisions for vesting orders 

where the court gives the judgment or order for sale of land, or 

where a judgment is given for a specific performance of a 

contract concerning land. In its 2002 report on The Trustee Act, 

the Law Reform Commission of Saskatchewan stated that these 

would be useful provisions, but recommended moving them 

from The Trustee Act to The Queen’s Bench Act, 1998 since it 

contains similar miscellaneous provisions relating to the powers 

of the court. 

 

The new trustee Act, 2009, based on the recommendations of 

the commission, does not include these provisions. It is 

proposed to include them in The Queen’s Bench Act, 1998 as 

recommended. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another amendment will repeal The Laws 

Declaratory Act and include an equivalent provision in The 

Queen’s Bench Act, 1998. The new section provides that if a 

judge, for example a small claims judge, has jurisdiction over a 

particular matter that relates to one of the rules of law in The 

Queen’s Bench Act, 1998, he or she can use the rules in dealing 

with that issue. This ensures that all courts in the province apply 

the same rules of law and promotes consistency in that regard. 

 

The date, Mr. Speaker, for the reception of English statute law 

is currently set for Saskatchewan in the Northwest Territories 

Act as July 15th, 1870. This is the date of the transfer of 

Rupert‟s Land from the Hudson Bay Company of Canada. An 

amendment will repeal that provision for the purposes of its 

application in provincial law and re-enacted in The Queen’s 

Bench Act, 1998 as parts of the various rules of law set out in 

this Act. 

 

Its inclusion in a provincial statute will make the provision 

more accessible to lawyers who must cite it in preparing 

materials for court. Currently they have to rely upon a statute 

volume that is over a century old and not found in most law 

libraries. The amendment will not change the legal effect of the 

provision, but simply make it easier to find in the statutes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Act will also abolish the common law action 

for breach of promise to marry. The action is likely 

unconstitutional and does not reflect current societal views and 

expectations of persons intending to marry. Mr. Speaker, I am 

pleased to move second reading of The Queen’s Bench 

Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2). 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved second 

reading of Bill 115, The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2009 

(No. 2). Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the 

member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, listening to the minister‟s comments on The Queen’s 

Bench Act, 1998, I guess I actually have more questions now 

after listening to him than what I did previously going through 

the legislation itself and the explanatory notes. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what I need to do . . . The minister just made a 

comment about proposed section 79.1 that provides for the 

abolition of the common law action for breach of promise to 

marry. But in the explanatory notes, and I believe in the 

minister‟s comments, he made the comment that the action is 

probably unconstitutional and no longer reflects current views. 

So I‟m not sure whether they‟re changing it because it‟s 

probably unconstitutional or that it no longer reflects current 

views. And I‟m not sure if probably that something may be 

unconstitutional, if that is a legitimate reason to actually make 

the changes to the legislation. 

 

Other than that, there are a number of small changes in the 

legislation. And I noticed that the minister made comments too, 

that moving the statute would make it easier for the legal 

profession, and I guess clearer in some of the judgments where 

it may be in use or may be quoted in some of their cases. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I need to do more work on this. And I know there 

are a number of my colleagues that I need to speak to, to get a 

better understanding of the changes that are proposed. So at this 

time, Mr. Speaker, I would adjourn debate on Bill 115. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Moose Jaw Wakamow has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 115. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 116 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Draude that Bill No. 116 — The 

Traffic Safety (Drivers’ Licences and Hand-held Electronic 

Communications Equipment) Amendment Act, 2009 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, this Bill that comes before us 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh I‟m sorry. 

 

[14:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 116, an Act to amend The Traffic Safety 

Act and to make consequential amendment to the statutory 

offences procedure Act, 1990, Mr. Speaker, the short title is the 

traffic safety (drivers‟ licences and hand-held electronic 

communications equipment) Act, 2009. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Act will ban cellphones and hand-held 

devices while operating a motor vehicle. And as we all know, 

cellphone use has expanded rapidly over the last 10 years. And 

we‟ve had numerous studies that have been done, Mr. Speaker, 



3746 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2009 

on the use of cellphones and what they have caused. Various 

provinces, Mr. Speaker, have taken some action on this issue. 

And, Mr. Speaker, for us it is also good to see that we are 

moving, moving on this. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned, the cellphone use has grown 

rapidly over the last 10 years. And, Mr. Speaker, one of the 

things that the researchers I talked about has . . . that we find is 

happening is that cellphone use has . . . that you are 23 times as 

likely to have an accident when you are using the cellphone, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, some of the things, other things in the Bill, 

we‟ve had different places where the minister brought forward 

studies that they have done on this Bill, Mr. Speaker. In a recent 

study from Virginia Tech Transportation Institute, Mr. Speaker, 

on cellphone use, as I mentioned, this study was the one that 

found the risk for drivers while talking on cellphones is three to 

six times that of a non-distracted driver, Mr. Speaker. Three to 

six times, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned the 23 

times, it was in this study that they found, Mr. Speaker, that 

texting also elevated the risk in the involvement of traffic 

collisions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we all know as we drive on our highways, 

as we drive on our roads across Saskatchewan, the use of the 

cellphone and how important it is to us, Mr. Speaker. Cellphone 

use has grown because we have found the need for cellphone 

use. Now, Mr. Speaker, in doing this and in looking over the 

Bill, we have to be careful to make sure that all questions have 

been asked, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I mention, in principle we are in favour of this 

Bill, but we do have some concerns. And, Mr. Speaker, 

obviously consultation, consultation which we have found to be 

lacking in this government on a number of other Bills . . . We‟re 

not certain as to who exactly has been consulted on this. 

 

Now I guess one of the questions, Mr. Speaker, is, are the 

police services around the province prepared to start enforcing 

as early as January 1st? What work has been done? Mr. 

Speaker, what were some of the studies done or what were the 

questions that were asked in implementation? What were the 

concerns and what were the challenges, Mr. Speaker, of other 

jurisdictions in Canada who had this put in? We have basically, 

Mr. Speaker, seen nothing. We have an idea and we have some 

studies which say there are concerns here that distractions cause 

accidents. We have some statistics around that. We‟re not 

disputing those, Mr. Speaker. What we are asking here is asking 

about consultations. Who did the government speak to? What 

did they say? Mr. Speaker, that would allow us to be able to 

deal with this and further, Mr. Speaker, know full well whether 

or not there would have to be any amendments, Mr. Speaker, 

amendments, perhaps friendly or otherwise, to this Bill which I 

think most residents in Saskatchewan would feel the time has 

come, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the questions that we have around this Bill 

is again we are left with, Mr. Speaker, only 12 days to look at 

the legislation, Mr. Speaker — 12 days to look at this 

legislation. And while the government announced this back in 

September, yet there was no legislation present that we could 

have in our hands so that we could look at it, Mr. Speaker. And 

as I mentioned, the concerns around the consultations, Mr. 

Speaker, the concerns of doing the research, of being shown all 

of the research that is available for us, that is what we would 

appreciate. That‟s what we are after, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Again we know that there are polls done, Mr. Speaker, and 

perhaps some people can govern by polls. But, Mr. Speaker, 

we‟d rather go with factual research and factual presentation 

and, Mr. Speaker, and consultation. And so simply that the polls 

and people want the cellphone use in here . . . We as legislators 

have a responsibility, Mr. Speaker, to the residents of 

Saskatchewan to provide good legislation. 

 

And good legislation involves consultation, Mr. Speaker. Good 

legislation not only involves consultation but good research, 

Mr. Speaker. And that is — at least to what we‟ve been shown 

— sorely lacking. And as I said, Mr. Speaker, not only that, but 

we now at this stage of the legislative calendar have been given 

a Bill to pass which, again I say, Mr. Speaker, that we in 

principle are in agreement with this Bill, but we need to 

understand very clearly what is being done, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know, we know for a fact that the cellphone 

use has grown enormously in leaps and bounds, all sorts of 

hand-held devices, Mr. Speaker, that we are now able to use in 

vehicles. What other hand-held devices would this include, Mr. 

Speaker? What else would it include? What would be deemed 

to be a hand-held device? Have we looked at all the possibilities 

— GPS [Global Positioning System], Mr. Speaker? What other 

things would this legislation refer to? And perhaps, Mr. 

Speaker, it should refer to all sorts of devices that are now 

appearing in vehicles. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the other things that perhaps we should be 

looking at, and again some discussion was the vehicles that now 

come with phones within the vehicles, Mr. Speaker. And have 

we looked at that? Have there been any studies done as to these 

phones that are not hand-held but are devices in our vehicles? 

How do they work, Mr. Speaker? Has there been any studies 

done on those sorts of situations in these vehicles in terms of 

safety? Perhaps that is more safe, Mr. Speaker, than the 

hand-held devices which could cause some distraction. And, 

Mr. Speaker, as I‟ve heard, there are some concerns that a 

hand-held device . . . or a device that is not hand-held perhaps is 

as distracting as a hand-held device. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what message are we sending then? Are we 

going to be back at this in six months making these changes? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I not only am concerned about the list of who 

was consulted, Mr. Speaker, but have we done all the research? 

Have all the questions been answered that need to be around 

this, what we all agree is a very important Bill? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I believe the residents also of Saskatchewan 

agree that we need a Bill of this sort. It‟s not that we are talking 

about whether we need a Bill of this sort, Mr. Speaker. We‟re 

talking about what the details that are needed in this Bill. So, 

Mr. Speaker, in a poll provided, about six in ten or 59.3 per cent 

of Saskatchewan residents strongly support legislation of this 

sort, and three in ten somewhat support. So overall support, Mr. 

Speaker, is 87.9. And so there are 3.6 per cent that strongly 

oppose this, Mr. Speaker. So I‟m not certain who those folks 



November 23, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3747 

are but for the most part, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan residents 

have spoken loud and clear. 

 

Now what they have spoken loud and clear on is they want to 

ban the use of cellphones when driving. It‟s up to us as 

legislators to take that and put that in, draft that into legislation 

as to what it would mean, Mr. Speaker. And what does it mean? 

And that is at the heart of the concerns that we are having with 

this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So again consultations . . . And this reminds me, Mr. Speaker, 

that this Bill, in terms of something that is so important, it is 

somewhat disappointing that this research would not be readily 

shared or shown to the opposition or whether in fact . . . what 

research was done so that we could deal with these questions, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Because this is a good debate to have. This is a great debate to 

have, Mr. Speaker, the debate here as to that we need that. But 

what should the Act look like? What should it look like? What 

should it include? What are some of the definitions of 

hand-held devices? Those are all things I think, Mr. Speaker, 

that . . . And should it be broadened out? And, Mr. Speaker, 

with that kind of agreement from the residents of 

Saskatchewan, I‟m sure if there was some amendments that 

would have to be made or some friendly amendments, if I may 

say that, that I‟m sure that all parties could agree on this. 

 

Our goal here is safety, Mr. Speaker. Our goal here is safety, 

safety for everyone on the highways. We have heard from the 

police force of the dangers here. Now again, Mr. Speaker, Chief 

Clive Weighill from Saskatoon called on banning texting in 

vehicles. And collisions are up 24 per cent in six months in 

2009 in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. And I think we‟ve all had . . . 

We don‟t need polls, Mr. Speaker, to do that, or stats. We all 

know ourselves in terms of driving and seeing some erratic 

driving on the roads. Or perhaps in the city, Mr. Speaker, in my 

city of Saskatoon, coming up to traffic lights and having 

someone in front of us not moving because they‟re talking on 

the phone. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, even if we are talking on cellphones in 

vehicles I think there‟s a . . . What have we done about that? 

Because, Mr. Speaker, at times if we can get ourselves involved 

in the discussions on a cellphone, it‟s not the whole idea that we 

are discussing some issue or perhaps some emergency issue, for 

that matter — which plays both ways when we were discussing 

those sorts of things — if that is not distracting as well. And, 

Mr. Speaker, what research has been done on that? So are we 

moving just to ban hand-held devices? Still at the same point in 

time, perhaps there isn‟t any change. 

 

I think the residents of the province expect something from us 

on this, and I think this side is, we‟re prepared to work towards 

that end. But I think there are some questions here that have to 

be answered, and to date we do not see anything. 

 

And as I mentioned, Mr. Speaker, it is somewhat disheartening 

to see that when this was announced in September, that at this 

time we now have to deal with the Bill and are told in a news 

conference that it will be in on January 1, that it‟ll be in on 

January 1, Mr. Speaker. I mean, I think that‟s fine to win some 

points, but I think the real work and the serious work that needs 

to be done is simply, Mr. Speaker, not being done with that kind 

of an approach. We have to do this; we should work towards an 

early resolve for this Bill. But, Mr. Speaker, there are important 

issues here that have to be . . . and important questions that have 

to be asked. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I haven‟t talked about the penalty for this yet. The 

penalty is a $280 fine and four points removed from the SGI 

[Saskatchewan Government Insurance] Safe Driver program, 

Mr. Speaker, the program that the NDP created. And we are 

seeing the value here again, Mr. Speaker. So again the penalty, 

whatever chosen, that‟s fine, Mr. Speaker. But again what have 

we done about that? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned, I think the Bill is supported 

and has backing by the residents of the province. But it is in 

principle, Mr. Speaker, of what is being supported here because 

I think it is up to the residents to say, we think that this should 

be law. We want to ban cellphones, and we all agree. We all 

agree with that, Mr. Speaker, that we should ban the use of 

cellphones. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, does that mean, for some people, does that 

mean ban the entire use of cellphones? Does it mean ban 

hand-held devices? What are the new devices out there and 

have they been proven? Have they been proven? Have we had 

experience? Or have there been studies done on these to show 

which hand-held, what sort of systems are best for vehicles? 

 

[15:00] 

 

And as I spoke, Mr. Speaker, are the systems that the new 

vehicles, perhaps some of the new vehicles are coming out 

with, where the telephones are built right onto the vehicles, are 

those perhaps safer, Mr. Speaker, than even some of the other 

things that we see, Mr. Speaker? Some of the other people that 

are advertising for devices that allow drivers not to have to use 

hand-held devices, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for my part I‟ve heard arguments that the use of a 

cellphone or just talking in the vehicle is not all that different, 

Mr. Speaker. There‟s still the distraction of dialing the numbers, 

Mr. Speaker. There‟s still the distraction of actually talking on 

the issue, Mr. Speaker. So there are concerns here, Mr. Speaker, 

and I think we have to deal with those issues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with this Bill, I think one of the most parts, if I 

just may review that again, the idea of banning all cellphone 

use, Mr. Speaker, is in here. And I think that for new drivers, 

Mr. Speaker, is a point again that we would like to look at. 

There are some very good positive points with that, Mr. 

Speaker, to allow new drivers who are learning how to drive to 

have no distractions. 

 

And that‟s exactly the point here, Mr. Speaker, is that we need 

to, we need to look at what are we doing and is the real 

argument, Mr. Speaker, the ban of cellphones in vehicles? Is it 

the distraction with the number of things that we have now 

going on when people drive, Mr. Speaker? 

 

People are doing all sorts of things in the vehicles, and as well 

now we‟ve had sort of the onslaught of the cellphone. And use 

is rising and right up to and including texting, which, Mr. 



3748 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2009 

Speaker, does take your eyes off the road. And as we all know, 

it does not take a lot of time in taking your eyes off and not 

concentrating on traffic ahead of you or people, perhaps on any 

road, to perhaps that we would drive off or somebody stepping 

off a curb in front of us, Mr. Speaker. There are enough things 

going on in our vehicles that we do not need to be taking our 

attention away in times of texting. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again, as I mentioned, in principle we are not 

opposed to this Bill. I think the opposition agrees, along with 

the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, that we have to move 

on this. 

 

The issue, Mr. Speaker, is not the issue of moving, but the issue 

of getting it right. And I just would reiterate one more time the 

time left to deal with this Bill — the 12, Mr. Speaker, only 12 

days to look at this legislation — when we look at the times 

where we‟re not dealing with Bills with our legislative agenda, 

Mr. Speaker. We have the issue now with the mismanagement 

and the new budget, Mr. Speaker, that has been brought in. And 

now we have this issue which we would hope would not 

become a casualty of that. We would hope that it would not 

become a casualty of that, Mr. Speaker, because of the fiscal 

mismanagement and the time that we are going to need to deal 

with those issues, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As we heard earlier today, the number of program cuts, the 

number of cuts to projects — people in Saskatchewan are 

asking questions. And sometimes, Mr. Speaker, we have to 

listen to what is most important to people. And at this time they 

are saying that the finances of this province are important to 

them. The finances of the province are very important to people 

of Saskatchewan and particularly, Mr. Speaker, in health care, 

Mr. Speaker, where we have seen cuts being made. It almost 

reminds me of a slash-and-burn kind of approach to things, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

What do we do with that? We have a number of articles here 

where we have a number of polls where the people of 

Saskatchewan say this is important. The government says we 

will do it. They say that in September, and away we go. 

 

They wait till there‟s 12 days left. They propose a Bill and then, 

Mr. Speaker, now the people of Saskatchewan are saying the 

finances are important. The finances of the province are very 

important to us, and we have 12 days left. Twelve days before 

the legislature is to be gone. That reminds me of “The 12 Days 

of Christmas”, Mr. Speaker, but I don‟t think this is very much 

of a Christmas present to anyone — this budget that we‟re 

hearing about. 

 

So now, Mr. Mr. Speaker, just a practicality of dealing with this 

in the time that we have left to deal it. And, Mr. Speaker, I wish 

it wasn‟t so. This is the season for wishes, but I wish this wasn‟t 

so, Mr. Speaker, that we would be in this position with the 

Christmas season coming, our session supposedly coming to an 

end, and we have a budget. And the people of Saskatchewan are 

saying, what is going on? We need to know what is going on, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

At the same time the people are also saying we have a safety 

issue here because people are using cellphones. And we see that 

it‟s come to a point where cellphone use, we have to move on 

this. And so we have a safety issue. In some ways, Mr. Speaker, 

it‟s a sad, sad day that a safety issue should be trumped by the 

finances of this. But now we‟ve got problems, Mr. Speaker. 

We‟ve got questions to answer. 

 

Because not only are people asking about safety issues about 

cellphones, but they‟re asking about safety issues in nursing 

homes. They‟re asking are there safety issues where the 

members have raised, members have raised and said that there 

were safety issues in nursing homes. Now we have a safety 

issue on the cellphones, and we have a budget that people want 

questions answered on. And it‟s quite a position, Mr. Speaker, 

that we find ourselves in. And at the same time there are only, 

where we‟re only given 12 days to look at the legislation. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, I‟ve been saying 12, but I believe it‟s only 

eight days that we have now before the legislation is done. So I 

stand corrected there, Mr. Speaker. I was giving more time than 

we have here. So, Mr. Speaker, it‟s only eight more days that 

we deal with. And if you look at the actual schedule that we 

have on those days, that is in fact not that . And yet we have 

nothing before us in terms of studies, nothing before us on that. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, over and above all that, the budget. The 

budget with questions about this and questions about whether it 

be . . . In health care it‟s safety, Mr. Speaker, and questions of 

safety and cellphone use, which are very important. And the 

people want us to deal with these things, and they want us to 

deal with it properly. And I don‟t think they want it, Mr. 

Speaker, this gone over lightly and to rubber-stamp this. I think 

we‟re put here, Mr. Speaker, to do the due diligence on the 

Bills. And the due diligence needs to be done, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could go on further on this because this is this 

topic. And at the point we find ourselves in the legislative 

calendar, Mr. Speaker, and the issues that have arisen in 

Saskatchewan just over the recent days, over the recent days we 

need to be . . . Mr. Speaker, these are serious issues, and they 

deserve our attention. And they deserve the necessary reviews 

and the necessary consultations, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the question, the main question here, if we could 

get perhaps maybe some movement on this Bill, is the 

consultations. Mr. Speaker, I see nothing before us. I see 

nothing in the minister‟s speech, Mr. Speaker. And I‟ve 

reviewed that and I see nothing that in terms of that would 

speak to the consultations that have occurred, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, there has been no, no consultation. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, how do these compare to the 

other distractions that we have in our vehicles, all the things 

that are going on? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟ve not yet talked about the changing, which is 

also in the . . . changing the driver‟s licence to a one-part 

licence, Mr. Speaker. I think that there‟s some merit in that as 

well, Mr. Speaker, and I‟m glad to see that included in here. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, you know, the members opposite are the 

government. And I know they‟re fond of sometimes — and 

we‟ve heard on various Bills; I‟ve heard on, Mr. Speaker, on 

Bill 80 for example, the Bill 80 — that they in some ways that 

they are attempting to blame the opposition for not being able to 



November 23, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3749 

pass it, Mr. Speaker. And I remind the members that they are 

the government, and they are responsible for the calendar, for 

the legislative calendar, Mr. Speaker, to do, to put in legislation, 

important legislation like this legislation in a way that it has 

been done, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To print legislation and just say, accept us, trust us — we‟ve 

heard that line here before, Mr. Speaker. There‟s a legislative 

process, and the government members or the government 

should understand that at the base of it is a respect for that 

process, and to put Bills forward in a timely manner. So 

understanding that they will require the necessary discussion, 

consultations, and everything that I‟ve mentioned, Mr. Speaker. 

So fundamental to our legislative process is the process of 

consultation, putting Bills out in a timely manner where you 

feel that they are important. And I think that in this case has not 

been done, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we have to, on this side, we have to take the time necessary 

now to go over this Bill — to go over it; to go over it and 

understand the Bill. And, Mr. Speaker, one of the main things 

is, I think, the question is that we do not want to be here again 

next year because we find that in fact it is the idea of cellphone 

use in vehicles that is causing the accidents, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And if we find that, if we find that in fact it is simply the act of 

talking on a phone in a vehicle, whether it‟s hand-held or 

otherwise, that is causing the distractions, Mr. Speaker, and the 

studies bear that out . . . And, Mr. Speaker, perhaps there are 

studies that have been done. Now we don‟t know or have not 

seen or had those questions answered in terms of cellphone use. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to say again, we are with the people of 

this province in agreeing that there should be cellphone ban use. 

But, Mr. Speaker, I wonder when you ask people what that 

means to them, I wonder what it truly does mean to them. And 

have we asked them or have we simply said we are for the 

banning of cellphone use? 

 

But what does that mean? What does that mean to people in the 

province of Saskatchewan? Does it mean no talking on phones 

in vehicles, Mr. Speaker, as they have introduced for new 

drivers? Or is it, Mr. Speaker, is it texting, or is it the total ban 

of any device such as a phone in a vehicle? Is that where we‟re 

heading, Mr. Speaker? 

 

And if we find, Mr. Speaker, and if we find that the accident 

rates have not gone down, perhaps, Mr. Speaker, we would look 

back to today and say, we should have taken a little more time, 

Mr. Speaker. We should have taken a little more time on this 

issue and said, let‟s take the time and do the proper 

consultation. Let‟s go and find the proper research on this issue, 

Mr. Speaker. And let‟s get this Bill right. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think probably at the end of the day, at the end of 

the day, Mr. Speaker, the most disconcerting thing is the time 

that we have left on this Bill, Mr. Speaker, the time that we 

have left on this Bill to deal with this in a manner that deserves 

the serious attention that we can give it. Mr. Speaker, we don‟t 

want this to be a knee-jerk reaction. Mr. Speaker, we don‟t want 

this to be something that we have to come . . . as many times 

legislation from that side has come. 

 

And we‟ve had oops Bills. We‟ve had everything here, Mr. 

Speaker, where we have to take the Bill back. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we‟ve had to bring it back and do a redo, do a redo on 

some of these Bills. So, Mr. Speaker, we don‟t want this Bill 

. . . This is too important. This is too important for the people of 

Saskatchewan to do that. So we need some thoughtful debate on 

this Bill. We need some thoughtful reading of the other 

legislation. We need some thoughtful looks at the research. 

And, Mr. Speaker, that‟s what this side requires on this Bill. 

 

And with that, Mr. Speaker, I know there are other members on 

our side who wish to enter into this debate. And, Mr. Speaker, 

with that I thank you and look forward to more debate. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It‟s 

indeed a pleasure as always to weigh in on debate and 

deliberations and discussions within this Assembly and to do so 

on behalf of the good folks within Regina Rosemont. It‟s my 

honour to bring their voices to the debate. 

 

And this is actually a Bill, in fact, that I‟ve done much survey 

within my constituency. And we‟ve had many discussions and I 

continue to do that as we move forward here, Mr. Speaker. And 

it‟s something that I‟d actually urge all members to do: to make 

sure that their constituents are aware of this legislation and to 

make sure we fully understand what that means to our 

constituents. 

 

[15:15] 

 

I have to say on the surface, Mr. Speaker, that as has been 

stated by my colleagues, that we support this legislation in 

principle. We support moving in this direction, Mr. Speaker, 

and making sure that community safety is brought to 

Saskatchewan people. In many ways, it‟s a matter of keeping 

pace with the evolution and the changes within our society, the 

evolving technologies — and in this case cellphone and 

electronics use, Mr. Speaker, which have really been of huge 

growth and huge uptake within society over the last 10 years, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it‟s important, as we talk about community safety in this 

context, Mr. Speaker, that we talk that New Democrats are on 

the side of community safety on so many fronts, Mr. Speaker. 

We‟re on the side of community safety as it relates to dangerous 

offenders who may be released into the public, in the case of a 

sex offender that was recently released. And this government 

failed to follow their policy to inform, adequately inform or to 

inform at all the public, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So when I talk about community safety, I certainly speak about 

it in broad stroke as well, Mr. Speaker. And certainly we urge 

the government and support the principle of this legislation. We 

urge the government to look at community safety in a much 

broader context, Mr. Speaker, recognizing the multitude of 

challenges that our society faces. And certainly one example of 

that would be in calling this government to account and to 

behave in a more responsible fashion the next time the public‟s 

put at risk by the release of, whether that be an inmate 

incorrectly again, in the last event a sex offender. 



3750 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2009 

And I know that my constituents are hugely concerned that this 

government won‟t follow policy such as this that are there to 

protect community safety. And they say to me regularly how 

pleased they are that we‟re raising those kinds of issues because 

those are the kinds of issues that are so important to families 

within my constituency there. They look at their children and 

the different challenges that certainly exist within our society. 

 

We always stand on the side of community safety, just as we do 

on this Bill here in supporting the banning of cellphones and 

texting. But we‟ve got to make sure we get it right, Mr. 

Speaker. And we do have some questions on that front. 

 

One of the other things that you could talk about, when we‟re 

talking about community safety, Mr. Speaker, on a broad 

stroke, would be the capacity, the fiscal capacity of government 

and the fiscal circumstance of government, Mr. Speaker. And I 

know so many of my constituents, Mr. Speaker, are feeling 

hugely jeopardized, compromised, and feeling that they‟re 

being placed at risk by the financial mismanagement of this 

government. 

 

And it relates directly back to community safety, Mr. Speaker, 

back to our institutions of health care and education and the 

different abilities of those programs to provide community 

safety to our constituents, to the people of this province. And 

that‟s our job, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so when we‟re talking about community safety and we 

look at this cellphone ban, which is something that we certainly 

urge the government to move forward with in principle, and 

something we support in principle, we ask the government to 

look on the broad stroke of the many, many, many other key 

areas that it‟s really missing providing adequate community 

safety to Saskatchewan residents, whether that‟s their release of 

recently a sex offender into the community — not following 

their protocol to then alert the community so that families and 

schools and different facilities and churches were aware that 

this individual was within the community. And that‟s shameful 

that this government wouldn‟t have followed that policy, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But getting back more directly to Bill No. 116, An Act to amend 

The Traffic Safety Act and to make a consequential amendment 

to The Summary Offences Procedure Act, 1990, it‟s fair to say, 

Mr. Speaker, that we certainly support many aspects of this Bill 

in principle. 

 

We are very concerned, Mr. Speaker, that cellphones are a huge 

distraction to drivers, Mr. Speaker, and a huge risk on the roads. 

And it‟s not just the anecdotal evidence that you or I or many 

other individuals within this Assembly might have on that. And 

I know many of us put many, many hours on the road, Mr. 

Speaker, in this job, Mr. Speaker, and we probably recognize 

more than others in many cases. Or as many other individuals, 

many of my constituents spend a lot of time on the road. They 

recognize the number of people that are using these hand-held 

devices and being distracted from what their primary job should 

be, and that‟s offering the due care and attention that they 

should to the road ahead of them, and making sure that our 

fellow neighbours are safe and the other individuals who are 

sharing the road with them are safe, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we would urge that kind of responsibility right back to all 

Saskatchewan drivers and anybody who enters our jurisdiction, 

Mr. Speaker, because it puts at risk our families and our 

communities and our loved ones when individuals don‟t operate 

safely. 

 

And it‟s worthy to note that this Bill is in many ways a response 

to the evolution of technologies, the evolution of society, I 

suppose, Mr. Speaker, and the huge uptake of use in the last 10 

years of cellphones and certainly texting, Mr. Speaker. I know 

when I referenced the Canadian Wireless Telecommunications 

Association, they‟ve shown the dramatic increases in the uptake 

into the market of these kinds of devices, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Ten years ago, these were really just simply in their infancy. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, they‟re really a mature industry that has 

strong penetration across our province and across the world, 

Mr. Speaker. And in saying that, it‟s important that we 

recognize that other jurisdictions have moved the line on this 

front and have put legislation in place to respond to this concern 

and to the needs of their drivers in response to safety. 

 

And I think I can reference here in Canada that Newfoundland 

and Labrador have banned hand-held cellphone use back into 

2003. So they‟ve sort of been some leaders on this front, Mr. 

Speaker. Quebec and Nova Scotia have introduced similar bans. 

And I understand that as well Alberta, Manitoba, and Prince 

Edward Island are all considering such sorts of legislation. 

 

In fact, I‟ve spoken specifically with the MLA, the member 

from Alberta who‟s put forward this legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

And he‟s taken this on and it was quite a long consultation 

process that that individual took on and in fact put it forward as 

a private member‟s Bill, Mr. Speaker, and has a lot of pride in 

that legislation and has done . . . Certainly I haven‟t scrutinized 

the Alberta legislation or the consultation that occurred, but 

from what‟s been stated back to myself, a very, very thoughtful 

review of its implications and making sure that it fits the 

Alberta circumstance. 

 

And one of the concerns that I think we‟ve been raising here, 

and I know the member from Saskatoon Fairview highlighted 

this so well, is that we‟re concerned that we maybe haven‟t had 

that same sort of thoughtful development of this legislation here 

in Saskatchewan. And the reasons that we would be concerned 

is that this government has proven itself incapable in many 

ways of putting forward legislation that has followed the proper 

vetting processes and the proper legislative instruments that 

should evaluate such legislation. And as a result, in many cases 

we‟ve seen flawed legislation that has had to be corrected or 

changed and in many ways has had unintended consequences 

for Saskatchewan people that haven‟t been the productive 

purpose of the legislation. 

 

When we look at some of the statistics, Mr. Speaker, and this is 

why the opposition has urged the government in this way and 

certainly supports the principle of this, is that the statistics are 

just incredibly compelling, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to 

distracted drivers. 

 

And we understand that cellphones and texting are no short part 

of distracting drivers, Mr. Speaker. I understand that using a 

cellphone while driving makes you 23 more times as likely to 



November 23, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3751 

be in an accident, Mr. Speaker — 23 times more likely. And 

you think about what that does back to, even from an 

individual‟s fiscal circumstance, what that does to rates, Mr. 

Speaker, and what that does to our insurer. And of course then 

we all pay for those accidents. 

 

But we need to look beyond that, Mr. Speaker. We need to 

think more specifically how this affects our constituents and 

children and families and our loved ones. And certainly 

distracted drivers on the road are, I believe, something that all 

legislators should be standing up to urge this government to 

make sure that, when they put forward legislation, that they get 

it right. And, Mr. Speaker, that‟s something that we‟re 

concerned with. 

 

But I know I‟ve referenced specifically some work that the 

Virginia Tech Transportation Institute has done, and I thank this 

institute for the work that they‟ve done because here they are 

being referenced in our debates and proceedings here today, and 

in effect going to be changing some of the laws and practice 

within this province of ours. 

 

But they quote about the 23 times more likely to be in an 

accident while using a cellphone, and that‟s a very, very 

compelling statistic, Mr. Speaker. And it‟s something that we 

should all take heed of. And it‟s certainly in no short order one 

of the main reasons that this opposition and myself and my 

constituents urge this government and support this banning of 

cellphones and texting while driving — in principle. 

 

That doesn‟t mean we necessarily think this legislation has it 

completely right though, Mr. Speaker, and we need to make 

sure that that is the case. We‟ve been concerned that on a Bill 

that comes with huge support from the Saskatchewan people, 

that we‟re wondering why this was tabled so late, Mr. Speaker, 

into this legislative session. Because there was no reason for 

delay on this front, Mr. Speaker, had the Bill been constructed 

and crafted and consultation occurred to have had this on the 

order sheet and to make sure that this priority was provided 

back to Saskatchewan people. 

 

And so we are concerned in many ways now because we know 

when this government crafts legislation they fail to consult with 

the people it affects and in many ways they‟ve made significant 

flaws in many pieces of their legislation. So we now need to go 

undertake as an Assembly — and certainly as the opposition — 

to undertake to make sure that that‟s not the case with this 

legislation, Mr. Speaker. So we have many conversations to be 

had and many groups and individuals to discuss this legislation 

with further. 

 

And that brings us to some of the concern and why this 

government brought this in so late to session when it was 

probably something, Mr. Speaker, that the people of 

Saskatchewan expect us to get to work on, Mr. Speaker. And 

I‟m greatly disappointed, Mr. Speaker, in the Saskatchewan 

Party on this front. Because this Bill, as I‟ve said, certainly I 

and we support in principle, Mr. Speaker, and we really look 

forward to moving a priority for the Saskatchewan people. 

 

But we‟re very concerned with a government who‟s, in many 

ways, delayed this process and now has rammed this piece of 

this legislation that affects community safety right up against 

something else that‟s hugely significant, Mr. Speaker, that 

affects community safety in a major way, Mr. Speaker. And 

that‟s the announcement of the gross fiscal mismanagement that 

we‟re witnessing within this province, Mr. Speaker, the 

announcement that we‟re $1 billion short, a $1 billion deficit, 

Mr. Speaker, here at this point in time. 

 

It‟s something that my constituents and individuals across this 

province are also pressing us on to make sure is a priority. So 

here we have a bit of a collision, Mr. Speaker, of I guess 

legislation with another huge priority of Saskatchewan people, 

and certainly the opposition will endeavour to make sure that 

both of these are addressed with every ability that we have, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But we‟re disappointed in the government, Mr. Speaker, in not 

lengthening the number of sitting days this session as we‟ve 

requested to make sure we do the diligent work that the people 

of this province and the communities of this province expect us 

to, Mr. Speaker. It‟s not a matter of getting done early or 

something like getting ready for Christmastime, Mr. Speaker. 

It‟s a matter of doing the good work for the people of the 

province who send us here, Mr. Speaker. That‟s why we‟ve 

called for an extension of the session — something that the 

Premier has denied. I assume his denial has to do with a huge 

concern as to having the issues raised, the critical issues raised, 

as it relates to the $1 billion deficit that he, he — the Premier — 

has created in two short years in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So when we talk about community safety, that‟s where we want 

to be looking in the broad context. Certainly we urge the 

government to move in this way. Certainly we support the 

principles of this legislation, but we want to make sure that the 

government‟s focused on community safety on the whole, broad 

context as it relates to best practice in health care, Mr. Speaker, 

as it relates to best practice and prudent and responsible 

financial management, Mr. Speaker. And when you don‟t have 

that in place, such as right now, it certainly places families and 

individuals and communities and the people of this province 

and the prosperity that we should expect and enjoy, Mr. 

Speaker, at risk. 

 

And it relates to when a government doesn‟t follow procedures 

in place as it relates to inmates that they‟ve released incorrectly 

that are a danger to the public, and then they decline to follow 

their policy in letting the public realize and be aware and to 

notify the public of this risk to families and to our communities. 

 

It‟s worthy to note that within this legislation there‟s a $280 

fine, and four points are removed from the SGI safe driver 

program. And the reason I say it‟s worthy is that this is a 

program that was brought forward, in fact I‟m quite proud 

actually to say that it was New Democrat government that 

brought forward this instrument, Mr. Speaker — if we can call 

it that — to control the habits of driving. And really that‟s what 

we‟re looking at here is, we‟re looking at an instrument to best 

affect the driving habits of Saskatchewan people. And we 

brought forward a driving program that has a demerit system to 

it and of course a fine, Mr. Speaker, consequences that can then 

be applied to unsafe driving practices and failure to follow the 

laws of our road. 

 

[15:30] 



3752 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2009 

And we believe that this is — and certainly it doesn‟t work in 

all cases, Mr. Speaker — but we do believe it‟s a good 

instrument, not perfect, but a good instrument in effecting the 

kind of positive change in drivers‟ behaviours and habits that 

we expect, Mr. Speaker. So we‟re pleased to see the utilization 

of that structure within the legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I was just looking down to the floor, and of course I was 

looking to our Clerk here, and I know there‟s no bigger Rider 

fan in this Assembly, I think, than our Clerk. And the reason 

that comes to mind is, yesterday leaving that great game, Mr. 

Speaker, that great game with a big victory over the 

Stampeders, I noticed so many vehicles fleeing the area and so 

many individuals on their cellphones. Bumper to bumper 

traffic, Mr. Speaker, as I walked back out of the area in around 

Mosaic Stadium at Taylor Field, and it brought to my attention 

again, Mr. Speaker, the importance of legislation like this. 

Again it reinforces why we‟re urging this government to move 

forward in a thoughtful way towards effective legislation to 

effect positive driving changes around cellphone use. 

 

But I say in some ways it seemed to be rather chaotic, Mr. 

Speaker. And I thought, boy, if we could remove those 

cellphones from the hands of those many drivers at this point in 

time, as they were leaving the Rider game . . . and I‟m very 

pleased. I hope they were phoning to tell their friends and 

family in other provinces about our great success here at Taylor 

Field, but I wish they would have waited till they got home, Mr. 

Speaker, to do that because at the same time we put at risk the 

many families and children that were walking hand in hand 

with their mom or dad at that point in time from after that game. 

 

So we hope we get this right, Mr. Speaker. We are in favour of 

this Bill in principle. We have concerns, as I‟ve said, as it 

relates to a government who makes policy on the fly from 

knee-jerk responses. 

 

Certainly we know the Saskatchewan people support moving in 

this direction, and that‟s why we‟ve urged this. We urge it as 

well because we think it‟s best practice, but to do these two 

properly, we need to make sure the legislation gets this right. 

And this is something that this government has erred on in so 

many cases, Mr. Speaker. At the end they‟re trying to do 

cleanup in many cases on legislation, or they‟ve passed 

legislation that has hugely negative, unintended consequences 

for Saskatchewan people. We need to get this right, Mr. 

Speaker, because it‟s an important, important, important 

principle and not just because you have a popular poll, Mr. 

Speaker, should that drive policy making. It should be made out 

of making sure that it meets the concerns within your 

jurisdiction, and in our case, our province, to make sure we 

completely understand the effects on groups and individuals 

and on some of the broader pieces, Mr. Speaker, that might not 

be contemplated. 

 

We have questions about even the date that this will be installed 

and that will be within our communities, I believe as a set date 

of January 1st. We are wanting to make sure that the capacity 

within our police forces and that our police services around this 

province are going to be able to be enabled and are going to be 

ready to be able to enforce, be prepared to be able to enforce 

this legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we have to make sure that that consultation occurs as well. 

And I wish I could count on the members opposite to conduct 

this kind of legislation and to make sure those kind of ducks are 

in a row, but we‟ve learned in too many cases, Mr. Speaker, 

that we can‟t make that presumption, that we can‟t expect that, 

Mr. Speaker. So we currently are certainly doing that kind of 

consultation. We need to make sure that on January 1st that 

when this becomes a law, that it‟s something that actually is 

able to be fulfilled, that it‟s going to be able to be implemented 

by police services. 

 

And again this gets back to the fact of why we had a 

government that really delayed this legislation at the start of this 

session, Mr. Speaker, bringing it in so late and ramming it right 

up against the time where they end up showing one of the worst 

cases or one of the greatest cases of financial mismanagement 

in this province, Mr. Speaker, because now you have these 

competing priorities, Mr. Speaker, and very, very important on 

both fronts that we get this right and raise the people‟s 

questions. 

 

And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t think I‟ve had a busier time 

just responding to phone calls and getting the backlog of 

messages as right now, when Saskatchewan people across this 

province . . . my constituents and others, I‟ve met so many 

across rural Saskatchewan who are so concerned with the 

behaviour of this government as it relates to the gross fiscal 

mismanagement, Mr. Speaker. And they said, we‟ve seen this 

story before. It‟s the same old, same old Tory story, Mr. 

Speaker. And they‟re disappointed on that front. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, so again, we support the principle of 

removing cellphones and texting from cars, but we‟ve got to 

make sure that we — from driving — we‟ve got to make sure 

that we understand the unintended consequences and the ability 

to enforce that legislation when it comes into force, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And broader questions even as it relates specifically to driving, 

Mr. Speaker . . . because we know distraction, Mr. Speaker, is I 

believe 25 per cent of the cause of accidents. But we don‟t 

know exactly what percentage of the 25 per cent is specifically 

cellphones and texting. 

 

I‟m sure it‟s . . . I don‟t minimize that in any way because I 

think it‟s a big part of it. I think it‟s a significant part and we 

need to move on it. But I‟m wondering what other sorts of 

actions are occurring in vehicles, Mr. Speaker, that are 

distracting individuals and what kind of audit and thoughtful 

analysis has this government conducted to make sure that this 

legislation is actually effective in its goal of reducing distraction 

in vehicles to make sure that my family and yours, Mr. Speaker, 

my constituents and yours, Mr. Speaker, are safe, and safe as it 

relates to the road. 

 

And I even think of some of the evolutions within technology, 

and I‟m wondering, does this legislation have any impact on 

GPSs? Do GPSs have any concerns? Is there research out there, 

Mr. Speaker, as it relates to GPSs and should we be taking a 

look at this? Certainly I think we should all be looking at all of 

the distractions and making sure we provide thoughtful analysis 

of whether or not there‟s a role for that within legislation. 

 



November 23, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3753 

I think of many of these musical instruments, the electronic 

ones, Mr. Speaker, such as iPods, Mr. Speaker, and other 

brands of hand-held electronic devices that provide us music, 

Mr. Speaker. And of course these can be distracting too if 

you‟re looking down at your iPod Shuffle and trying to shuffle 

through to the next song. And I don‟t believe that‟s included in 

this legislation, Mr. Speaker. And I don‟t know if the Minister 

of Agriculture uses an iPod or not when he drives, or others or 

whomever, but it‟s important that we consider those other kinds 

of devices as well, Mr. Speaker, in safety as it relates to the 

road. 

 

We have many questions as well as far as how this is practically 

applied, and what its actual application is as it relates to 

mounted devices. So I guess if we‟re looking specifically at the 

hand-held devices, what if your hand-held device, Mr. Speaker, 

is mounted? What if your hand-held device, Mr. Speaker, is 

mounted in the vehicle? Does that pose a risk to Saskatchewan 

people, or is that included within this legislation? 

 

And these are the kind of questions that we think the 

government should be including when they‟re doing legislative 

changes and making sure that the legislation is including the 

scope of the many distractions that occur for driving — making 

sure they put forward legislation that makes sense to meet these 

needs, and simply goes through the proper consultations on 

these fronts. 

 

Right now, Mr. Speaker, we are concerned that this government 

got a poll that said that banned cellphones is popular, and so 

knee-jerk they do that. But we don‟t realize the unintended 

consequences. And we‟re not sure if they‟re, if they‟re 

committed to looking at the many, many other issues that cause 

distraction while driving and bring danger to our roads, Mr. 

Speaker, something that we all as legislators should be focused 

sincerely to make sure that we‟re applying best practice and 

research and evidence to reduce, Mr. Speaker, because I know 

that‟s something, as I talk with my constituents about this piece 

of legislation, they want to make sure that safety is brought to 

the roads. And certainly they, in spades — meaning most of 

them certainly, probably not all of them but the ones I‟ve 

chatted with and I‟ve chatted with many on this front — support 

reducing or eliminating the dangers as it relates to cellphones. 

But there‟s other risks out there, and we should be evaluating 

those, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Within this legislation I would like to commend and take the 

time to commend a Saskatchewan leader on this front who‟s 

brought this forward to us as legislators and said, can you work 

on this? Can you look at this? And that would be Saskatoon 

Police Chief Clive Weighill. I commend him for his leadership 

and from his role as it relates to policing, Mr. Speaker, 

recognizing something that‟s important to him and his members 

in his service and with his vantage point on the perspective to 

say, we want your legislature to look and make sure you get this 

right, Mr. Speaker. And certainly, Mr. Weighill‟s leadership on 

this front is no small reason of why we‟re now acting on it here, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I want to make sure that we‟re looking at all distractions, 

Mr. Speaker, as it relates to driving and not just cellphones and 

texting, and to make sure that we‟ve thoughtfully analyzed all 

of those and to look at what sort of legislative changes might 

effect the kind of positive safe driving changes that we‟re 

looking for, Mr. Speaker. We‟re disappointed on that front that 

this government has dragged its heels so significantly in 

introducing this legislation into session, Mr. Speaker, because 

the consultation that needs to happen on any piece of legislation 

. . . even though we fully support the principle and urge the 

government to move this direction to reduce the harm of 

cellphones and texting while driving. We need to make sure that 

we‟ve had the thoughtful consultation to make sure that, with 

all the stakeholders across this province and individuals, that we 

understand the actual consequences and how it‟s going to be 

applied and what impact it has on them. 

 

Because in many ways if you move forward in a hasty fashion 

and without proper consultation, you end up with flawed 

legislation, as we‟ve seen time and time again with this 

government, who then chases its tail trying to fix it or leaves 

those negative ramifications for Saskatchewan people. And we 

need to make sure we vet this properly and make sure that it 

includes the purpose and intent that Mr. Weighill and that 

members of this side — and I hope members of this entire 

legislature — are committed to, Mr. Speaker, the broad sense of 

community safety. 

 

When I look at other jurisdictions that have moved in this 

direction, we should be doing a bit of a comparative and 

certainly a dialogue and discussion with those jurisdictions to 

see what that experience has been like for them, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And we will endeavour to be doing that in the coming 

weeks and days. 

 

We see within this legislation as well a modernization of a 

driver‟s licence. I use the word modernization because that‟s the 

word that was put forward by the minister. And we‟ll certainly 

have some other questions on that front, what this new driver‟s 

licence means and the extended period of time that that driver‟s 

licence is valid for, Mr. Speaker. On the surface, no great 

concerns there, but we do have thoughtful questions to continue 

to ask. 

 

But at the same time it‟s worthy to note, Mr. Speaker, and it fits 

into the case of gross fiscal mismanagement of this government, 

financial mismanagement, to remember the enhanced driver‟s 

licence that was put forward, the ill-fated enhanced driver‟s 

licence that was put forward by this government just last year, 

Mr. Speaker. It‟s important to remember this, because we 

realize that they put forward a driver‟s licence that was then 

called into question by external and third party validators to say 

that we have concern about the security of personal information 

in the Sask Party‟s new enhanced driver‟s licence, Mr. Speaker. 

And they were challenged, Mr. Speaker, that this was going to 

put at risk the personal and secure information of individuals 

and families in our province, something that we opposed, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

That government in the end had to retract on the ill-fated 

enhanced driver‟s licence, but not before they wasted, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, $1 million. One million dollars, Mr. Speaker. 

One million dollars, Mr. Speaker. And those are dollars that are 

causing rates to increase, Mr. Speaker. Those are dollars that, 

when you look at the surgical care centre that‟s in Regina that 

was $3 million, Mr. Speaker, that my constituents and I were so 

proud to see coming to our city, that was going to serve rural 



3754 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2009 

Saskatchewan as well as Regina residents, that was now cut. 

And that program was $3 million, that surgical care centre 

which was going to take off time off wait-lists, Mr. Speaker. 

And we see ill-fated policy put forward in the enhanced driver‟s 

licence that comes at a huge cost, a waste of $1 million, Mr. 

Speaker. And that‟s a huge concern for Saskatchewan people. 

 

So we need to make sure that that kind of action and activity 

doesn‟t occur. We‟ve seen that kind of waste, Mr. Speaker, on 

so many fronts. We‟ve seen that kind of waste from this 

government. When we have people‟s priorities that need to be 

advanced, we see this government advancing other priorities, 

and the enhanced driver‟s licence is but one example. 

 

We can look at the millions and millions, tens of millions of 

dollars put into this Enterprise Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And 

we look in many cases what‟s gone on is Enterprise has put 

forward recommendations that have then been rejected by this 

cabinet, Mr. Speaker, and at a very huge cost of tens of million 

dollars a year. And at the same time we‟ve seen the . . . In fact, 

tens of millions of dollars a year. And we‟ve seen an economy 

slip into decline under the watch of this government. 

 

[15:45] 

 

We also notice that when we talk about waste like the enhanced 

driver‟s licence. We‟ve seen that with the unneeded severance 

costs to fire long-time civil servants in this province, Mr. 

Speaker, and something that has come at a huge cost and is no 

small part of the fiscal mismanagement challenges that this 

government‟s run into. 

 

We see it with the dollars as it relates to the Olympic pavilion 

that is there in many ways, I guess, to stroke the ego of this 

Premier, Mr. Speaker, to go and spend more money on a 

pavilion at the Olympics than pretty much any other 

jurisdiction, Mr. Speaker. This vanity pavilion, when we have 

priorities here back at home such as wait times and surgical care 

centres and children‟s hospitals that are being cut time and time 

again by this government who can‟t manage their finances, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And of course, if you‟re a friend of the Sask Party, certainly 

there‟s money for you, Mr. Speaker, but only the high-level 

friends, only a few of you. And those would be individuals like 

Doug Emsley and Garnet Garven, Mr. Speaker. We look at that 

kind of waste, Mr. Speaker, and it‟s problematic and it‟s 

concerning. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as I say, we certainly support the principle of 

this legislation. We support moving forward as it relates to 

addressing safe driving or providing safe driving practice to the 

roads and for the people of Saskatchewan. But we‟re concerned, 

Mr. Speaker, that this piece of legislation, as so many of the 

pieces that come from the Sask Party, will have been prepared 

in a vacuum and will have been more of a knee-jerk response to 

a poll, Mr. Speaker, instead of looking more broadly at the issue 

of what distracts drivers and what really brings safety and 

security to our roads. Because this is what my constituents are 

concerned about, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We‟re very concerned that this Sask Party has dragged their 

heels on this piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker. Before 

introducing it . . . They should have introduced it right at the 

start of session, allowed the thoughtful dialogue and 

consultation that needs to occur on such pieces of legislation. 

 

But that being said, Mr. Speaker, we‟re going to work hard on 

this front to make sure we advance an important priority. We‟re 

going to make sure that this legislation is put forward in a 

productive way, and certainly we‟re going to raise concerns 

where we see some holes within the legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

At this time I know I have many other colleagues that would 

like to speak to this legislation as well. And I believe, at this 

point, I‟m going to adjourn discussion of Bill . . . No, improper 

framing. At this time I‟m done speaking to Bill 116, the Act to 

amend The Traffic Safety Act, and I know another colleague of 

mine is ready to speak, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am pleased to join in 

on the debate on Bill No. 116, a Bill to ban cellphone use. It‟s 

interesting to hear this Bill come up. We‟ve heard a number of 

different comments and people have talked with great length, 

some; some very short. But I‟ve got some comments I‟d like to 

make and just some of the things that are concerning to me. 

 

I mean everybody, Mr. Deputy Speaker, wants to make sure 

that people out there, motorists are safe, pedestrians are safe. 

And sometimes we know for a fact that safety is a big issue and 

we want to make sure that residents of our province and anyone 

visiting our province is safe. And looking at, I guess, some of 

the accidents, and we hear people saying some of the 

seriousness that goes on and it‟s really concerning. And I think 

it‟s time that this Bill get looked at and seriousness by the 

government and by the members here on the opposite. It‟s time 

to look at this Bill and debate it. 

 

There is a process, you know, and I‟m learning that process and 

I‟m very pleased that I‟m learning the process. But there‟s a lot 

of things you have to look at. You have to make sure the people 

are consulted. You have to make sure that the services that a 

Bill like this will affect are being addressed, and let‟s make sure 

. . .  

 

And, I mean, there‟s different areas. One that comes to mind 

that‟s interesting, you talk about, you know, some of the rates, 

and they look at some of the numbers saying those that operate 

cellphones, texting, it is really serious. You‟re hearing some of 

the numbers that‟s coming out. I don‟t know where those 

numbers are coming from but I‟ve been given some of them and 

it‟s really alarming. And if those numbers are accurate and are 

truly what‟s going on out there, it‟s time that we have a serious 

discussion. And I guess that‟s why it‟s here on this floor to 

debate. 

 

I look at some of the . . . the call for one of the police chiefs 

from Saskatoon. He wants this ban on cellphone use and texting 

and he probably has his reasons why, in data. It would be nice 

to find out what that is and maybe we‟ll get a chance to hear 

somebody sharing some of that. 

 

You know, you look at insurance, and I imagine the cost of 



November 23, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3755 

insurance is quite high when an accident happens under 

someone using a cellphone or, you know, texting. There‟s cost 

to the province in insurance. So they talk about using this and 

will there be . . . We know there‟s a rate increase in insurance 

and if you have a lot of use and if it‟s people using cellphones, 

texting. I don‟t know how many have caused accidents, but if it 

is even a small number and it‟s costing taxpayers out of the SGI 

insurance claims to go up, then we obviously have a problem. 

But if we get that under control, I guess, is there going to be, 

you know, a rebate? Is the price of insurance going to drop 

because of some of the insurance premiums? It‟s not a bunch of 

cost. 

 

So we‟ve got to look at all this stuff. And I mean, it‟s a good 

time to wonder and, I mean, and the costs that are going out of 

control . . . And people in our province right now are struggling 

with cost. And insurance costs are one of those areas. If we can, 

you know, give them some relief, wouldn‟t that be nice? So if 

this does that, I‟m hoping that this kind of a Bill will 

accommodate that. So that‟s just one area I want to talk about. 

 

Have we talked with CAA [Canadian Automobile Association] 

and asking them? You know, they‟re a motor vehicle agency 

that helps out a lot of stranded people. They cover a lot of 

different areas. Have we talked to them about this, and have you 

got input from CAA? So that‟s just one other area I was 

thinking about, you know. Have they given, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker . . . Have we checked with them? Did anybody get any 

information? I know I haven‟t. And you know, within a 

timeline I guess, you know, a person may have a chance to look 

at that and ask them what do they think about this and get their 

recommendation. And they might have brought it forward. I just 

don‟t know at this time that I‟m aware of. 

 

Now you talk about texting and, you know, you see people out 

there texting. And it happens. They‟re occupied. I‟ve watched 

it. And again I‟ll go on saying, last night it was a wonderful 

game, everything exciting. I was driving around. People were 

going crazy. They‟re driving, talking on their . . . And really 

exciting times. Mr. Speaker. It is pretty scary when you seen all 

the people, the pedestrians walking and people all over talking, 

travelling. So there is those issues. And I think sometimes, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, we have to be very sure. 

 

Now I know a deadline of January the 1st, 2010, we‟re looking 

at this Bill passing. It would become law. We‟ve talked about 

this. Are the law enforcement agencies prepared to move on this 

date? And will they support this? And do they support this? I 

mean, we‟re going to need that. Do they feel that, you know . . . 

What‟s their view on this? We‟ve heard from one, I know, chief 

of police from Saskatoon. But I guess, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 

need to find out if they‟re ready to go with this. And if this Bill 

passes and the deadline on January the 1st is the date they‟re 

pushing, will that happen? 

 

So looking at some of the stuff, Mr. Deputy Speaker, safety is a 

big issue. We know that. And some people operate, it‟s almost 

like in their vehicle they operate an office. There‟s a lot of 

different pieces of equipment that people are using. And I 

sometimes think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is a distraction, some 

of the equipment that they‟re using. I‟ve seen some of the, I 

guess, television programs they‟ve shown where some people, 

they operate right out of their vehicle. It‟s almost like an office. 

It‟s amazing to see the technology that‟s out there. But you 

know having said that, it‟s fine if they‟re pulled over, if they‟re 

on the job site and they‟re using those pieces of equipment. But 

when you‟re driving, operating a motor vehicle, I‟d have to 

wonder about the safety that‟s there and how much attention are 

they focusing on the vehicle they‟re operating and how much is 

focused on some of the equipment they‟re using. 

 

And you know today‟s world, we know we‟re busy. It‟s busy 

times. Everybody‟s trying to save. So I have to look at this Bill 

and wonder, is it the right Bill? Does it go far enough? You 

know, we have to look at that and make sure. How far does this 

Bill go? And I mean you could sit here and say, well trust me, 

trust me. And I think there‟s a process has to happen, definitely 

a process that has to happen. And I‟m very pleased to take part 

in this debate on this Bill and see where we‟re going, you know. 

 

And I want to go back to this you know, Mr. Speaker, because I 

think it‟s very important. We all talk about safety. We want to 

make sure people in our province are safe. We as the official 

opposition have a duty, all of us as MLAs and members of this 

legislature, have an obligation to make sure Saskatchewan 

people and visitors are safe. And we see provinces . . . And 

we‟re not the first province to bring this ban in. There‟s about 

four other provinces I believe right now currently have a ban on 

cellphone use. So I think we‟re moving along and we need to 

move along. 

 

But I think they all went through a process. They didn‟t just 

wake up one day and say, well let‟s have a ban. Let‟s do this. I 

think there was a, you know, duty to consult if you want to say 

that. You want to make sure that they‟ve talked to the right 

people. Maybe there‟s a lot of people that disagree. Even we 

talk. Some people say it‟s busy times. 

 

But you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think overall that 

insurance thing really sits there on my mind, thinking, what is 

the cost to this province? Is there any way to know truly what 

the cost, you know, the cost, what would the cost be, you know, 

would there be on cellphone use? I‟m curious, you know. And 

it‟s a heck of a debate. But, you know, I‟m curious to find out. 

And maybe I‟ll get some time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to find out 

exactly what are the costs. 

 

And maybe the minister of, you know, SGI [Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance] will be able to give us some of that 

information. You know, I never thought about it to ask. Maybe 

it‟s time I asked that question. 

 

And will there be cost savings again? I want to go back to that 

because to me it‟s crucial. If we‟re going to ban this and it saves 

people‟s lives and injuries and it saves on accidents and it saves 

on costs of repairing vehicles, well maybe, you know, if those 

rates are so high and they come down, that maybe there‟s a 

rebate to come back or something for the people to say, yes 

we‟ve banned this but here‟s the reason why: the costs are 

getting out of hand. But you know what? We‟re going to pass 

that on to the taxpayers because, at the end of the day, it‟s the 

taxpayers, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that pay for the bill. 

 

So you know, when you look at that . . . And then again, I want 

to go back to the deadline. They‟re talking January the 1st and, 

you know, I don‟t know if that gives us enough time. I think 



3756 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2009 

there has to be more time given here. And I think overall, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Who made that deadline? 

 

Mr. Vermette: — I don‟t know who made that deadline. It 

wasn‟t us and it wasn‟t through consulting with us and talking, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. So that deadline is a little concerning. 

There‟s a process that should happen, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 

I‟m hoping that . . . You know, they could have come over and 

apparently talked to my colleagues and we could have, you 

know, worked on this together in a more positive way. It‟s 

safety, and everybody knows that we want to make sure our 

residents are safe. 

 

And you know, when you think about a time saver, so many 

people today are looking at time saving. And some of these 

issues, you know, for the North — and I have to think about this 

— we do a lot of travelling. We have communities that are very 

isolated and they do use a lot of cellphones when they can get a 

signal. It‟s handy. They use other equipment. 

 

And I haven‟t had a chance to talk to a lot of people back home 

on this Bill personally, I know, about whether they‟d support 

this Bill banning cellphone use, texting. But I guess if you come 

back and you have a talk with people and I think we can solve 

them. Well we have to make sure that people in the province are 

getting an opportunity to talk about this and to bring . . . I 

represent them. We all do. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have to make sure that people 

want something that we‟re bringing through that‟s going to 

work for them. And sometimes people will support it if you get 

the public to support certain Bills and give a good rationale to 

why. But you have to make sure you communicate with the 

residents out there. People want to have laws. They understand 

that. But they want to make sure that the government goes out 

and consults them, shares with them, says, here‟s what we‟re 

proposing; what do you think? You think this would work? Do 

you have any better ideas? 

 

Sometimes you have to go out to the people and you have to ask 

the people. We don‟t want to shove this down your throat. We 

don‟t want to be dictators. We want to take the time and we 

want to communicate. We want to talk with you, let you have 

an opportunity to give input. So many times under this current 

government, there is not the opportunity to talk about things so 

they can say what they want. They can give back and forth. But 

you know, people just want to feel like they have a right to feel 

heard. 

 

And I think we have an obligation to make sure that the people 

in our province and my constituency get a chance to be heard. 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to make sure that the people 

know, back home, that we‟re doing all we can in this House. 

This official opposition is making sure that we‟re doing what 

we were asked to do when they asked us to represent them, and 

that‟s very important, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

[16:00] 

 

You know when you talk about the hands-free system, they‟re 

thinking of putting in a hands-free system, and some people are 

putting them in. Some of them coming on the new models. We 

know that. Some people will have to have those installed. But 

there are still a process you have to go through. It just isn‟t 

speaking. There‟s buttons that will have to be pressed, some of 

them. I‟m hearing different things and I‟m not sure. So I think 

the public‟s going to have to look at it. And some people are not 

happy that we‟re asking them to pay the cost to have this 

equipment in their vehicle. 

 

But sometimes, Mr. Speaker, I guess in the end, if it saves 

somebody and it saves a life, then I guess having hands-free is a 

way to go. I don‟t know for sure. I don‟t have all the facts. I 

don‟t have the data. But there obviously must be a reason why 

we‟re talking about this, debating this because there must be 

some serious accidents. And if we can prevent that, I guess we 

want to. But I have to be very clear. There is a process to doing 

that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And you can‟t just bring in Bills and have discussions just to 

have them. And I know that, you know, the members opposite 

and the government would like to introduce Bills and have them 

passed as they see, this is what‟s good for you. But I have to go 

back to the process. There are so many processes that have to 

happen. 

 

You know, I don‟t know how much distraction cellphones and 

texting — like I said I want to go back to that, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker — has. But obviously, you know, some of the things 

I‟ve seen happen, and probably everyone else can say they‟ve 

seen things happening, you know, near miss accidents, 

accidents that have been the cause of that, somebody has 

operated a cellphone or texting. 

 

But there are many other areas that we can look at, and I don‟t 

know if this Bill goes far enough with hand-held or . . . I mean 

you can look at a whole bunch of different areas that people are 

busy operating a motor vehicle. I mean you know, I guess there 

are some laws you can, you know, undue care and attention. 

 

There are some people . . . That comes up and some people get 

charged with that. I know that. So depending what you‟re 

doing, you know. It depends what‟s happening. What you‟re 

doing out there, you know . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well 

no, you could get charged with that. I know people have been 

charged with that. 

 

But going on, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the hands-free system, like I 

said, I think there‟s an opportunity but I think there are some 

high costs with that. It‟s not going to be a cheap . . . You know, 

and some people who have paid for their phones, they use . . . 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Why is the member on 

his feet? 

 

Mr. Hart: — With leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — The member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 



November 23, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3757 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I‟d like to thank 

the member from Cumberland to yield the floor to allow me to 

introduce a group of 16 grade 4 students seated in the west 

gallery, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They are accompanied by their 

teachers, Mrs. Lesser and Ms. Babiuk. And I see a number of 

chaperones; unfortunately I haven‟t been provided with the 

names. 

 

The group just arrived and this is their first stop in their tour, I 

believe. I will be meeting with them after they‟ve conducted 

their tour. I certainly hope that the young students from 

Punnichy Elementary School enjoy their tour here, and we will 

have a visit later on. And I would ask all members of the 

Assembly to welcome them to their Assembly. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from Cumberland. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 116 — The Traffic Safety (Drivers’ Licences and 

Hand-held Electronic Communications Equipment) 

Amendment Act, 2009 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Yes, I would like to go on and, you know, 

continue talking about the debate but I would as well like to, 

with the member opposite, acknowledge the students and staff 

and chaperones from Punnichy. Welcome to your legislature 

and I hope you have an enjoyable time. I hope you learn things 

and you can see that we truly have to do a job, and I welcome 

you to hear what we‟re doing here today. Anyway, welcome. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would just like to continue the debate on the 

cellphone and . . . Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I would like to 

just go on and have a little more discussion talking about, you 

know, the debate overall and where are we going with the 

cellphone and texting and the danger. 

 

And I talked a little bit about that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about 

insurance rates. Are the police onside? Is it enough time to 

January the 1st to get it going? We‟ve had a lot of different 

discussions. You know, time saver . . . Other provinces, other 

jurisdictions, are they going ahead and passing this? And what 

kind of input and what kind of talking did they do? 

 

And you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it‟s important that we 

make sure we do the right thing here. The people of our 

province are asking us to do the right thing. It‟s not just 

jumping at Bills and going in. Like I said earlier, and I just want 

to go back to that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it‟s not just as simple a 

thing as passing it. We know we can do that. We have to make 

sure that people feel that there‟s ownership to the Bills, there‟s 

ownership to law, that the people support that. 

 

And a government needs to make sure that its people are 

supporting what they‟re doing. It can‟t always be, you know, 

push, push, push. They have to make sure that people feel 

consulted, that people have input into the decision making. 

And people want that and expect that, and I‟m really happy that 

I can sit here representing my constituents and get into this 

debate. Not just push it and say, yes, let‟s just go ahead and do 

it. There are other things to, you know, to deal with. 

 

I‟ve had this time, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I‟ve had an opportunity 

to talk a number of different areas and, you know, there‟s been 

a few things that I probably didn‟t touch on because — I have 

to be honest — sometimes it‟s hard to discuss some of the items 

unless you get the information from the people that are going to 

be affected. 

 

And I think over the next while we‟re going to have an 

opportunity, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to hear from other members, 

my colleagues, talking about some of the items and we‟re going 

to get more items and more, probably, interest from people and 

more emails, and people making comments saying, yes maybe 

it‟s a good thing. And probably the majority of people would 

say, if you‟re going to try to do this because you‟re saving lives 

or you‟re saving injury or saving dollars to insurance companies 

and different things, there‟s good reasons why to do this and 

people probably aren‟t going to fight with that. 

 

But you have to make sure that they understand that — the 

reasons why we‟re doing this and the reason why this Bill‟s 

coming forward. I don‟t think it‟s just as simple as, oh we 

passed it and it‟s the law. I think we have to make sure that we 

feel and the people feel like they‟re getting their fair share of 

the information and input into this and feel like they‟ve been 

consulted. Because that government and the current government 

hasn‟t done such a great job of accommodating and 

communicating stuff. 

 

I‟m sorry to say, they just haven‟t. There‟s people not feeling so 

involved in the process and the decisions that that government 

has made, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So the government of the day 

makes a lot of different things, doesn‟t always involve . . . And 

I think this is an opportunity for people to feel like they get 

input. 

 

And like I said earlier, you know, there‟s different . . . People 

are charged with different things when they‟re operating 

vehicles, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There‟s been a lot of, you know, 

different things. And I said, we have to be sure. Does this Bill 

go far enough? You know, it sure, you know, cellphones. Are 

there other pieces of equipment that could, you know, be dealt 

with? Because other people are focused. They‟re doing different 

things. 

 

And like I said earlier, some people do get other charges. They 

get undue care and attention — and I want to talk about that — 

because they are operating other pieces of equipment that could 

cause harm. They‟re not paying attention to the vehicle they‟re 

operating. So this gives the police another thing. Seeing 

somebody operate, you know, a cellphone or texting, they could 

pull them over. This gives them an opportunity. So not only 

when people are not paying attention for other reasons, this will 

help the police to say, well we‟ve seen you were operating a 

motor vehicle and you were talking on a, you know, a 

cellphone. We were seeing you texting. 

 

I think this is going to give people an opportunity, but the 

process — I want to be very clear, Mr. Deputy Speaker — the 



3758 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2009 

process is important, the opportunity to debate it, the 

opportunity to bring views from residents, from people, from 

some of the professionals that are out there, some of the 

insurance companies, CAA. There‟s other people to talk with, 

share the ideas, and share that input. So the government should 

be doing more of that — not less of it, more of it. It‟s what‟s 

needed. 

 

So you know at this time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know my 

colleagues — Ron, are you just about, are you just about ready? 

— my colleagues are just about ready to take over. They 

wanted to debate this and they want to talk about it and they 

have a lot of good things that they would like to share with us. 

So at this time I think I‟m ready to pass it on to one of my 

colleagues. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from Regina Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — That‟s what you call just getting in under the 

wire, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of 

pleasure to have the opportunity on behalf of the fine folks of 

Regina Northeast to enter into this debate, the debate on Bill 

116, An Act to amend The Traffic Safety Act and to make a 

consequential amendment to The Summary Offences 

Procedures Act, 1990. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think it‟s rather a comprehensive Act 

because it covers more than one front. And I think . . . 

[inaudible] . . . unfortunately because this particular issue that 

we‟re debating here today and has captured much of our 

attention is the ban on texting and cellphones which . . . Mr. 

Speaker, I want to just make it absolutely clear right off the start 

of my presentation here is that we are certainly, certainly in 

favour of this Bill in principle. And we need to, though, on 

behalf of the good, fine people of Saskatchewan, to take a close 

look at it to make sure that the government has done its due 

diligence and has done its research and has done its 

consultations. 

 

And those are the things that we want to sort of flesh out here 

this afternoon as to the level of involvement the government has 

had in this Bill and its preparation for this Bill, to ensure that 

they have, you know, been able to closely look at all the 

ramifications of it. I mean any time — and I think we all agree 

with this, those of us who‟ve been around this legislature a little 

while — any time you enact a new Act or make amendments to 

the old Act, you disturb things. And you want to know, you 

know, what effect will that have on the economy? What effect 

will that have on people? It‟s sort of like a domino effect 

sometimes. 

 

When you change something, you change . . . inadvertently 

other things will change or a vacuum will be created or it would 

be filled, and the dominos start to fall. And things change that 

perhaps you had never anticipated and certainly wasn‟t the 

intent of the legislation. 

 

So we wanted to make sure that the government has taken its 

time and has done the due diligence that‟s required of 

government to ensure that such changes don‟t have an 

unintended negative effect on people. And I‟m hoping that the 

government has done that due diligence. And I suppose with a 

little bit of time here and some discussion, we‟ll be able to flush 

that out and identify that particular issue. 

 

But I think anything, Mr. Speaker, anything that will improve 

the chances or improve the safety standards for Saskatchewan 

people is something that we all support, and it‟s something that 

we all want. And I would hope that we as legislators, on both 

sides of the House here, would work to that end. I think we 

want to see programs, policies, Acts, rules, regulations that are 

in the best interest of Saskatchewan people and that will ensure 

the safety of Saskatchewan people as they go forward, whether 

it be in this particular piece of legislation or any other. 

 

That‟s sort of, I think, our responsibilities here. We, as elected 

people, every four years go out and ask the good folks of our 

constituency to entrust us with the privilege — really it‟s a 

privilege — to represent them in the various debates that take 

place in this House. And it‟s our job to, as often as we can and 

in any manner, shape as we can, we need to communicate with 

our constituents. We need to find out what their concerns are. 

We need to find out what issues that are first and foremost in 

their minds. 

 

And when we as opposition members, when government brings 

forward legislation, we have a responsibility to communicate 

those pieces of legislation back to our constituents so that we 

can get feedback from them, get an idea of what it is that 

they‟re looking for, whether they think it‟s good or bad. And I 

would think, Mr. Speaker, that when you present this particular 

piece of legislation in its broadest of forms, just saying, well the 

government has introduced a Bill here to ban cellphone usage 

while driving a vehicle, I think it‟s not hard to say that the vast 

majority of people would say yes, they‟re in favour of that. 

 

And that‟s the simple approach, Mr. Speaker, the one-line 

approach saying, well the government wants to enact a Bill that 

will ban cellphone and hand-held devices while operating a 

motor vehicle. And most people, when that line is presented to 

them, when that statement is presented to them, most people 

will think, well they‟re talking about a cellphone. And I have 

seen many people — in fact I‟ve done it myself, Mr. Speaker — 

while you‟re driving, take your cellphone out, dial somebody 

up, and talk to him because you have a question to ask or 

information you need. And that has become a fairly common 

occurrence. You see it quite often. 

 

Is it distracting? I would say it probably is distracting. To a 

degree, certainly it‟s distracting. I think the next step, the next 

phase that‟s come along is the text messaging, is probably even 

more distracting. Because when you‟re using a cellphone, a lot 

of times a lot of us have the numbers in speed dial so we can 

just really hit one number and it brings up the individual you‟re 

looking for. When that happens, you think you‟re still 

distracted, but the period of distraction is a lot less than that 

would be if somebody who has to dial the number, for example. 

If you have to dial the 10-digit number to get a hold of 

somebody, you‟re spending a little time looking at your 

cellphone and the face of your cellphone to be able to dial those 

numbers and hopefully hit the right number and get the person 

you‟re looking for. 

 

[16:15] 

 



November 23, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3759 

It probably compounds the matter when you look at texting 

now. The more modern way of communicating is through 

texting. And if you‟re driving and texting, well you‟re spending 

a lot more time looking at your device and following what‟s on 

the face of your device. And that certainly takes your mind off 

of, and your attention away from, driving which therefore 

makes, quite frankly, that situation a dangerous situation within 

the motoring public in Saskatchewan. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is something that, like I said right from 

the word go, we‟re very, very much in favour of legislation that 

will ensure the improved safety of Saskatchewan motoring 

public. That‟s why in principle we are certainly in favour of this 

Bill. 

 

There‟s just a few concerns that we have that we would like to 

be able to raise these concerns. We would like to have an 

answer to these concerns, and we would like to know if the 

government perhaps has done this consultation to address many 

of these concerns. Perhaps this has been done. Perhaps the 

government has taken the opportunity to talk to people in 

regards to many of the concerns that we in the opposition share 

right now. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, cellphone use has certainly grown rapidly in 

the last 10 years with the changing technology and the changing 

cellphones. I can remember when the first cellphone came out 

many years ago. It was a very cumbersome device. It was large 

and it was awkward to operate at any time, let alone trying to 

drive. But as technology has improved and improved quite 

rapidly over the last 10 years, we‟re seeing cellphones, the size 

of cellphones, change. 

 

We‟re also seeing the programming, I guess, within the 

cellphones. It‟s a lot more than just a cellphone anymore. It 

used to be one time that was what you did. You could phone out 

or receive a phone call, but that was it. But today the 

programming on these cellphones includes texting, but it also 

includes gaming. It also includes being able to keep your 

schedule, includes all types of advantages, I guess you‟d say, to 

a modern cellphone for communicating purposes. And with 

that, of course, Mr. Speaker, is the need to be informed and the 

ability to be informed. And I think many of us, certainly elected 

members see that as a great advantage. 

 

But at the same time, if we‟re using that cellphone to retrieve 

information or perhaps do some research or perhaps even 

playing a game or texting our friends or texting our family 

members that we‟re on the way, that sort of stuff is very 

distracting when you‟re driving a vehicle. And that is why, I 

think, it is essential that we look at providing some type of 

legislation that will increase the safety factor, as far as that goes 

with the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

I think it‟s safe to say, and I just want to look at a quote from a 

press story, news story, a CBC [Canadian Broadcasting 

Corporation] news story, September the 1st, 2009. And the 

headline is, “Sask. to ban texting, cellphone use while driving.” 

And in the heart of the news story, the Saskatoon police chief 

called for a ban on cellphone use by people operating a motor 

vehicle. The chief goes on to say that there are just too many 

accidents where cellphones are used and it is a contributing 

factor to the accident. And I believe that to be the case, Mr. 

Speaker, because when you‟re on a cellphone, you certainly are 

distracted. 

 

Often, even just on making a phone call, you would say, well 

you‟ve done the dialing and you‟re holding the phone in one 

hand. You‟re driving down the street. You‟re able to, you 

know, keep your eye on the traffic, keep your eye on the traffic 

lights and so on and so forth. But often you get into subject 

matter where your mind is occupied by the subject matter 

you‟re addressing on the telephone. And you lose track of 

attention on what should be the most important part of your 

responsibility, and that is the traffic in front of you, your 

handling of your vehicle. And those are the things that often 

you may get sidetracked from and may become secondary. And 

when that happens, there comes a situation where an accident 

can happen. And we certainly wouldn‟t want that to continue 

on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I believe that if you look at recent statistics, that they will 

suggest that many of the accidents that do occur have been, not 

necessarily a result of being on a cellphone or perhaps even 

texting, but certainly it was a contributing factor. And we 

certainly want to eliminate that because you want to create an 

atmosphere here and a condition within this province where 

Saskatchewan‟s motoring public will enjoy the most safe 

highways of anywhere in Canada. 

 

And I‟m hoping that‟s a goal for all of us, not only the elected 

government members, but also the elected opposition members. 

We should be working towards that as a goal. We want to 

improve the quality of life for Saskatchewan people. And that‟s 

one aspect of it, is to be able to provide them a safe as an 

experience in motoring throughout Saskatchewan as possible. 

 

Whether it be in our cities or whether it be in a rural area, we 

want to be able to provide them the opportunity to enjoy safety, 

to enjoy the ability to relax while they‟re driving, as far as 

worries some driver on the road may be involved in text 

messaging or may be involved in a cellphone conversation that 

has taken his or her mind off of the immediate responsibilities 

— and that is to be in good control of your vehicle — and 

perhaps creating a situation where an accident can occur where 

somebody that‟s innocent as possible, as innocent as possible, 

may be involved in that accident. So we certainly would hope 

that that is the direction we‟re seeing this particular Bill move 

us to. 

 

Mr. Speaker, most recently a poll suggested the majority of 

Saskatchewan residents support the proposed provincial ban on 

cellphone use while driving. And this is a news story that I 

don‟t have a date for, but I believe it came out of an article that 

was carried in the Leader-Post here not too awful long ago. 

 

It‟s interesting that the poll determined that the older 

respondents got, the more likely they were to support the ban 

and the less likely they were to use the cellphone themselves 

and certainly for text messaging. But it‟s interesting. 

 

And I suppose that sort of reflects the changing in technology, 

and perhaps the rapid changing in technology that we‟ve seen 

over the last 10 years. It‟s certainly the younger generation that 

has grasped it much quicker than the older generation, and I‟ll 

put myself in that category of older generation. And it‟s often 



3760 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2009 

been a standing joke that if you need help with your computer, 

you get the seven year old to help you because they got a better 

grasp of the technology and the ability to operate those 

computers perhaps than us older people have. And I suppose 

it‟s fair enough because that‟s what they‟ve grown up with, and 

for us it‟s a little bit foreign. 

 

But the article also goes on to say, “About six in 10, or 59.3 per 

cent, of Saskatchewan residents „strongly support‟ the proposed 

legislation and [about] three in 10 „somewhat support‟ it, an 

overall total of [about] 87.9 per cent support” for the legislation 

in principle. And, Mr. Speaker, we have no argument with this 

legislation in principle. We agree with this legislation in 

principle. 

 

What we want to know is what has the government done to 

ensure that this legislation is reflecting the wants and the needs 

of Saskatchewan people. That‟s the big question that I have, 

Mr. Speaker. And I would like to have that assurance, and I‟d 

like to have the opportunity for that discussion to take place. 

Because there are various, various groups that need to be talked 

about and considered when you‟re introducing such legislation. 

And I would hope, I would hope that the government had done 

their homework on this. 

 

As I had related, that first article, Mr. Speaker, it was dated 

September the 1st. And I remember when this particular issue 

came forward. And the government had indicated to the 

province of Saskatchewan, through the news media, that they 

would be introducing such a type of cellphone banning 

legislation in this session. And I say that because I was on 

media duty for our party at that time, and I remember having to 

field a number of calls from the media wanting to know what 

the opposition response was to the government‟s Bill or 

proposed Bill. 

 

And that was back in September, Mr. Speaker. And yet, it 

wasn‟t until now that we see anything on paper or we see the 

Bill itself. And I‟m a little disappointed in that, Mr. Speaker, 

because I would have thought that if the government would 

have made its announcement to Saskatchewan through the news 

media back in September, that they would have had the Bill 

ready. That they would have had that Bill in a form that they 

could have presented it to the opposition so we would have had 

the opportunity to discuss with the various stakeholders this 

particular piece of legislation.  

 

Unfortunately they didn‟t. They bring it forward, though, later 

in this session. I mean, it wasn‟t even in the first few days of 

this session that Bill was introduced. It was much later into the 

session. And now they‟re saying, you know, please, we want it 

passed in this session so it can take effect on January the 1st. 

Well that‟s fine. But it makes me feel like I‟m being jammed, 

and when I‟m being jammed, I immediately wonder why. 

 

Why is the government not bringing forward this legislation in 

a timely fashion to give the opposition members who, like 

we‟ve already said and I said that in my interviews back in 

September, that we would certainly support this Bill in 

principle. But we want to see the Bill. We want to see what‟s in 

this Bill and what does it apply to. 

 

And who has the government talked to? Who has the 

government consulted with as far as the content of the Bill? 

Who have they talked to? What was the reaction of those people 

who they talked to? What was the suggestions? What was the 

positives? What were the negatives? 

 

I know that they say that they‟re simply following other 

provinces. Other provinces such as Nova Scotia and Quebec, 

Newfoundland and Labrador already have brought in a form of 

this legislation and this is correct. They have. 

 

But how does our legislation, how does this government‟s Bill, 

how has this legislation this government‟s bringing, how does it 

compare with that of Nova Scotia? How does it compare? What 

has happened in Nova Scotia? What has Nova Scotia‟s 

experience been? Have they talked to the people in Nova 

Scotia? Have they only talked to the government? But have 

they talked to organizations such as the CAA and other 

automotive organizations out there as to their input and their 

experience with this Bill? Has it been a good one? Has it been a 

bad one? Or, or have they recognized things that should have 

been changed in the Nova Scotia legislation? Is there something 

there that should have been different that would have made the 

Bill even better? And if there was, was that then taken into 

consideration by Saskatchewan and Saskatchewan‟s officials 

when they were putting this Bill together? 

 

I don‟t know that it was. I don‟t know that it wasn‟t. But I do 

know, Mr. Speaker, that those are the questions that I would 

like to have asked. I would like to know, have they talked to the 

Quebec government? What has their experience been with this 

piece of legislation? And if they did talk to the Quebec 

government, who did they talk to and what was the reaction? 

What was the response from the Quebec government as far as 

this legislation is concerned? Was it positive? Was it negative? 

Did they recognize that perhaps if they had to do it over again 

there was things that they would have changed? If there was, 

what was it? 

 

Those are some of the questions that I would like to know 

because it‟s certainly . . . Like I said, Mr. Speaker, we support it 

in principle, but we want to make sure that if we‟re going to do 

this, we‟re going to do it right. We want to make sure that it has 

the best possible effect for Saskatchewan people. After all, as 

far as I‟m concerned — and I may be a bit biased here — but I 

think there‟s no finer people in the world than that of 

Saskatchewan people, and I believe that they deserve the best. 

And they deserve the best of legislation that will ensure their 

safety, particularly their motoring public safety, as they travel 

across this great province of ours. So I would like to see that, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

This Bill, Mr. Speaker, is, as it outlines here, hand-held 

electronic communication equipment. Well what does that 

mean? Does that mean just cellphones, or does that mean a 

cellphone combination BlackBerry? Does that apply? How 

about those people who have computer devices in their vehicle? 

And I know of two or three people who have a laptop computer 

right in their vehicle, and they communicate from their vehicle 

with their home office on a regular basis. Does this constitute a 

hand-held device? It‟s just as distractive if you have a laptop 

computer sitting on the passenger seat and you‟re reading your 

emails while you‟re driving. It‟s just as distractive as being on a 

cellphone. Is that covered in this legislation? I don‟t know that 



November 23, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3761 

it is. I don‟t know that it‟s not, but I don‟t know that it is. 

 

[16:30] 

 

So I would like to know those kind of questions, Mr. Speaker, 

because I think it‟s important to know what does this cover and 

what does this not cover? And to that end, how far has the 

government gone in its research, how far has the government 

gone in its consultation on this particular Bill? And how far 

have they gone and who have they communicated with and who 

have they consulted with and what has been the results of those 

consultations? Has there been those who have stood up and 

said, yes, we like this Bill as it is? Or have there been those who 

say, well we like the Bill in principle, but there are things that 

we would change? 

 

And if there were those groups out there or individuals who 

would have had the opportunity to look at this Bill, then I 

question the government. Why didn‟t the opposition have that 

same opportunity? If you‟re making this available to the public 

and making your announcement to the public back in 

September, then why didn‟t you provide the opposition with a 

draft Bill so we would have had the opportunity to ensure that 

the consultation with Saskatchewan people was done in a fair 

and adequate and balanced way? 

 

Mr. Speaker, this legislation is rather broadly worded. It says, 

“No driver shall use electronic communications equipment 

while driving a motor vehicle on a highway.” Okay, on a 

highway. Does this then apply, Mr. Speaker, to a grid road? 

Does somebody who is operating their vehicle around one of 

our many grid roads in this great province of ours, is it legal for 

them to use a hand-held electronic device? Can they use their 

cellphone if they‟re on a grid road? It says here they can‟t use 

their cellphone while operating a motor vehicle on a highway, 

but how about if they‟re on a grid road? How about if they‟re 

on a farm access road or how about if they‟re on a farm road? Is 

it possible for them to use that phone and not be covered by this 

legislation? That‟s another question, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well that‟s what we‟re wondering. Who have you talked to? 

Who have you talked to? Have you talked to anybody about 

this, or is this just simply a knee-jerk reaction to what is seen as 

a short-term political gain? And that‟s kind of what I‟m sensing 

here, Mr. Speaker, and I hope I‟m wrong. I hope I‟m wrong, but 

I don‟t sense there‟s been a great deal of consultation done on 

this particular piece. I think it‟s sort of a reaction to what the 

numbers that I was reading out earlier, Mr. Speaker. I read out 

these numbers earlier when it said a new poll suggested that the 

majority of Saskatchewan residents support the proposed 

provincial ban on cellphones while driving. 

 

Very broad when you ask that, Mr. Speaker. Common sense 

tells you the vast majority of people are going to say yes, we 

want them banned. We think that they‟re a distraction, and we 

would like to see them regulated in some manner, shape, or 

form to ensure that we‟d have greater safety on our roads, on 

our highways, and a greater safety for the motoring public. It‟s 

also interesting, Mr. Speaker, that at the same time that same 

poll shows that the older the respondent, the older that 

respondent got, the more likely they were to support the ban 

and less likely they were to use a cellphone while driving. 

 

So here‟s a political, I think a bit of a political tidbit that the 

government has seen and said, hey well we can maybe attract 

some support in this particular category. We can attract support 

generally across Saskatchewan by saying, hey we introduced 

this ban to make things much safer for everybody. And 

particularly amongst the older population who are less, as I am 

. . . less ability to pick up on the new technocrats and the new 

changes in technology. But it clearly states here that the poll 

shows that nearly 87 per cent — pushing 90 per cent — of 

people would provide somewhat support for a piece of 

legislation that would ban the use of cellphones by the motoring 

public. 

 

Well like I said, Mr. Speaker, in the beginning, we would 

certainly support that in principle. But the question here is what 

has the government done to ensure that they‟re putting together 

an Act that properly responds to the wishes of Saskatchewan 

people? Oh I see very low evidence of the government putting 

much effort into comprising this Bill to ensure that the motoring 

public of Saskatchewan would enjoy safety as a result of the 

implementation of this Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and here I mean just a second line, just a second 

line in this Act as it pertains to hand-held electronic 

communications equipment, just the second line, very simple, 

very straightforward. It says, “No driver shall use electronic 

communications equipment while driving a motor vehicle on a 

highway.” “On a highway,” fair enough but . . . means if we 

pull off of that highway and I‟m taking a shortcut using a 

primary grid road to go to the community I want to go to, while 

I‟m on that grid road, can I use that hand-held electronic device 

legally, despite this Act, if this Act was ever implemented? Can 

I use it? Does it apply only to highways, not to grid roads? 

 

Well if it doesn‟t apply to grid roads, then why are 

Saskatchewan people, particularly people who live in rural 

Saskatchewan, second class citizens here? That they can be 

jeopardized by having people on their roads using hand-held 

devices that are distractive creates a greater opportunity for 

accidents, and they would be exposed to that while people on 

highways are not. That, to me, Mr. Speaker, creates a huge void 

here, a huge void. So I can‟t help but wonder why it is only on 

highways. Now you don‟t so often see that . . . 

 

It goes on to say in the Act here, Mr. Speaker, that drivers who 

are not new drivers and who, while driving a motor vehicle on a 

highway . . . again, Mr. Speaker, it repeats itself — on a 

highway. It doesn‟t say on a motorway. It doesn‟t say on a 

roadway. It doesn‟t say on some type of line of traffic. It says 

on a highway. My question then immediately is, does it apply to 

grid roads? Does it apply to farm access roads? Does it apply to 

farm roads period? 

 

And it says, Mr. Speaker, electronic communicating equipment. 

Okay what is this? It says a hand-held device, is the 

terminology used here, a hand-held device. Hand-held 

electronic communications equipment is the exact words used 

here. Well what if that particular piece of communicating 

equipment is not hand-held? What if it‟s mounted on a mount 

on the dashboard? What if the telephone is in a mount on the 

dashboard, and you don‟t hold it in your hands? You don‟t hold 

it in your hands. You still have to dial. You still have to punch 

send. You still have to punch end when the conversation is over 



3762 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2009 

with, so does that then not be covered by this Act? 

 

So does that mean the difference is whether it‟s on a mount on 

your dash or in your hand? Is that the only difference in this 

Act? It could be the same phone, with the same ability to 

distract drivers, but simply because it‟s on a mount on the dash 

and not in your hand, that makes it okay. I don‟t know that, Mr. 

Speaker. I wish it would be. 

 

Again I ask about the individual who has the ability to use and 

communicate with their computer from their vehicle, and I 

know business people who do. They have their computer set 

right on their passenger seat. They have it plugged in to their 

power unit which is the electrical, the cigarette lighter on their 

vehicle, and they communicate, use that computer. They can 

communicate with their home office. They can communicate 

with clients. Now, Mr. Speaker, is that considered a hand-held 

device? Because it‟s not held in their hand. It‟s on the seat. It‟s 

on the seat, on the passenger‟s seat, and it‟s not in their hand. 

Therefore is that a hand-held device according to this Act? I 

don‟t know. It doesn‟t say. 

 

And the government hasn‟t provided us with any information as 

to the support of this Act, as to what they may have done as far 

as consulting with various groups. There‟s business groups 

across this great province of ours, as to those, some of those 

type of questions like, what actually constitutes a hand-held 

device? Is it simply a cellphone, or is it BlackBerry, or is it a 

GPS? 

 

Today‟s world, you see in travelling the world, you see a lot of 

vehicles equipped with GPS. There are those who use it because 

it‟s . . . if they don‟t necessarily know the countryside or 

perhaps they don‟t know the community, but they have a name 

and they have an address. And they‟re able to punch that in to 

their GPS, and it lays out a road map for them or lays out a map 

for them to follow, and they can get to their desired destination. 

 

But again, Mr. Speaker, this is not necessarily hand-held. It has 

its own mount. It has a bracket for its own mount. You can take 

it out of that mount with a flick of your wrist, and you can hold 

it in your hand. You can program it while in your hand. Put it 

back in its mount, and it will do its thing. It will contact the 

satellites, and it will unfold the map to the destination that you 

desire. Same time, Mr. Speaker, you don‟t have to take it out of 

its mount to program it. You can program it while it‟s on your 

dash. While it‟s stuck onto your windshield, you can program it 

there. But does that not distract you from your sole 

responsibility or your major responsibility, that is, to be in 

control of your vehicle? Yes it does. It certainly does. 

 

And I have a GPS so I know what I‟m talking about. Okay. I 

have a GPS and I use it on a regular basis. So, Mr. Speaker, 

does that apply to this legislation or does this legislation apply 

to a GPS that is not necessarily hand-held because it has its own 

mount? But you can take it out of its mount, make it a 

hand-held device for the purpose of programming it. Or you can 

leave it in its mount but if it‟s set closely enough to you, on the 

dash, you can program it there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is something that‟s not even mentioned, not 

even mentioned in the government‟s press release. It‟s not 

certainly mentioned in this government‟s Bill here. And I 

haven‟t seen any supporting documentation from the 

government to suggest that they have even considered, have 

even considered the aspects of a GPS or a electronic device 

other than a cellphone. 

 

I would have hoped the government would have, Mr. Speaker, 

because this is a very important issue. It‟s a very, very 

important issue. Fundamentally what‟s at stake here is the 

safety of Saskatchewan‟s motoring public, safety of 

Saskatchewan‟s motoring public. And that, Mr. Speaker, we 

should be all working towards, ensuring that in Saskatchewan 

the people driving on Saskatchewan roads — not just 

Saskatchewan highways, but Saskatchewan roads, whether they 

be grid roads, primary grid roads, whether they be secondary 

grid roads, whether they be farm access roads or plain 

municipal roads — they should be able to drive on those roads 

with the greatest of safety and the knowledge, and the 

knowledge that they are enjoying that level of safety in 

Saskatchewan here. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, should be the goal of all of us here, is to 

ensure that when we bring legislation forward that is going to 

change and have effects on the safety level of Saskatchewan 

people, that those effects are improved safety levels rather than 

perhaps creating situations where you have perhaps a law that 

applies to — as I would understand it, at least — that would 

apply to hand-held electronic communication equipment as far 

as the highway is concerned but has no jurisdiction on 

municipal grid roads, no jurisdiction on a municipal primary 

road, no jurisdiction on a municipal secondary road, no 

jurisdiction on a municipal non-grid road, a farm road. 

 

So those are the questions, Mr. Speaker, that immediately come 

to mind. What does this really cover? Where does this 

legislation really cover motoring publics? Is it just on the 

highway or is it everywhere in Saskatchewan? From what I see, 

it says just on the highway. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question will be to the government, will be, 

what is a hand-held device? What is a hand-held device? That‟s 

what basically what they‟re saying here, okay? They‟re saying a 

hand-held device. This legislation is hand-held electronic 

communications equipment. Hand-held. What is hand-held? 

What is meant by hand-held? Does that mean that if I have a 

cellphone, but I have a cellphone that before I start off I open up 

my cellphone, I stick it into its bracket on the dash, I have the 

new modern ability to have an electronic piece in my ear, and I 

can communicate with that cellphone or I could talk directly 

into it — it doesn‟t matter — while I travel down the highway? 

 

[16:45] 

 

Will that be covered by this legislation and will not be 

permitted? Or will it be something that would be permitted? Or 

if I have an earphone that I can plug into that telephone and 

stick one earphone in one ear and have the other ear open for 

the sounds of the road, so to speak, the sounds of the traffic . . . 

That would allow me to hear a siren if it comes up behind me 

and an ambulance making its rush, or a fire truck or something 

on its way to an emergency. Those are the kind of things you 

certainly would not want to interfere with. 

 

So you want to have the ability to hear something like this. So 



November 23, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3763 

I‟m saying with an earphone in one ear, Mr. Speaker, and the 

ability then to talk into this phone, to hear the conversation back 

without, without having to have that particular electronic device 

in your hand, so that would rule out it being hand-held then. It‟s 

not hand-held. It‟s no longer hand-held. 

 

It is a device that is on the dashboard of my car but at the same 

time can be just as distractive because I‟m involved in a 

conversation — perhaps a serious conversation, or perhaps with 

a constituent of mine, and I‟m paying very close attention, as I 

should, and perhaps even trying to make some mental notes 

from this conversation. And therefore takes my concentration 

away from what should be my primary responsibility, and that‟s 

the control of my vehicle. 

 

That takes my primary concentration away so that I become 

really a hazard on the road because I have now exchanged my 

primary responsibility of being alert and concentrating on the 

handling of my vehicle and concentrating on the traffic that I 

am surrounded by. I‟ve exchanged that for the pursuit of 

questions or issues or concerns that my constituent may have 

who is sharing that with me. And I‟m trying to make mental 

notes so that I can find out the answer to his inquiry or her 

inquiry and get back to them with the information. I‟m trying to 

remember this stuff while I‟m driving. I don‟t want to take my 

time away to make notes, because I quite frankly am trying to 

concentrate on what is being said by my constituent, and I lose 

concentration on what should be my biggest responsibility, and 

that is to ensure that I have full control of my vehicle. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, once again creates the problem: what is 

meant by a hand-held device in this piece of legislation? It 

doesn‟t state. There‟s no information that accompanies this Act 

to provide the opposition with those types of answers. And I 

wonder, has the government bothered looking into that? Has the 

government bothered looking into that? Has the government 

bothered looking into what is really meant by a hand-held 

device? 

 

And have they been able to frame that in a way that the 

opposition would be able to find some comfort in the 

information provided by the government? Because I don‟t see 

it. I don‟t see it. We haven‟t been provided it and I just don‟t 

see it. And I‟ve checked through the file here a couple of times 

and I don‟t see anything here except some copies of speeches 

given by the minister at the introduction of this Bill. But other 

than that, I don‟t find anything of substance that would support 

the terminologies. And my first terminology of course is 

hand-held electronic communications equipment. What is 

meant by hand-held? What is meant by hand-held? 

 

My fear, Mr. Speaker, is that the government probably hasn‟t 

done its work. We‟ve seen many examples in the past over the 

history of this government, a mere two years of this 

government, but they have quite a track record, Mr. Speaker, of 

bringing in legislation without even consulting stakeholders. 

Bringing in legislation without talking to people in 

Saskatchewan about this. Bringing in legislation that in some 

cases has dramatic changes and has dramatic effects — not 

positive but negative effects — on people in Saskatchewan 

here. And this government has no problem to bring those kind 

of changes in without fair and reasonable consultation with the 

good folks of Saskatchewan here. 

And I wonder if that isn‟t the case again because I think perhaps 

what has happened here, Mr. Speaker, is that the government 

got blinded with the results of this poll that said that 87.9 per 

cent of people to varying degrees would support a 

government-introduced ban on cellphones and the use of 

cellphones while driving. I think they seen that and said, whoa, 

here‟s an opportunity for us to make some hay with the general 

public. Here‟s the opportunity for us to gain some political 

favour going into the last half of our term, and we want to start 

staging things for our election run which we‟ll see in 2011. 

 

And here‟s an opportunity to say, well look at all the things 

we‟ve done. But one in particular we‟ve done, we‟ve introduced 

legislation that banned cellphones. That should make us quite 

popular because 87.9 per cent of those polled said that they 

would support, either strongly support or somewhat offer 

support, to that type of legislation. So I think, Mr. Speaker, that 

the government put . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . You want 

me to do that? I don‟t want to do that. I‟m not ready yet. I have 

too many things to say yet. 

 

I want to, I want to . . . My colleagues here want me to sit 

down, but I‟m not going to let them off the hook that easy, Mr. 

Speaker. I think that the government members would probably 

enjoy the fact if did, but I don‟t plan to do that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s a simple . . . [inaudible] . . . clause. It‟s simple, 

that‟s all it is. It‟s a clause in this particular Act. Now this Act, 

like I said, covers a number of other fronts. It covers a number 

of other fronts such as valid driver‟s licence. And it covers 

other temporary driver‟s licence and the photo ID 

[identification] cards. And there‟s a number of pieces of 

legislation here that of course affects the travelling, motoring 

public. 

 

And this particular one, which I think is a very important Bill, I 

think it‟s very important. And it‟s only one clause, it‟s only one 

clause in this entire Bill, Mr. Speaker. And I think that‟s 

unfortunate because this is an important piece of legislation. It 

is important to the people of Saskatchewan, because it provides 

an opportunity to further improve, further improve the safety 

factor for the motoring public of this great province. 

 

And like I said before, I think, as you travel Saskatchewan — 

and I know you have, Mr. Speaker, and I know that the 

members across the way have — and I think we all agree, I 

think we all agree that wherever you travel in Saskatchewan, 

you do certainly nothing more than meet great people. Very 

friendly, hospitable people. And whether it be in Canora, where 

I was last Friday, or Preeceville on Saturday, or whether you be 

in Humboldt or whether you be in Melfort or wherever you 

happen to go, I can guarantee that the people you meet there 

will be warm and friendly, hospitable people. 

 

And I‟ve had that experience, having travelled the province a 

fair amount in my lifetime. But I travelled a fair amount this last 

summer and both north and south, east and west, and I just 

really enjoy it. And I enjoy it every time I get out there and visit 

with people. And this is one of the things I would hope that the 

government had done. I would hope that the government had 

contacted people throughout the province — various groups 

perhaps, Mr. Speaker, individuals and representatives from 

various community groups — and run this piece of legislation 



3764 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2009 

past them, particularly this clause past them, as far as the 

banning of cellphones and text messaging devices. If they run it 

past these people, what was the reaction? 

 

I mean we know what the polls show, Mr. Speaker. But the 

polls, is the poll taken on a very broadly based question? The 

question was, would you support the government‟s banning 

cellphones or use of cellphones while people are driving and 

operating their vehicle? And I think, Mr. Speaker, common 

sense would say the vast majority of people would say, yes, 

they would. And obviously that‟s what the poll shows — an 

87.9 per cent of people supported to some degree, some 

strongly, some not quite so strongly. But overwhelming support 

was there for a ban on the use of hand-held or cellphones while 

driving. 

 

I think also, Mr. Speaker, it‟s just as important that we ensure 

that we have in that ban, text messaging ability, not just on 

BlackBerrys, Mr. Speaker, perhaps not just on cellphones. But 

as I have indicated earlier, I do know of people involved in the 

business world who have the ability to communicate with their 

laptop computer sitting on the front seat of their car on the 

passenger side. They will use that to communicate while 

driving or standing, but certainly while driving also, with their 

home office or with clients in fact around the world. And that is 

just as distractive, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I would hope that the government has taken some time to 

look into that because that computer sitting on the passenger 

seat of a businessman‟s vehicle is not hand-held. In my 

terminology, I don‟t think it would be considered hand-held. 

That‟s why I asked the question, and repeatedly so, is what is 

meant by hand-held? Because does that computer sitting on that 

passenger‟s seat while the owner of the vehicle, the 

businessperson I‟m thinking of, is driving down the highway 

and often drives the highway between Regina and Saskatoon on 

a very regular basis and can communicate with his laptop 

computer on the dash. Is that the same as a BlackBerry? 

 

A BlackBerry is likely, in all likelihood, considered a hand-held 

device. And is it hand-held device if it‟s in your hand? Of 

course it would be a hand-held device. But what if that same 

device is mounted on the dash, or if it was a bracket, which is 

available, mounted on the dash? It‟s not being held in the hand. 

Is it then still considered a hand-held device? Likelihood just as 

distractive if you‟re driving down, and you‟re going to try to do 

some text messaging while your device is mounted on your 

dash is just as distractive if you do that. Or is it not considered a 

hand-held device, as indicated earlier? 

 

It raises a question with me, Mr. Speaker, having a bit of a rural 

background. Would this legislation also apply to a farmer who 

is moving his motorized farm equipment on a public road? 

Would this legislation apply to a farmer who is moving, 

operating motorized farm equipment on the road? Does this 

apply? 

 

Is this motorized farm equipment covered by the terminology 

within this legislation that says . . . Mr. Speaker, I have a lot 

more to say on this issue. I‟ve just hardly scratched the surface. 

But I‟m getting pressure from my colleagues who want to get 

on to do other pieces of business. And so with that, Mr. 

Speaker, I will move adjournment of debate. 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Northeast has 

moved adjournment of debate. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 

allow the important work of the Standing Committee on Human 

Services and Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice, I move this 

House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that in order to facilitate the work of committees, this Assembly 

stand adjourned. The House stands adjourned until tomorrow 

afternoon at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:59.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3733 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3733 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3733 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3734 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3734 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3734 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3757 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3734 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3734 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3735 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3735 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3735 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3735 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3735 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3736 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Green Week Celebrates Roughriders Win 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3736 

 Roughriders Vie for Grey Cup 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3736 

 Saskatchewan Scholarship of Honour  

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3736 

 Preeceville and District Health Centre Expansion  

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3737 

 Saskatchewan Police Forces Protect the Public  

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3737 

 Management of Provincial Expenditures 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3737 

 Saskatchewan Multicultural Week 

  LeClerc .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3737 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Management of Provincial Economy 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3738 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3738 

 Consideration of Supplementary Estimates 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3739 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3739 

 Children’s Hospital in Saskatoon 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3740 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3740 

 Moose Jaw Hospital Project 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3740 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3740 

 Saskatchewan Hospital in North Battleford 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3740 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3741 

 Funding for Long-Term Care Facilities 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3741 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3741 

 School Construction 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3741 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 3741 

 Funding for School Councils 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3741 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 3742 

 Social Services Caseloads and Initiatives 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3742 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3742 

 

 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3742 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 112 — The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 2009 

 Loi de 2009 modifiant la Loi de 1988 sur les juges de paix 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3742 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3743 

 Bill No. 113 — The Justices of the Peace Consequential Amendments Act, 2009 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3743 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3743 

 Bill No. 114 — The Small Claims Amendment Act, 2009 

 Loi de 2009 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur les petites créances 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3743 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3744 

 Bill No. 115 — The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2) 

 Loi n
o
 2 de 2009 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3744 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3745 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 116 — The Traffic Safety (Drivers’ Licences and Hand-held Electronic 

 Communications Equipment) Amendment Act, 2009 
  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3745 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3749 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3754 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3758 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium Development 

Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

 Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

Government House Leader 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. James Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Capital Commission 


