




















































Hansard: October 29, 2009


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 6A  THURSDAY, OCTOBER 29, 2009, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3317 

 October 29, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, seated in your gallery this morning is a large 

group of men and women who most of us, as members of the 

Legislative Assembly, had the opportunity to meet last night at 

a reception hosted here in the Legislative Building. And I want 

to thank on behalf of all members for their kind hospitality and 

the opportunity to share on concerns to the Association of 

Saskatchewan Realtors. So, Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members to 

welcome them to their Assembly this morning. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And on 

behalf of the official opposition I want to join the Deputy 

Premier in welcoming realtors to the Saskatchewan legislature, 

their Assembly, their legislature, Mr. Speaker, and I want to 

stress that the three issues that they raised with us today, Mr. 

Speaker — property tax relief, affordable housing, and changes 

in the assessment of property in Saskatchewan — are issues that 

I think we all need to take note of, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I thank the realtors of Saskatchewan who have done a 

tremendous job over the years at the provincial and at the 

national level, Mr. Speaker. I thank them for their continued 

efforts on behalf of Saskatchewan people. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Today I 

rise to present another petition calling for wage equity for CBO 

[community-based organization] workers. And we know that 

the low wages that are paid to the people working in 

community-based organizations result in high staff turnover, the 

subsequent lack of caregiver continuity, and it has a negative 

impact on the quality of care clients often receive. Mr. Speaker, 

I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

development and implementation of a multi-year funding 

plan to ensure that CBO workers achieve wage equity 

with employees who perform work of equal value in 

government departments. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these folks come from the city of North 

Battleford and Saskatoon. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition in support of fairness for students here in 

Saskatchewan. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately expand the graduate 

retention program to include master’s and Ph.D. 

graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals that signed this petition are from 

all over Saskatchewan. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present a petition on behalf of rural residents of 

Saskatchewan who question why the Sask Party government is 

leaving them behind with respect to providing safe and 

affordable water. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to financially assist the town of Duck 

Lake residents for the good of their health and safety due 

to the exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency, and that this government fulfills its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good residents of 

Duck Lake, Saskatchewan. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I stand to present a petition in 

support of maintaining quality health care services in 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners are concerned that 

the health care providers . . . that the government address the 

retention and recruitment issues and ensure safe staffing levels. 

And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to commit to maintaining quality health 

care services and job security for all public health care 

providers. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petition is signed by people from Rosetown, Milden, and 

Fiske. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

pleased today to rise to present a petition in support of 

affordable rents and housing in The Battlefords. Mr. Speaker, 

the petitioners note the rapidly rising increases in rental rates 



3318 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2009 

and the lack of supply of housing units. Mr. Speaker, the 

petitioners pray: 

 

That the honourable Legislative Assembly call upon the 

Government of Saskatchewan to develop an affordable 

housing program that will result in a greater number of 

quality and affordable rental units to be made available to 

a greater number of people throughout The Battlefords, 

and that will implement a process of rent review or rent 

control to better protect tenants in a non-competitive 

housing environment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by residents of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned Saskatchewan residents 

as it relates to the unprecedented mismanagement of their 

finances, Mr. Speaker. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to start managing our 

provincial finances responsibly and prudently to ensure 

that it does not continue its trend of massive budgetary 

shortfalls, runaway and unsustainable spending, equity 

stripping from our Crowns, and irresponsible revenue 

setting. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by concerned citizens here in Regina, 

Mr. Speaker. I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I would request leave of the 

Assembly for a slightly extended member statement to honour 

the sacrifice of Lieutenant Justin Boyes. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has requested leave. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Lieutenant Justin Garrett Boyes 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to 

colleagues in the legislature for the leave. 

 

It is my sad duty today to rise and join in prayer and sorrow 

with the family of Lieutenant Justin Garrett Boyes of 

Saskatoon. Lieutenant Boyes was killed yesterday just 

southwest of Kandahar city. He was 26. He leaves behind his 

wife, Alanna, and their three-year-old son, James. Our thoughts 

are with them, and our thoughts are also with Justin’s parents, 

Brian and Angie. 

 

Brian and Angie live just a few doors down, as it turns out, and 

across the street from the Minister of Justice. And I had a 

chance to talk to him a bit this morning about them, and they’re 

a great couple and great neighbours. And after Justin’s first tour 

in Afghanistan, the neighbourhood was festooned in yellow 

ribbons. And so we are very mindful of their loss this morning. 

 

Lieutenant Boyes started out his military career as a reservist 

with the North Saskatchewan Regiment. He chose to join in a 

more full-time capacity last year and was serving with the 3rd 

Battalion, Princess Patricia’s Light Infantry. He was a mere 10 

days into his second tour in Afghanistan when he died, and he 

recently spoke of how happy he was to be back in Afghanistan 

following months of rigorous training. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just a few days ago we had the occasion in this 

Assembly, in the library of this Assembly, to honour our 

reservists and to declare Reserve Forces Day in Saskatchewan. 

It was an honour for our government, and humbling for all of 

us, to be able to express our gratitude to tell these reservists 

how proud we are of them, to tell these women and men how 

grateful we are that they are prepared to serve in this way. 

 

We are humbled by their willingness to perform, to sacrifice. 

They are part of an unbroken line, these reservists, and so is 

Lieutenant Justin Boyes — part of an unbroken line of honour 

and sacrifice that stretches from today all the way back to Vimy 

Ridge where our country came of age. 

 

This morning I invoke those same thoughts and words in 

memory of Justin Garrett Boyes. That unbroken line that 

stretches back to Vimy Ridge has been thickened in recent 

months by blood, and strengthened by uncommon valour. We 

honour Justin for his courage and his valour this morning. 

 

In this Assembly we stand on the shoulders of those who are 

prepared to make that sacrifice for freedom and for democracy. 

We tread on their valour, these heroes of the past. But there are 

heroes still in Saskatchewan and Canada, and what a view of 

security and freedom and protection we have on their shoulders 

as they bear the standard of freedom and carry the colours of 

our nation. 

 

Let’s be very clear this morning. Because of what Justin did and 

what others are prepared to do and have done in Afghanistan, 

there are no more camps there that trade in terror. There are 

fewer threats to our families, to our country, from those who 

name Canada as an enemy. 

 

Justin’s purchase for us is security and safety and freedom. The 

currency with which he made that purchase is courage and 

valour and service. 

 

There is a flag on this building today that is flying at half-mast. 

That flag and these inadequate words are our way to say this 

morning, thank you. To his mom and his dad, to Brian and 

Angie, to his wife, Alanna, to his young son, James, we offer 

them the gratitude of a grateful province and the love of 

neighbours, and we pray for them the peace that passes 

understanding. 

 



October 29, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3319 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Kindergarten Students Visit Constituency Office 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 

Friday, October 23rd, I had the pleasure of hosting the 

kindergarten class from École Victoria School at my office in 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

The students are taking part in a series of who are the people in 

your neighbourhood walks. So they’ve gotten to know their 

neighbourhood better. So far they have been to the 

Saskatchewan Craft Council on Broadway, the St. John’s Music 

store where they got to play the piano, The Refinery, which is a 

performing arts centre attached to St. James’ Anglican Church, 

and, last Friday, my constituency office. 

 

While visiting my office I asked if any of them knew what a 

member of the legislature did and one little girl enthusiastically 

replied, “You people run the whole world.” So colleagues, we 

have some very high expectations amongst our kindergarten 

constituents. 

 

These kindergarten students had a number of questions. They 

wanted to talk about our parks and camping. They were 

interested in budgets and animal protection, particularly wildlife 

and cats and dogs. They’re interested in highway signs and, Mr. 

Speaker, they wanted to know who we were. And I have a 

number of photos on my constituency wall so I was able to tell 

them who our Premier is and who other members of the 

Legislative Assembly are. 

 

The students were extremely well-behaved and they received 

juice, a Saskatchewan flag tattoo, and a small Saskatchewan 

flag for their classroom. Accompanying them were their 

teacher, Kari McRae, parents Marie Sellar, Sam Lindsey, Bryn 

Rawlyk, Clint Westman, as well as their educational assistant, 

Emily Bilay. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the École Victoria School 

kindergarten class for taking an interest in their neighbourhood 

and an interest in what we do. And I would ask my colleagues 

to join me in wishing Kari McRae and her students — who are 

watching the Assembly this morning — well as they strive for a 

creative and productive future. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Trick-or-Treat Proceeds for African Children 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is a big 

weekend for kids across Saskatchewan. Dressed as Hannah 

Montana or a transformer, they will fan out across their 

neighbourhoods in their annual quest for candy. Mr. Speaker, 

Halloween is once again upon us. 

 

Many of those trick-or-treaters, through their schools and 

community groups, will also be raising money to help children 

around the world through the annual Trick-or-Treat for 

UNICEF [United Nations Children’s Fund] campaign. 

 

For more than 50 years, Canadian kids have been collecting 

money to help less fortunate kids in countries they have only 

read about. This year the money they raise will go toward 

sending children in Africa to school. In partnership with the 

Nelson Mandela Foundation, UNICEF hopes to help close to 1 

million children in Rwanda and other African countries receive 

an education. No amount is too small, Mr. Speaker. As little as 

$5 can help provide pencils for an entire class; $10 buys a 

soccer ball for the entire school; for $5,000 we can provide 

clean water for a community school. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this Halloween I would encourage all 

members of this House to put the change jar next to the candy 

bowl to give children around the world a better life. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Prince Albert Hosts National Council of Women 

Convention 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, in June of this year, Prince Albert 

was host to the National Council of Women of Canada 

convention, or the NCWC. The three-day event took place at 

the E.A. Rawlinson Centre for the Arts. The president is Karen 

Dempsey from Halifax, and the hosting council was from the 

Prince Albert Council of Women led by President Patricia 

Leson. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NCWC was founded in 1893 in Toronto and 

has been designated by the Government of Canada as being of 

historical significance for its role in Canadian women’s history. 

Today there are local councils in 20 Canadian cities, including 

the city of Prince Albert, and the NCWC is a member of the 

International Council of Women, which represents women in 

over 70 countries. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the delegates were treated to a gala opening night 

event in which over 20 women from Prince Albert were 

acknowledged for their contributions to our community. Over 

the three-day event, delegates had the opportunity to enjoy 

Prince Albert’s famous hospitality. Delegates were also treated 

to local talent, including Cathleen Lesperance and the Diva 

Hags. 

 

The women who attended the convention were from every part 

of Canada, including Halifax, Montreal, Vancouver, Winnipeg, 

to name a few. For many it was their first trip to Prince Albert, 

and for some their first trip to Saskatchewan, but all commented 

on how beautiful our province is and the wonderful hospitality 

of the people of Prince Albert. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join with me in 

acknowledging the contributions of the National Council of 

Women of Canada, and in congratulating Patricia Leson and the 

Prince Albert Council of Women for being wonderful 

ambassadors for Saskatchewan and for organizing such a 

wonderful event. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 



3320 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2009 

Habitat for Humanity Key Ceremony 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night I had pleasure 

of attending another Habitat for Humanity key ceremony right 

here in Regina. Habitat for Humanity and its many community 

partners and volunteers have again come together to help build 

a home for a family here in Regina. The Canadian Institute of 

Plumbing & Heating hosted last night’s event. They were key 

contributors to the plumbing and heating systems of this home. 

This was part of the association’s commitment to help with 

Habitat’s build across the country. 

 

On March 30th, our government committed to Habitat for 

Humanity $1 million to build 20 new homes throughout 

Saskatchewan. Of this 1 million, 50,000 was contributed 

towards the construction of the Zatlun family home. The 

Zatluns are originally a Burmese family who have now obtained 

Canadian citizenship. They originally came to Canada and 

Regina via a Cambodian refugee camp. Families selected to 

receive Habitat for Humanity have to put in a minimum of 500 

hours of sweat equity. This feat is even more remarkable by the 

fact that the Zatluns have four children under the age of eight. 

 

Our government believes that everyone should have access to 

safe, affordable housing — housing that promotes health, 

dignity, security, and independence. Our government cannot 

emphasize enough how community partners such as Habitat for 

Humanity are essential to making this a reality. Thank you very 

much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Results of Municipal Elections 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

municipal elections took place yesterday across the province, 

offering an opportunity for Saskatchewan citizens to exercise 

their democratic right to choose their representatives. I’d like to 

take this opportunity to congratulate all candidates who sought 

election and commend them for allowing their name to stand 

for public office. It represents a commitment to our 

communities and a desire to be involved in the democratic 

process. Thank you for your contribution. 

 

To those candidates who were successful, I extend deep 

congratulations. You obviously have the confidence of electors 

and mandate to proceed with your best judgment in the interest 

of your citizens. I wish you the satisfaction of public service 

and the patience and good humour that are needed to ensure 

your service is satisfying and productive. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to extend a special congratulations to 

a man I am proud to have worked alongside in this legislature 

for many years — Glenn Hagel. The newly elected mayor of 

Moose Jaw received a remarkable 64 per cent of the popular 

vote. I look forward to the positive work he and our new 

council will accomplish for our city of Moose Jaw. Mr. 

Speaker, I ask that all members of the Assembly join me in 

congratulating all of those newly elected officials right across 

the province. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

take this time to congratulate all the winners from last night’s 

municipal elections. First of all, let me congratulate our new 

mayor of Yorkton. James Wilson was victorious over Randy 

Goulden, the two separated by only 54 votes. I know Mr. 

Wilson well. I witnessed his involvement, commitment, and 

leadership in his community, family, and his work. Mr. Wilson, 

the incumbent, and new council members will serve Yorkton 

well, and I know will be leaders that we can all be proud of. 

Let's hope Mr. Wilson can be serving as successfully as Mr. 

Walter Streelasky of Melville, who last night was acclaimed. 

 

Next I would like to congratulate the mayors of Saskatoon and 

Regina. They once again received strong approval of their 

leadership. Mayor Fiacco received 85 per cent, while Mayor 

Atchison received 58 per cent. In the border city of 

Lloydminster, Jeff Mulligan defeated incumbent mayor, Ken 

Baker. 

 

Other winners in mayoralty races were Jerrod Schafer of Swift 

Current, Ian Hamilton in North Battleford, Debra Button in 

Weyburn, Malcolm Eaton in Humboldt, Mr. Glenn Hagel in 

Moose Jaw, and Jim Scarrow in Prince Albert. Another 

acclamation was Mr. Gary St. Onge of Estevan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate all the other winners 

from last night’s election. The mayors, the councillors that put 

their names forward in other jurisdictions, I commend them for 

putting their names forward as well. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Public Safety Policies 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, will the Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and 

Policing confirm for the people of Saskatchewan today that a 

dangerous sex offender is unlawfully at large from the 

correctional system in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have no 

knowledge of that at this point in time. If the member would 

like to pass some information over to me, I will definitely look 

into it. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, is it still the government’s policy to 

be open and transparent about the release, unlawful release, or 

escape of offenders from the correctional system in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections and Public Safety. 

 



October 29, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3321 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — As the member opposite would 

know, Mr. Speaker, that the policy of somebody that’s at large 

on a level 1 is the policy, and that we would notify the public if 

it’s a level 1. There are extenuating circumstances to some 

cases, I would suggest, where in consultation with the police 

services whether it’s at the best advice of the public whether it’s 

notified or is not. Again, if the member would like to offer 

some more details on the specifics of the case, I would be very 

happy to look into it. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, if the minister was doing his job, 

he would know that Brock Wiebe, a dangerous sexual offender, 

has been unlawfully at large from the Regina Correctional 

Centre since July 30 at 5:23 p.m. — three months ago. He was 

serving time for sexual assault, assault with a weapon, and 

obstruct of a police officer among other charges. Why has the 

news media not been informed? Why have the people of 

Saskatchewan not been informed that this dangerous offender 

from Swift Current, Saskatchewan is at large? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections and Public Safety. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Now that 

the member opposite has given me some information that I can 

work with, I can tell him that I am aware of the particular case, 

that the member was accidentally released on probation. He was 

released 71 days early. Mr. Wiebe followed all of the conditions 

of his probation. He is now living in Calgary. We have an 

address of Mr. Wiebe. We have contacted the police services in 

Calgary to apprehend. 

 

One of the reasons that the decision was made not to put it 

public is — there’s a number of reasons, Mr. Speaker — one of 

the reasons that we decided and I decided not to make a public 

announcement of this is because we were under the impression, 

with the police services, that it might drive Mr. Wiebe 

underground. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, we have a policy that the 

government described as open and transparent that the people of 

the province of Saskatchewan would be notified when an 

offender was at large. This offender has been at large for now 

over three months. As of today, he’s still listed as unlawfully at 

large and listed as dangerous by the system. How does the 

minister defend not allowing the people of this province and of 

this country to know that this individual is at large? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve 

explained, Mr. Wiebe is at large. We have contacted the police 

to try and apprehend Mr. Wiebe and bring him back to 

Saskatchewan. 

 

It’s also noted that Mr. Wiebe . . . The member opposite is 

talking about a dangerous offender. I can advise the House that 

Mr. Wiebe has been complying with his probation officer. He 

has a part-time job. He has a known address. He’s living with 

relatives in Calgary. My thoughts of his designation as a 

dangerous offender, he was released. He was released by the 

Parole Board early. 

 

But I would like to also, Mr. Speaker, remind members opposite 

that under the previous administration, there are nine . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The members are aware of the rules. 

Listen to the answer. Minister Responsible for Corrections. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, under the previous 

administration, there was nine cases where inmates were 

released mistakenly — nine cases between 1998 and 2007. The 

more interesting of those cases, nine incidents, two of the 

incidents involved an offender accused and charged with 

murder, was released in September of 2005 and in 2007 under 

the watch of the member asking the question. He was in charge 

at the time. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

H1N1 Pandemic Planning 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We know that there are 

at least four suspected cases and two confirmed cases of H1N1 

at the university of Saskatoon. Yesterday I asked the minister if, 

in the face of a full-blown pandemic, would the University of 

Saskatchewan students be able to access the H1N1 vaccination 

before November 24th. And he dodged the question. Mr. 

Speaker, to the minister, I’ll ask again: is the minister 

scheduling a clinic immediately to vaccinate students at the 

University of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, as I answered yesterday, we go on the advice of our 

chief medical officer, Moira McKinnon, as to how the rollout of 

the vaccine should be conducted around the province. Mr. 

Speaker, she’s advising and I take her advice that we need to do 

all our health care workers; isolated communities, many of 

them in the North right now; people that are at risk over the 

next week or so; and then into the general public. 

 

We can only vaccinate as many as we receive vaccinations from 

the federal government, Mr. Speaker, which is on a per capita 

basis. There is no negotiating between provinces to provinces to 

the federal government. It’s on a per capita basis. It’s being 

rolled out across Canada. 

 

I would note though, Mr. Speaker, that I don’t think it would be 

appropriate to run after an area that may have some increase in 

H1N1 and not have enough for our high-risk people, Mr. 

Speaker. I don’t know if that’s what she’s suggesting. I think 

that would be inappropriate, especially when you look at, for 

example, Wilcox or the Notre Dame college. As of today there 

are zero confirmed cases because they did as we asked — they 



3322 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2009 

self-isolated. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, this government owes 

Saskatchewan mothers some straight answers. The Regina 

Qu’Appelle Health Region website states that children six 

months to four years of age are in the high-risk group and will 

be vaccinated November 2nd to the 6th. The Saskatoon Health 

Region website states children over six months up to five years 

— they’re in the high-risk group, and they’ll be vaccinated 

starting November 9th. 

 

To the minister: Saskatoon mothers want to know why their 

children are forced to wait an extra week to get the vaccination, 

and Regina mothers want to know why their five-year-old 

children are not considered to be high risk when Saskatoon’s 

five-year-olds are. And they want an answer from the minister, 

not dodge it and pass it on to the health region. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned 

yesterday that, again, it’s the chief medical officer that sets out 

the sequencing, and we set it out in a broad context. It’s the 

health regions that deliver. The health regions deliver the health 

care services in our province, across the province in 12 different 

regions.  

 

[10:30] 

 

And there will be some variation within the health regions. If 

you think that delivery of a vaccine should be the same in 

Regina as it would be in Mamawetan Churchill, you’re 

completely out of the category because, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Members are aware of the fact that all 

comments are to be directed through the Chair, and I’ll ask the 

Minister of Health to comply. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will 

forward my remarks through you to the critic. And I’ll try and 

do it slow so she can completely understand, Mr. Speaker, 

because yesterday in the news scrum, she certainly had a hard 

time understanding how it was being rolled out, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s being rolled out through the health regions on a very 

controlled basis, unlike in other provinces where there’s up to 

seven-hour waits and when they do get there, there is no 

vaccine left. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Health Care Options 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I gather the minister still has no 

answer and he’s reduced himself to personal insults. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Shame. 

Ms. Junor: — It is a shame. I have another question, Mr. 

Speaker. A report from BC [British Columbia] yesterday says 

that the Saskatchewan government is in discussion with that 

province to “. . . sell 400 hip and knee replacement surgeries to 

Saskatchewan over the next two years.” The news story goes on 

to note that Saskatchewan will pay more for the service and that 

will help BC patients get their surgeries faster. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why is this government paying 

more to the BC government when it could be investing in 

solutions here at home? Why is the Wall government more 

concerned about patients in BC than . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Members are just 

reminded of the fact that they’re to direct the comments through 

the Chair, not to individual members. I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Eastview for the question. 

 

Ms. Junor: — I’ll re-ask the question. Sorry, Mr. Speaker. 

Why is this government paying more to the BC government 

when it could be investing in solutions here at home? And why 

is the Sask Party government more concerned about patients in 

BC than those needing urgent care here in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, you know certainly 

through many conversations that we’ve had with constituents 

around this province, but more importantly through the Patient 

First Review that has listened to people across the province as 

to what are their priorities — what do they want to see in the 

health care system — one of the areas is wait times. It’s been an 

issue in the province for many, many years. In fact it’s been 

growing in the province for many, many years. And we finally 

got a handle on it so that, you know, we’re as many people in or 

what is being operated on and going out, Mr. Speaker. But there 

is a huge wait list in between. 

 

And I believe that, Mr. Speaker, it’s our responsibility as a 

government, it was in the Speech from the Throne to address 

that huge wait list, Mr. Speaker. And I’m going to challenge the 

health care system to look at all options. Mr. Speaker, I know 

there’s more capacity within the system. I know there’s other 

options, Mr. Speaker. If we look to what has been done in Great 

Britain who had the same problem, they looked at a number of 

innovative ways to reduce that wait time. Mr. Speaker, that’s 

what we’ll be doing as well. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Reports from BC 

today suggest that the Premier’s plan to send patients needing 

hip and knee surgeries to that province for treatment will end up 

costing the province a premium for that service. “This is an 

opportunity . . .” And this is a quote from the BC Health 

minister: “This is an opportunity for us to charge a premium by 

doing Saskatchewan surgeries . . .” 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: how much is Saskatchewan paying 

in premiums for this surgery, and why is the minister not 



October 29, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3323 

investing in the health care system here? Why has he stripped 

away funding for the surgical centre in Regina that would have 

done just what BC is proposing at a less cost? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — We are looking at all the options that 

are available, Mr. Speaker. In the public system if there’s more 

capacity, that is great. We’re certainly looking at that. If we 

have to look at a private deliverer operating within the province, 

Mr. Speaker, that will be done because what we are doing is 

we’re putting the patient first — unlike their ideology that left 

people languish on a wait list for over two years. Mr. Speaker, 

two years — absolutely unacceptable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if we have to deal with other provinces and work 

with other provinces, we’re more than willing to do that — 

unlike that government would build walls around their province 

and keep people languishing on waiting lists for far too long. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

H1N1 Pandemic Planning 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Yesterday the Minister of Health told the media and today the 

Minister of Health told the Assembly that a number of H1N1 

. . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the 

Minister of Health told the media and today he tells the 

Assembly that a number of H1N1 vaccines were on their way to 

northern Saskatchewan. In the North we have the problems of 

overcrowding housing, of isolation, and as Aboriginal people, 

mostly Aboriginal people, we are considered a very high-risk 

group. This is very alarming to everyone, very concerning. 

 

To the minister: where and when will the people of Athabasca 

receive the H1N1 vaccination? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said in my earlier 

answers, that the chief medical officer is rolling out the vaccine 

protocol across the province. Vaccines have been delivered to 

all 12 health regions. It’s up to those health regions then to 

carry on the vaccination plan within their area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, through the week there have been vaccines given 

to health care workers. But also in the northern communities, 

Mr. Speaker, the two northern health regions are in possession 

of the vaccine and they’re rolling those vaccines out. It cannot 

be done in every community on the first day — no, it can’t be, 

Mr. Speaker — but they’re working through the North to try 

and vaccinate and immunize those communities. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I find it very curious that the member would 

be asking those questions when the Health critic would want 

something totally different. Maybe we should take those 

vaccines from the North and give them to the university. Is that 

what they’re saying, Mr. Speaker? Because it’s a contradiction 

between those two. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, the minister talks about the 

region’s website, and we did go through the region’s website 

just a half an hour ago. They have no information as to where 

and when the people in northern Saskatchewan will receive 

their vaccination. And I’ve got a copy of that right here for the 

minister. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the question I have, does this minister know what 

he’s doing? No, he does not, Mr. Speaker. Again I’ll ask that 

minister, without playing politics, and the question is when will 

he get this information out to the people of the North and in 

particular Athabasca, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the health regions are 

responsible for the delivery within their area on an overarching 

basis through the Ministry of Health and through our chief 

medical officer, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, they’ve been 

working at it, and they’re out delivering those vaccines as we 

speak, as they go across the northern parts of our province to 

isolated communities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Is there a lack of information on the odd website? I would say 

probably there is. If there is no information on the Mamawetan 

Churchill or Keewatin Yatthé health regions, Mr. Speaker, that 

should be corrected. And we’ll look to make sure that is. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Over the past couple of days 

I’ve been attempting to ensure that members understand the 

rules of directing the questions through the Speaker. And I just 

want to remind members. And sometimes members 

inadvertently refer directly, but I would ask members to direct 

all questions, no reference directly to an individual but to the 

minister or whether it’s a member at large. 

 

I recognize the member from Regina Rosemont. 

 

Energy Issues 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We know this 

government conducted a poll a few weeks ago using a Toronto 

polling firm, Angus Reid Strategies. This expensive, 

Toronto-generated online survey tells the public this about 

SaskPower rates: “It is projected that an average annual rate 

adjustment of approximately 8% will be required during the 

next decade . . .” On a compounded basis, Mr. Speaker, that 

means 100 per cent of rate increases and more than that over the 

next 10 years — a doubling of rates, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To the minister: can the minister confirm that this is the rate 

plan of the Sask Party government for SaskPower? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 



3324 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2009 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

there has been no application by SaskPower for a rate increase 

at this particular time. There probably will be at some point in 

time. There has been no decision taken with respect to it. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — No application, but they’re spending big 

bucks to let the people of Saskatchewan know that there’s going 

to be over a 100 per cent rate increase. Bit of a disconnect here, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

This Toronto-generated survey asks an interesting question 

about the future decisions of SaskPower. It asks, “Who do you 

believe is best equipped to make decisions about future 

electrical supply?”  Among the options is private sector. 

 

To the minister: which private sector companies does this 

government propose to put in charge of making decisions about 

SaskPower’s future electrical supply? Is it Bruce Power? If not, 

then who is it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, when it comes to the 

generation of electricity in Saskatchewan, SaskPower has 

facilities that they operate themselves. They have facilities that 

they have joint ventures with. They have private partnerships. 

And that has been ongoing for a long time both under this 

administration, under the previous administration. 

 

However I can understand why the NDP [New Democratic 

Party] have a reluctance to get involved in private sector 

generation in Saskatchewan. In 1995, the last time that they got 

involved in one, they asked for proposals to come forward. 

Proposals did come forward from a number of different 

companies. At that point, they cancelled the proposal request. 

And then they took the information, they grabbed the 

information and went about it and built it themselves. The only 

problem with it was, Mr. Speaker, was they were sued for doing 

so, and they were dragged through the courts of Saskatchewan 

for seven years for that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize . . . Order. I recognize the member 

from Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — It wasn’t an answer to my question. The 

question related to who’s best served in making those decisions 

about our electrical supply. This government’s suggesting that 

the private sector should be making those decisions. I’m not 

talking about who’s participating in generation, but who’s 

making those decisions. This government thinks the private 

sector should be making those decisions. 

 

My question to the minister: who in the private sector should be 

making decisions about Saskatchewan’s electrical supply? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

SaskPower has had a long-standing relationship with private 

sector deliverers of electrical generation in Saskatchewan for a 

long, long time, dating back to the years when the NDP were in 

government. We continue that tradition. If you pay attention to 

what the CEO [chief executive officer] of SaskPower is saying, 

this is an adequate mix between private sector and public sector 

generation. 

 

And as I said, I can understand why the NDP doesn’t want to 

get involved in that once again because they got sued by these 

companies, were dragged through the courts for seven years. 

And the whole mess, the whole bungling mess, was managed 

by none other than the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Members will come to 

order. The Minister of Health will come to order. I recognize 

the member from . . . Order. Members want to have question 

period? We can have it or we can let it pass by. 

 

I recognize the member from Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — So we asked the question twice; it 

wasn’t answered either time. We’re not talking about power 

generation. Maybe the minister doesn’t understand here. What 

we’re talking about is who’s best to make the decisions about 

Saskatchewan’s future electrical supply. These guys, that 

minister, thinks it should be the private sector. 

 

I’ll go on here, Mr. Speaker. It’s interesting that one group is 

missing from the list of people who I think might be interested 

in being involved in SaskPower’s future decisions about 

electrical supply, that being Saskatchewan people. 

 

To the minister: the government admits. with its question in its 

expensive poll, that it has no plan to listen to the public when 

making decisions about the future energy options for 

Saskatchewan. Why is this? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

SaskPower is responsible for making the decisions just as they 

have been for a long, long time; just as they have been when 

they are making decisions about their public ownership 

generation; just as they are when they’re making decisions 

along with private sector partners, which they have for a very, 

very long time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also note that the Leader of the Opposition 

shouts from his seat that it wasn’t him that was responsible for 

it; it was Doug Anguish that was responsible for it. He wants to 

throw him under the bus. But at the time, Mr. Speaker, he was a 

member of cabinet. He was the CIC [Crown Investments 

Corporation of Saskatchewan] minister, and he most certainly 

did have responsibility for it. 

 

[10:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 



October 29, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3325 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we need that minister to 

focus on the present and today he’s focused so much on the 

past. And what’s really important here is the fact that 

Saskatchewan businesses . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Member’s fairly close to the 

Speaker’s chair, and it’s almost impossible to hear the question. 

I recognize the member from Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I can 

understand why the minister’s trying to deflect everything here 

and focus on the past instead of what’s important, and that’s 

100 per cent rate increases for families and businesses in this 

province. Talk to families, that’s very difficult for them. Talk to 

the Federation of Independent Business, that’s their number one 

challenge for business. 

 

The same survey says that SaskPower has a short-term, 

mid-term, and long-term plan to meet the power needs of 

Saskatchewan people. Surprisingly, demand-side management 

or energy conservation is only mentioned as a short-term option 

to meet Saskatchewan’s power needs. And the plan is far too 

modest at only 10 per cent, Mr. Speaker. Looking at power 

production, the cheapest megawatt is the one that’s not needed, 

the one that’s conserved, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To the minister: why does the Sask Party government for 

SaskPower have no plan to improve energy efficiency and 

conservation beyond the short term? Why is the Sask Party 

failing Saskatchewan families on conservation? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

SaskPower has ongoing consultations that they conduct with the 

consumers and the customers of this province on an ongoing 

basis. In addition to that, in the first time in history in 

Saskatchewan, there has been a legislative committee that has 

been struck to look at the energy options for the future of 

Saskatchewan. Those options include conservation. They 

include new generation, They include wind power, biomass — 

all of the different components, whether you’re looking at 

natural gas and even perhaps at some point, nuclear. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that the members opposite do 

not know which way they want to go on this file. Do they want 

to have SaskPower make the decisions, as they always have? 

Do they want to let the private sector make the decisions? We 

believe that SaskPower is best equipped to make those 

decisions. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would argue and I would say that the last 

person who we’re going to be asking for advice is the captain of 

industry that came back from Alberta to offer his advice. On 

one hand, he was in favour of nuclear, but when he came back, 

all of a sudden he’s a big proponent of wind energy in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Well I would say to the people of Saskatchewan, SaskPower 

will make those decisions. 

The Speaker: — Order. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Not Debatable) 

 

Return No. 1 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar, the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like the 

Assembly to issue an order for return. 

 

The Speaker: — Order for return. 

 

Return No. 2 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar, the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — For return, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Order for return. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by the Hon. Mr. McMorris, seconded 

by Ms. Ross, and the proposed amendment to the main motion 

moved by Mr. Lingenfelter.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure for me to rise today and join my colleagues and other 

members of the Legislative Assembly in speaking to the Speech 

from the Throne and the amendment that has been placed in 

front of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Before I make comments specific to the Speech from the 

Throne, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to make some other comments 

relating to other matters in front of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In particular, I’m interested in joining with my colleagues in 

welcoming the two new members to the legislature in this 

session, Mr. Speaker. Two by-elections were held in 

September. Those two by-elections were won by 

representatives of the official opposition, Mr. Speaker. And I 

want to welcome the new member from Saskatoon Riversdale 

and the new member from Regina Douglas Park. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these two members are going to add to the 

dynamic, the incredible dynamic that is this Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker. And I look forward to working with both members — 

one the new Leader of the New Democratic Party, the official 

opposition, and the second a new member who has 

distinguished herself in the Saskatoon community and who I 

have no doubt will distinguish herself in this Assembly on 



3326 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2009 

behalf of her constituents for the entire province. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the people of The 

Battlefords constituency for continuing to support me, Mr. 

Speaker, in the last election. The fact that I was returned for 

another term, Mr. Speaker, gave me great confidence in being 

able to continue the work that I had begun previously. And, Mr. 

Speaker, over the course of the last two years since the election 

in 2007, I’ve been overwhelmed to receive representations from 

throughout The Battlefords about issues that are important to 

my community, Mr. Speaker. A number of those issues I will 

raise shortly in my comments related to the Speech from the 

Throne itself. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on this day I also want to congratulate the people 

of Saskatchewan who allowed their names to stand for election 

yesterday in this province, election to municipal government 

across the province. And, Mr. Speaker, in particular, although I 

value the work that has been done by municipal leaders right 

across the province of Saskatchewan, and I remind members 

that indeed I served on the city council in the city of North 

Battleford for a term, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank all those 

who let their names stand and I look forward to working with 

those who have been elected for the next municipal term. 

 

But in particular, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank those elected in 

The Battlefords constituency. First in the town of Battleford, 

returned by acclamation, the mayor, Chris Odishaw. But in the 

council of the town of Battleford, Mr. Derek Mahon, Mr. Garth 

Walls, Ms. Donna Lavin, Mr. Cam Duncan, Mr. Bill Halewich 

were all returned incumbents, Mr. Speaker. All returned to their 

seats, joined by a new member, Ms. Susan McLean-Tady, Mr. 

Speaker, an individual who has worked for the town of 

Battleford, who knows the town of Battleford very, very well, 

will be joining them on that council. And I congratulate all of 

them and look forward to working with them during their term 

in office. 

 

In the city of North Battleford, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 

people who allowed their name to stand and congratulate those 

who were elected, Mr. Speaker. 

 

A very tight race for mayor in the city of North Battleford. Last 

night the numbers came in; only 15 votes separated the first and 

the second candidates on the ballot. But declared elected, Mr. 

Speaker, former councillor, Mr. Ian Hamilton as the new mayor 

in the city of North Battleford, also joined by incumbent Don 

Buglas, Ray Fox, and Grace Lang. 

 

The city of North Battleford has three new councillors, Mr. 

Speaker: Rhonda Seidel, Ron Crush, and Trent Houk. Mr. 

Speaker, this will be a dynamic council in the city of North 

Battleford. I congratulate them all and I look forward to 

working with those members of the council, city of North 

Battleford and the town of Battleford. 

 

I also, while I’m talking about municipal leaders, Mr. Speaker, 

do want to send a congratulation out to our former colleague 

here in the legislature, Mr. Glenn Hagel, who was elected with 

more than 60 per cent of the votes in the city of Moose Jaw. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve been watching the Moose Jaw election for a 

number of reasons — not only because a former colleague was 

in that race, but also because the city of Moose Jaw and the city 

of North Battleford share a number of issues in common, not 

the least of which is financing and bringing into being a new 

recreation and cultural facility for the community. And I know 

that Mr. Hagel from the mayor’s chair will manage issues in the 

city of Moose Jaw with a very capable hand. 

 

And one other piece of news I want to bring to the attention of 

the members of the Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker, that I 

read in The StarPhoenix this morning. I wasn’t aware of this, 

but I’m extremely pleased to hear that the Canadian Institute of 

Health Information, an organization we refer to as CIHI, Mr. 

Speaker, the Canadian Institute of Health Information has just 

named John Wright, former deputy minister of Health in the 

province of Saskatchewan, an individual let go from the Health 

department by the Sask Party opposite, is now the new head of 

the CIHI. Mr. Speaker, a national body that is critical to the 

development of the electronic medical record in Canada and 

guaranteeing the rights of individuals in the health system to 

privacy but to sharing of information for medical purposes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my congratulations to John Wright, who is now 

being recognized on the national stage for his past contributions 

to health and recognized for his ability to be a leader nationally 

in the health field, Mr. Speaker. My congratulations to my 

former deputy minister of Health, Mr. John Wright. 

 

Mr. Speaker, two other thank yous that I want to express. 

Number one: I know a lot of the people of The Battlefords who 

contact my office talk with my constituency assistant, Colleen 

Smith, before they have a chance to talk to me. Primarily, Mr. 

Speaker, because she’s always there and I, Mr. Speaker, am 

sometimes here, sometimes at meetings in other places around 

the province, Mr. Speaker. I want to thank Colleen Smith for 

the tremendous job that she has done and will continue to do in 

representing me and, more importantly, representing the 

interests of my constituents to me when I’m not there, Mr. 

Speaker. She does a tremendous job. 

 

And of course, Mr. Speaker, I also want to pay tribute to and 

thank my spouse, Cheryl Cook-Taylor, who has contributed 

greatly to my ability to represent the people of The Battlefords 

here in the Legislative Assembly. Mr. Speaker, my thanks and 

love to my wonderful wife. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to turn my attention now to just letting the 

members of the Assembly know what the issues are in The 

Battlefords that I see. Because, Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech 

is intended to provide a vision to the people of Saskatchewan, 

the vision of the government for the year ahead. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the idea of the Throne Speech, the history going 

back many years, is to assure the public that the government 

understands the issues of the province and has a plan, an idea — 

more importantly, a vision — of how to address those issues 

and give the people of the province an opportunity to prepare 

themselves to work in concert with the government in 

addressing those issues. So, Mr. Speaker, Throne Speech: 

general in nature, but always addressing vision, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I want to talk about the needs of the city of North Battleford, 

the town of Battleford, and the constituents of The Battlefords 

— and more importantly, Mr. Speaker, the challenges that they 



October 29, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3327 

face, given the circumstances that exist in the province today. 

Because, Mr. Speaker, in direct relation to the vision outlined in 

the Throne Speech, I’m asking members to think, are the needs 

being addressed by vision outlined by the province of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

[11:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I mentioned in the House yesterday that the 

primary issue in The Battlefords is indeed affordable housing. 

Mr. Speaker, this is an issue that is best presented by the fact 

that there are virtually no alternative accommodations in The 

Battlefords. We have a shortage of rental units, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This shortage of rental units is compounded by a number of 

factors. Number one, the growing economy is bringing people 

into the community for education and, Mr. Speaker, for 

employment. And the lack of rental accommodations, Mr. 

Speaker, particularly for immigrants and for young people 

moving into the community for their first job, number one, they 

can’t find places. But number two of course, Mr. Speaker, they 

can’t afford a place that becomes available, if any become 

available, because of course the rents are increasing. 

 

Now I don’t begrudge a landlord or an owner of a property 

getting a return on their investment, Mr. Speaker. But it has to 

be tied to, in my belief, the economy of the region. And the 

latest increase in rents, Mr. Speaker, is in a property that’s 

primarily, the residents of that property are primarily seniors or 

low- to middle-income individuals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the property has recently been purchased by 

residents who live in the city of Calgary. And all of a sudden, 

the North Battleford economy is seeing the rents in this building 

being increased commensurate with the economy in Calgary, 

Mr. Speaker. The building was purchased on the basis of highly 

leveraged circumstances. And as a result, the new landlord 

wants a rate of return very similar to what is available in a 

larger, even more active economy. 

 

So seniors on fixed income, low-income people in basically 

low-wage jobs, Mr. Speaker, are being asked to contribute 40 

per cent more in rent. And that date of application, Mr. Speaker, 

will take effect on February 1st, essentially the coldest day of 

the year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, without some appeal procedure or some appeal 

provision, a number of these people are going to have to find a 

way to justify spending money on rent versus spending money 

on groceries, or perhaps — even for the seniors, Mr. Speaker — 

prescription drugs. Mr. Speaker, they’ll have to make decisions 

because they can’t move. And others, Mr. Speaker, who are 

fortunate enough to be able to move, Mr. Speaker, are finding 

that the quality of the accommodation that is otherwise 

available is not up to the standards that they feel they deserve 

after having lived in a quality building for, in some cases, 10, 

15, and 18 years. So, Mr. Speaker, that’s just one example. 

 

But we have a community that’s in growth. We have young 

people moving to the community. We have a large senior 

population on fixed income. And, Mr. Speaker, we have a large 

number of First Nations communities in the area, Mr. Speaker, 

and quite a number of people, young First Nations people 

moving into the community to take employment — often their 

first jobs, Mr. Speaker — and there are virtually no rental units 

available, Mr. Speaker. So I simply state that housing is a 

critical issue in The Battlefords . . . needs to be addressed in 

terms of the challenges of our growing economy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I look at the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker. What’s the 

vision for housing? Well the Throne Speech response to 

housing is, we’ve done a little bit, and there’s a little bit under 

way. The only paragraph in the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker — 

no identification of where this government, the Sask Party 

government, intends to go with housing. I’ll have more to say 

on that in a couple of minutes, Mr. Speaker, when I get to the 

lack of vision, when I get to some comments on the lack of 

vision in the speech itself. 

 

Other issues, Mr. Speaker. It’s no surprise to members in here 

that I believe that the province needs to have immediate action 

on the construction of a new hospital, a new mental health 

facility. Saskatchewan Hospital, North Battleford has been on 

the agenda of government now for a couple of years, Mr. 

Speaker. The commitments were there previously during the 

election campaign in 2003, 2007, Mr. Speaker. The 

Saskatchewan Party government made their commitments and 

promises to replacing Saskatchewan Hospital. Two years later, 

Mr. Speaker, we’re still not there. So, Mr. Speaker, second 

issue in The Battlefords. I’ll address that in a little more detail 

in a few minutes. 

 

We do have some highway issues, Mr. Speaker, that people 

have been raising. The government talks a little bit about the 

infrastructure needs, etc., but the town of Battleford, Mr. 

Speaker, has been struggling with the Department of Highways 

opposite on the program about urban connectors and the issue 

relating to the ability of traffic to move through the town of 

Battleford on a provincial highway, Mr. Speaker, and the lack 

of response over the last two years to this issue, an important 

issue for the people. 

 

It’s not so much money, Mr. Speaker. It’s about the attitude and 

the ability of the department to get this issue resolved so that 

the town of Battleford can continue the growth that has begun 

there, Mr. Speaker. The Department of Highways has not 

demonstrated the ready-for-growth attitude that the government 

has been cheerleading over, Mr. Speaker, for the last two years. 

 

And also, Mr. Speaker, I don’t need to remind members of the 

casualties, the tragedies that have occurred on Highway 4 

North, going north of The Battlefords, Mr. Speaker. We’ve lost 

a number of young people over the course of the last few years, 

Mr. Speaker, to accidents. Municipal leaders throughout the 

whole region from The Battlefords north to the town of Glaslyn, 

Mr. Speaker, have been calling for additional investment in that 

highway. All has to do with safety, Mr. Speaker. They’ve gone 

so far as to call for a twinning of that highway, Mr. Speaker. 

But to this date there’s still been no concrete resolution. 

Municipal leaders want to see that, the safety of that road dealt 

with by the Minister of Highways. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we had a meeting the other day with 

representatives from the Canadian Federation of Independent 

Business, Mr. Speaker. One of the issues that CFIB raised was a 

shortage of qualified labour. There isn’t a week in The 



3328 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2009 

Battlefords, Mr. Speaker, that an employer somewhere in the 

community doesn’t mention to me the difficulties that our 

community has in growing the workforce because of the lack of 

qualified labour, Mr. Speaker. And indeed the government 

needs to put additional efforts into ensuring that where business 

needs employers, Mr. Speaker, that we’ve got the province, the 

government, supporting them. 

 

That is one of the other big issues in The Battlefords because, 

Mr. Speaker, west side of the province, lots of resource activity 

taking place, ideally positioned on the Yellowhead highway, 

Mr. Speaker — The Battlefords certainly needs to experience 

the capacity to grow. But at the same time, Mr. Speaker, that 

growth presents challenges and we need the support of the 

provincial government to meet those challenges. 

 

And lastly, Mr. Speaker, like other . . . Well not lastly. I have 

two other points. Second last, Mr. Speaker, we are looking for 

continued efforts to fund recreation and cultural opportunities. 

 

The people of The Battlefords are very pleased that the province 

was able to contribute $7 million to our multi-purpose facility. 

Mr. Speaker, this is a project that our new council is going to 

deal with and bring to fruition but of course, Mr. Speaker, since 

the province provided funding to that building, of course the 

costs have escalated somewhat and the community has to deal 

with raising money to complete the financing of that project. 

Mr. Speaker, we will meet that challenge but we also have 

another challenge, Mr. Speaker, and that’s funding of other 

municipal projects while this one is under way. 

 

And in particular, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of the Environment 

will know that a couple of weeks ago I sent a letter to her 

talking about the needs of Saskatchewan municipal golf 

courses, Mr. Speaker, to improve their irrigation systems, to 

make these golf courses more environmentally friendly, Mr. 

Speaker, to reduce their environmental footprint. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have an opportunity to improve irrigation 

systems in municipal golf courses across the province, reducing 

chemical use, reducing water wastage, Mr. Speaker, and 

protecting the fragile environments that exist around some of 

our golf courses. 

 

Mr. Speaker, an issue in The Battlefords that I know is also 

going to be an issue in other communities, Mr. Speaker, is the 

whole issue of funding a new environmental approach to golf 

course irrigation management, Mr. Speaker. And I hope the 

government will be able to address that issue soon. 

 

And lastly, Mr. Speaker, to the government, another issue that’s 

emerging is our Citizens on Patrol program. The Citizens on 

Patrol exist in other communities as well, Mr. Speaker. With the 

loss of FleetNet and some other things that have been taking 

place, the communication systems between local police 

officials, the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] in our 

community, and the citizens who have volunteered to be the 

eyes on the ground, Mr. Speaker, the communication system 

has deteriorated to the point where it’s virtually non-existent. 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve called on the government to try to address 

this issue. 

 

Those are significant issues in The Battlefords, Mr. Speaker. I 

wanted members to understand that as the province grows, as 

our communities grow, there is a need for the province to 

address and pay attention to the challenges that affect us. Mr. 

Speaker, that’s sort of the theme towards my conclusion. I’m 

not at the conclusion yet, Mr. Speaker, but the theme towards 

my conclusion is the ability of this government to manage the 

challenges that we are facing in the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

My conclusion will of course be that this government is failing 

to manage those challenges. Great at cheerleading the optimism 

that’s in the province, Mr. Speaker, because there is some, but 

there are serious challenges, Mr. Speaker, that can’t be fixed by 

cheerleading. They can only be fixed by addressing them face 

to face, face on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I look at the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, that talks about 

moving forward. And of course as other members of the 

Assembly have already pointed out, this Throne Speech is less 

about moving forward and more about looking back — and 

again I use the word cheerleading, Mr. Speaker — cheerleading 

what has already taken place, but failing to think about what 

this means and what it could mean to the citizens of 

Saskatchewan over the course of the coming year. 

 

And that was my opening comment, Mr. Speaker. A Throne 

Speech is about what confidence can we have in the 

government for the coming year — are they going to address 

our issues? By and large, Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech sets 

that out. This one fails miserably in that department. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, let’s just jump back briefly. I don’t want to 

use too much of the time of the House, Mr. Speaker, but I just 

want to jump back briefly and take a look at what this 

government has done since they were elected in 2007, since 

they’re very good on cheerleading, Mr. Speaker. I want to look 

at the throne speeches for the last two years, Mr. Speaker, 

before this one. 

 

And we recall that in 2007, after the election in 2007, the 

Saskatchewan Party came to government. The Throne Speech 

was called “Securing the Future,” Mr. Speaker. And I quote 

from that Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, 2007. This was the 

vision that the government set out right after the election. The 

vision is, “. . . [We] will have a growth agenda . . . [It] will be 

built on a foundation of sound financial management.” How 

long did that last, Mr. Speaker? Sound, sound financial 

management . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — And we’re starting to see it, Len. 

Growth agenda — 360 students more. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, we have no trouble with a growth 

agenda. The Deputy Premier yells, growth agenda. We’re 

getting there. Mr. Speaker, the NDP was there, Mr. Speaker, in 

2007 in November. You look at all the charts, Mr. Speaker. The 

province was growing before the Sask Party got elected, Mr. 

Speaker, and growing at a considerable pace, I might add. 

However, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. We’re well aware of the fact 

that we all have differences of opinion. We also have the right 



October 29, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3329 

to respect the right of an individual to speak. I recognize the 

member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The point of the quote 

from the Throne Speech was, “. . . built on a foundation of 

sound financial management.” No sooner, Mr. Speaker, did this 

Saskatchewan Party government take the seats opposite than 

they started to try to creatively . . . I think the Minister of 

Enterprise talked about creative accounting over there. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, we took a $2 billion surplus and dropped it to 800 

billion. The money is gone. We don’t know where it is. 

 

[11:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, they built a budget — 20 per cent of that money 

was going to come from potash revenue, Mr. Speaker. They 

didn’t get the potash revenue. We’re cutting back in this 

province now on commitments, particularly commitments to 

health care, Mr. Speaker. And where is this foundation of sound 

financial management that was the promise of the Throne 

Speech, the vision of the members opposite, in 2007? 

 

Mr. Speaker, they talked about a labour shortage. In The 

Battlefords, I mentioned earlier, two years later the labour 

shortage is still there. Is there any evidence, Mr. Speaker, that 

this government has a vision of dealing with that this year? No, 

Mr. Speaker. But in 2007 that was a commitment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech in 2007 focused on forestry, 

and Enterprise Saskatchewan was going to deal with the 

forestry sector. Well, Mr. Speaker, that didn’t last very long 

either. No sooner did they say, we’re going to manage the 

forestry sector better, than we got to a point today, two years 

later, we have virtually no forestry sector left, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And of course the conclusion there talked about, growth will 

produce a higher quality of life for the people of Saskatchewan. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, they forgot to say that in two years time, a 

higher quality of life — unless you’re a senior on fixed income, 

unless you’re a student going to college or university, unless 

you’re unemployed, unless you live in the North, unless you are 

a person of First Nations ancestry, Mr. Speaker, unless you are 

a recent immigrant to this province. Higher quality of life — we 

all demand it;, we all deserve it, Mr. Speaker — vision of the 

members opposite in 2007. 

 

Let’s go to 2008, Mr. Speaker, and this was the interesting year 

— 2008. The Throne Speech was referred to. “A Stronger 

Saskatchewan. A Better Life,” that was the title, Mr. Speaker. 

And it also said in the Throne Speech the year will be 

“characterized by fiscal prudence,” Mr. Speaker — fiscal 

prudence. Here we go. 

 

The year that they put all their eggs in the potash basket, Mr. 

Speaker. And the Minister of Energy yesterday tried to explain 

why they made their mistakes, Mr. Speaker, and he had a pretty 

good explanation. But it contradicts what the Premier says in 

the Throne Speech, that it was process. Mr. Speaker, the 

Minister of Energy indicated it wasn’t process. It’s the way that, 

the attitude about how you do things, Mr. Speaker. Potash, 20 

per cent, not there. We’ve had some difficulties as a result. How 

do we manage the challenge in front of us, Mr. Speaker? They 

have failed in managing the challenges. 

But more importantly, Mr. Speaker, what were the words of joy 

that came out of that second Throne Speech in 2008, Mr. 

Speaker? Saskatchewan used to be next year country. This year 

is this year country, Mr. Speaker. That’s what the Throne 

Speech said. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what came about as a result of this so-called 

it’s not next year country; it’s happening this year, Mr. 

Speaker? Well where have we come from now, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The children’s hospital is next year. The surgical centre is next 

year. The Saskatchewan Hospital in North Battleford may be 

next year. Affordable housing in the province, next year. Cattle 

and hog production support, Mr. Speaker, next year, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The members opposite in 2008, a full two Throne Speeches 

ago, Mr. Speaker, talked about Saskatchewan being this year 

country. All we got, Mr. Speaker, was a flawed fiscal approach 

and now we’ve got cutbacks and are paying the penalty. 

 

Mr. Speaker, is this the government to meet the challenges 

faced by our economy and the challenges faced by individuals 

living in our economy? Mr. Speaker, I argue that no, it isn’t. 

Saskatchewan as far as their plans are concerned, Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatchewan from a Saskatchewan Party perspective is still 

next year country. 

 

And this year, Mr. Speaker, this year’s Throne Speech, we sat 

here and listened carefully. We looked at the title, “Moving 

Forward.” We all get excited, Mr. Speaker, because we all want 

to move forward. But, Mr. Speaker, as colleagues here have 

indicated, there was more looking back in this vision then there 

was looking forward. And there’s no vision, Mr. Speaker, 

there’s no vision at all in looking back. We need to know what 

we’ve done to move forward, but we have to use what we’ve 

done to plan, to make the plan for going forward. So, Mr. 

Speaker, what’s lacking in here? 

 

Let’s go back to my desires of the people in The Battlefords, 

Mr. Speaker. There’s nothing in this Throne Speech for 

housing. There’s nothing in this Throne Speech for forestry 

which is part of the economy of the North and of The 

Battlefords, Mr. Speaker. Nothing in here for cattle and hog 

producers which surround the economy of The Battlefords, Mr. 

Speaker. Nothing in here to deal with the labour shortage in the 

province, Mr. Speaker. All issues that are critical to the quality 

of life and the future of the economy in The Battlefords, Mr. 

Speaker, these are very, very important. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I urge the government opposite not to 

postpone for very long if they want to manage wait-lists and the 

surgical health care needs of the people of Saskatchewan, not to 

postpone very long the surgical day centre here in Regina. It 

will assist people in The Battlefords, Mr. Speaker, to get their 

surgeries done. 

 

And once that’s finished, Mr. Speaker, let’s remember the 

commitment that the New Democrats made — not just one 

surgical day centre in the province, Mr. Speaker, but two: one 

in Regina and one in Saskatoon over time as resources 

permitted. Mr. Speaker, this will go a long, long way to 

ensuring that Saskatchewan will benefit. 



3330 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2009 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I know that my time has elapsed. Mr. 

Speaker, I want to stress finally and in conclusion that when . . . 

Oh, I forgot one other thing, Mr. Speaker. I can’t, I would be 

remiss if I forgot this. We had a very nice meeting with those 

representing small business in Saskatchewan, the other day as I 

mentioned, Mr. Speaker, a very good meeting. And I would 

argue that 85 per cent of the business people in The Battlefords 

constituency, that which I represent, would be considered small 

business, Mr. Speaker. They talked to me not only about the 

inability to attract qualified labour, but they also talked about 

other things that governments can be doing to assist small 

business. 

 

Well let’s just take a look at what was also happening in 

Saskatchewan a week ago, what was happening a week ago 

when the Throne Speech was brought forward, Mr. Speaker. 

The Throne Speech was delivered during Small Business Week 

in Saskatchewan — Small Business Week in Saskatchewan — 

and yet while Small Business Week in Saskatchewan is on the 

minds of many people, it was not on the minds of the Premier 

or the government of the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker, because not a 

mention in the Throne Speech about small business. Not a 

mention. 

 

So in addition to no mention about housing or cattle and hogs or 

agriculture or forestry or other things that are critical to the 

future — the next year of people adapting to this changing 

economy, Mr. Speaker, not a mention — certainly no reference 

whatsoever to a plan or what the future might bring. 

 

So Mr. Speaker, when it comes to, did this government lay out a 

plan that we as Saskatchewan residents can follow? No, Mr. 

Speaker, they did not. They did not give us a plan so that we 

can manage our lives in concert with the direction that the 

government wants to take. 

 

Mr. Speaker, therefore some of the things that I’ve argued, I can 

argue very strongly, Mr. Speaker, that this government over the 

last two years has failed students. They’ve failed seniors. 

They’ve failed cattle and hog producers. They’ve failed forestry 

workers. They’ve failed the forestry industry in northern 

Saskatchewan. They’re failing northerners. They’re failing 

immigrants. Mr. Speaker, they’re failing small-business people 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I know I’ve missed somebody in that list, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

sure they’ve failed more. But that’s the list that I know of from 

The Battlefords, Mr. Speaker. Did this Throne Speech, Mr. 

Speaker, provide the people of Saskatchewan with a plan? No. I 

can therefore argue, Mr. Speaker, that this Throne Speech failed 

the people of Saskatchewan fully, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I guess it’s easy to understand why, Mr. Speaker, this Throne 

Speech — the third year of the Saskatchewan Party 

government, one year before the next year-long election 

campaign which will probably begin with the Throne Speech 

next year, Mr. Speaker; the third Throne Speech, the third 

opportunity to plan for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker — therefore a Throne Speech that had a lot of input 

from the Premier, Mr. Speaker. I’m not at all surprised because 

when we look at the Premier’s resumé, Mr. Speaker, we know 

that his resumé is full of a lot of cheerleading, Mr. Speaker. 

There’s virtually no evidence on the Premier’s resumé of 

success, Mr. Speaker, virtually no recognition of success on the 

Premier’s resumé. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I shouldn’t be surprised one little bit that over 

the course of the last three Throne Speeches, the delivery of this 

government to meet the people of Saskatchewan, that if there’s 

been failure before, there’ll be failure after. Mr. Speaker, the 

Premier hasn’t learned anything from his time outside of this 

place, Mr. Speaker. Therefore it’s easy to understand why this 

Throne Speech and the plans, and lack of plans of this 

government, are failing and will continue to fail the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity to speak to the 

Assembly today. I wish to inform you that I will not be 

supporting the motion to support the Throne Speech, but I will 

be supporting the motion to support the amendment which 

recognizes the failure of this government to meet the challenges 

of the people of Saskatchewan in these challenging times. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I welcome 

the opportunity to participate in this debate as we have the 

opportunity to comment on the Speech from the Throne and to 

discuss the vision of our government. Two words, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker: moving forward. 

 

I would like to welcome the members who represent the 

constituencies of Saskatoon Riversdale and Regina Douglas 

Park who have recently joined this Assembly. In my relatively 

short time in this Assembly, I am of the belief that those who 

serve in this House do so for the right reasons. We serve in this 

House to serve the people of Saskatchewan, to serve the people 

of Saskatchewan and to improve the quality of life of all of the 

people of Saskatchewan. This Assembly should not be a haven 

for opportunists, for self-serving interests, or for 

self-promotion. I trust it will not. 

 

My constituency, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as you are aware, is the 

constituency of Cut Knife-Turtleford. It’s somewhat a unique 

constituency in that the way the boundaries were drawn, it 

completely surrounds the constituency of The Battlefords. The 

member from The Battlefords, who we just heard . . . I spend a 

lot of time in The Battlefords area because my constituency 

surrounds The Battlefords, and I have a little different take on 

what the view of the people of The Battlefords is than that 

expressed by the speaker prior to me. 

 

It’s kind of ironic that the Saskatchewan Hospital is now a 

priority of unproportioned dimension that’s . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — It’s in your constituency. 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — Exactly. And it was mentioned the other day 

that it’s 100 years old. Well two years ago it was 98 years old, 

and the minister of Health couldn’t do anything about getting a 

new one. 

 

It’s also amazing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the Highway No. 4 

that was referred to, that the traffic count has somehow 



October 29, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3331 

multiplied in the last two years. I don’t believe it has. But all of 

a sudden that is a priority of unproportioned, huge . . . 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to take the opportunity to 

comment on a few of the initiatives of our government that we 

have undertaken and will undertake. A priority of our 

government is the continuing improving of the delivery of 

health care in our province. This government has committed to 

reduce surgical wait times in Saskatchewan to no longer than 

three months within a four-year period. This is a very 

aggressive goal, a goal that we are proud that our team has 

accepted and that we welcome the challenge. This means that 

people’s loved ones will no longer have to wait for surgery for 

one or two or three years. 

 

[11:30] 

 

Our government believes our people deserve better, and we are 

going to deliver better. Our government is committed to 

recruiting doctors and nurses. We’ve implemented one of the 

most aggressive physician recruitment strategies in the country. 

Our strategy will increase the number of physicians working in 

the province by increasing training positions at the University 

of Saskatchewan and recruiting from outside our borders. Along 

with increased physicians comes an enhanced access to health 

care for all people in our province. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, our government’s nursing recruitment is 

well under way. Unlike the NDP who decided that instead of 

recruiting nurses, we will just create such a stagnant economy 

that people will leave — thus creating a more equal ratio of 

nurses to the population — we on this side of the House believe 

that we should increase the number of nurses instead. And that 

is what we are doing. Our government has already recruited 560 

of the 800 nurses that we promised to recruit. That’s 

approximately seven-tenths of a nurse per day, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re also moving forward and creating 

more long-term care homes in this province. I would like to 

give an example from my own constituency, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, of a project that I think could serve as a template for 

addressing affordable housing in smaller communities and 

perhaps in larger communities. The example I would like to 

give is a project in my hometown, Maidstone, where in January 

of 2008 a seniors’ home was rebuilt and attached to our 

long-term care . . . Our long-term care facility was attached to 

our hospital. So that left the former building vacant. It 

accommodated 28 seniors at that time, and the decision that was 

recommended by the former government would be that it would 

just be tore down. 

 

So there was people with some initiative in our community that 

decided to address the absence of affordable home care for 

basically level 1 and level 2 individuals, that there was a 

possibility here to do something — not to request from the 

government that they do something, but actually an initiative 

that came from the community. And it went very well, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. The project kind of took to life about 18 

months ago. The first thing that they did was secure the 

property from the authorities. The health district was 

co-operative, agreed with the idea. 

 

On a Saturday morning, they had a charity auction to see if they 

could get this thing started, and they raised $100,000. In the 

18-month period, there’s been in excess of 10,000 hours of 

volunteer labour go into the project. And as of today, the last 

three suites are being completed, and it will accommodate 14 

residents in private suites — this all at a cost of less than 

$12,000 per unit. 

 

So this is an example, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of what can happen 

in a small community when people pull together and use their 

own resources to make good things happen. 

 

I’d like to speak just for a moment, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on our 

government’s position on being a leader in the new West. To 

this end our government continues to expand our relationships 

with our neighbours and our trading partners. In the summer of 

2008 we, Saskatchewan, joined the Pacific NorthWest 

Economic Region. Mr. Speaker, I welcome this opportunity to 

take a few moments to talk about this organization and our 

government’s participation. 

 

In a few short days, our province will host the fall/winter 

summit and the leadership academy of the Pacific Northwest 

Economic Region. This is our first opportunity to welcome the 

participants to our province. I’d like to take the opportunity to 

thank all of those who have assisted in making this possible — 

the ministries and officials, our Speaker’s office, the Lieutenant 

Governor’s office, the private sector, and the PNWER [Pacific 

NorthWest Economic Region] executive. 

 

Our Premier, in his invitation, summed up for our province our 

enthusiasm and our welcome for our visitors. And I will quote 

in part, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 

 

Saskatchewan has been warmly welcomed into the 

PNWER family. We are now enjoying new opportunities 

to work more closely and more collaboratively with other 

Canadian and US jurisdictions. 

 

Now it’s time for Saskatchewan to return some of the 

warm hospitality we have experienced from former 

PNWER forum hosts. I invite all of you to attend the 

PNWER Legislative Academy and Economic Leadership 

Forum. The forum is being held November 4-7 . . . in 

Regina, Saskatchewan, our capital city. 

 

This forum is a tremendous opportunity to visit one of 

North America’s strongest economies. Topics for 

discussion will include global competitiveness, 

responsible development of energy resources, agriculture 

and innovation. 

 

I also invite you to use this event as an opportunity to 

visit some of Saskatchewan’s world-class attractions and 

experience the warm welcome provided by the 

down-to-earth people who call this province home. 

 

That, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was of the greeting that we are 

extending, our Premier’s extending to our neighbours. That to 

me indicates the optimism that we have that is shared by our 

neighbours. 

 

Some of the notable speakers during the three-day conference 



3332 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2009 

include Ambassador Gary Doer, the new Canadian ambassador 

to the United States; some former Saskatchewan patriots who 

have made their way in the business world, including Cal 

Nichols who’s probably better known as the former president of 

the Edmonton Oilers; Brian Hesje from Fountain Tire; Doug 

Bloom from Spectra Energy; and our own Mayo Schmidt from 

Viterra. A number of people will be joining us over that period 

of time. 

 

We also have, as part of the program, offered tours of the 

Tunnels of Moose Jaw, will be for Saturday morning. And we 

have arranged for opportunities for our guests to attend the 

Roughriders game on November the 7th, which proves to be a 

fairly important game for Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in my constituency, the two driving 

economic forces are agriculture and heavy oil. And we do have 

initiatives in these areas that I would like to address, and areas 

that I think need to be discussed. 

 

On the oil, the heavy oil side, very recently — this week — 

Petrobank officially introduced the province’s newest 

conventional heavy oil project, and our Minister of Energy has 

mentioned that in this House. What is really interesting with 

this project, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that the technology in the 

heavy oil industry has increased dramatically in the last 

probably 15 to 20 years. Initially, if you were able to pull 5 to 7 

per cent of the oil, that was getting close to what was possible. 

With different technologies, steam technologies, fire floods, a 

number of technologies have been experimented with, all with 

varying levels of success. 

 

However this really is a new technology and the expectations of 

this project could increase the production from 5 to 7 per cent 

of available product to 60, 70 per cent. So it’s absolutely a good 

news story and I’m very pleased that it’s happening in our part 

of the world. This technology also will be available for the rest 

of the world, and that in itself, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where 

heavy oil deposits are being discovered in other parts of the 

world, we truly are the leader in these technologies that can be 

exported throughout the world. 

 

On the agriculture side, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are committed 

to moving forward by making support for our agriculture 

industry a priority with reforming crop insurance, support for 

our cattle and hog producers, and improving service to our 

producers. A couple examples, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of just 

things that have happened in agriculture in the last number of 

months were changes that were initiated to the crop insurance 

program to make it more effective for the producers. These 

were not huge changes. 

 

Probably the largest change is, we changed the direction of the 

former government which was to increase premiums and 

decrease coverage. That was the first change. But other 

modifications to the program have been made in recent months 

to adapt to this year’s particular climate, this year’s problems. 

So that’s the kind of adaptability and practical solutions that our 

Ministry of Agriculture has been offering. 

 

The other example that I think is worthy of note is the move of 

the AgriStability and AgriInvest programs from Winnipeg, 

Manitoba to Melville, Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, in my 

former endeavours I represented a number of agricultural 

producers on both sides of the border, in Alberta and 

Saskatchewan. And the difference between the service that was 

provided for the Alberta producers, which was provided out of 

an office in Camrose, Alberta, and that service that was 

provided to Saskatchewan producers in Winnipeg, Manitoba — 

or Ottawa; you were never really sure who you were talking to 

— was really pretty significant. 

 

And just one example of one of my clients, the kinds of silliness 

that happens in programs like these. 

 

One of my clients farms 4 or 5,000 acres and it was a little bit 

of a late spring and there was some low spots in some of his 

fields that he seeded to oats just so that, you know, to prevent 

the weeds from growing. So at the end of the year when he 

reports all his crops, he reports that . . . And they were seeded 

late and they didn’t turn out real good and that was all fine, but 

of his 4 or 5,000 acres and there was like one and a half or two 

acres of oats which were these small spots. 

 

At any rate his application that year he had a claim, was held up 

for six months and was . . . We had to arbitrate the case because 

they claimed that his production of oats was somewhat less than 

the average and so they thought that he was either hiding oats or 

eating oats or didn’t know how many oats he had. And the 

people in Winnipeg, we tried to explain that this was just an 

unique situation. He probably would’ve been better off not to 

report the oats at all, but for six months a significant amount of 

money that was owed to him was held up, and needless to say 

his accounting fees were probably ridiculous that year for the 

amount of time that had to be spent on trying to process his 

claim. 

 

[11:45] 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think those are some of the topics 

that certainly affect my constituency. And, as I said, my 

constituency surrounds The Battlefords area. These are some of 

the practical things that the people of that area of the province 

are bringing to my attention, and then it’s my pleasure to share 

with them. So I will be voting in favour of the Throne Speech, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, and against the amendment. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Wascana Plains. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I hustle back to 

my seat and held up by the Minister of Education. I’m 

honoured, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to rise today to take part in this 

debate on the Throne Speech and voice my support of our 

government’s vision to keep our province moving forward. 

 

First and foremost, I’d like to thank my office staff: Raynelle, 

Sally, John, Selena, and Linda. They do help me a great deal 

keeping me informed and organized, and for this I am most 

appreciative. Also I thank my constituency assistant, Marie, and 

constituency president, Sean Quinlan, who both manage the 

daily affairs and inquiries, whether constituency-related or 

whatever, while I work on my ministry duties. The many 

constituency volunteers, Mr. Deputy Speaker, also deserve 

honourable mention and thanks for all they do when called 

upon. 



October 29, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3333 

During my tenure as Regina Police Association in my past life, 

I came to realize how very important good governance is to 

efficiency and well-being of an organization. I believe that good 

governance and good government are synonymous. 

 

One aspect I want to address in my address here today is, what 

is good governance? UNESCO, United Nations Educational, 

Scientific, and Cultural Organization defines good governance 

as having eight major characteristics. The characteristics 

include that it is participatory, consensus-oriented, accountable, 

transparent, responsive, effective and efficient, equitable and 

inclusive, and follows the rule of law. 

 

Good governance assures that corruption is minimized, the 

views of minorities are taken into account, and that the voices 

of the most vulnerable in society are heard in decision making. 

Let me elaborate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on how our Throne 

Speech adheres to these characteristics of good governance. 

 

Participation and participatory. This is something that no 

government should ever, ever take for granted — the 

participation of the people it represents. That is something I 

believe our government has taken to heart. Saskatchewan has 

some very big decisions ahead of it, partially because the 

province is growing quickly — and we welcome that — and our 

economy is ready to lead the country; partially because, in the 

issues facing our government, is because the previous 

government avoided planning for a future of growth. Instead we 

inherited a huge infrastructure deficit. 

 

Highways were crumbling, schools had leaky roofs, hospitals 

need major investments in them. But I’m happy to report, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that our government has made a record 

investment in infrastructure, and over the past two years we 

have rebuilt and repaired over 3200 kilometres of provincial 

highway. 

 

We have also invested nearly 300 million in pre-kindergarten to 

grade 12 infrastructure, the largest amount ever invested in 

building and upgrading Saskatchewan schools in a two-year 

period, as we continue to move forward with maintenance and 

repairs and building new schools. 

 

Another problem was that the former government let the people 

of Saskatchewan down by not having a plan for the province’s 

future energy needs. So what has this government done, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker? We have engaged the people of the province 

in the widest consultation our province has ever seen on the 

future of the uranium industry and nuclear power in 

Saskatchewan. We have asked for participation of the public. 

We welcome participation of the public. In fact the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies is undertaking 

public hearings on Saskatchewan’s energy future and under our 

government. SaskPower will develop an electrical power 

generation strategy to meet our province’s future needs. 

 

We continually seek the input from the people of this province. 

Specifically last year we asked residents to weigh in on what 

they saw as priorities for the government to focus on. We 

listened and incorporated their thoughts into our plans. We are 

currently consulting Saskatchewan people respecting long-term 

care. And of course this is being undertaken by the member 

from Regina Qu’Appelle. 

Another characteristic of good governance is effectiveness and 

efficiency. The UNESCO definition of effectiveness and 

efficiency says that processes and institutions produce results 

that meet the needs of society while making the best use of 

resources at their disposal. 

 

I want to stop for a minute and address something said prior in 

this debate. The member for Regina Douglas Park said in his 

response to the Throne Speech that people are naturally social 

democrats in this province. And I quote, it’s just a way of life. 

Getting groceries from a co-op and banking with the credit 

union are a normal way of life. They are normal in rural 

Saskatchewan; however what is not normal is our health care 

system. 

 

Our health care system has let people down for many, many 

years. Any system which saw wait times for surgeries to be 

over a year long is not right and is much less than what 

Saskatchewan people deserve. And I think any credit union that 

made you wait in line two hours to speak to a bank teller would 

be out of business pretty fast, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And any 

credit union that made you wait for over a year in order to get a 

mortgage would be out of business just as fast. 

 

The members opposite may like to claim that that’s just the way 

things are done in this province, but this ideology has run its 

course. The opposition can continue to applaud and cheerlead 

the current downturn to try to scare the people of Saskatchewan 

into believing that things are all doom and gloom. They’ve been 

trying to do that for years but common sense will prevail, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and that means finding ways to deal with 

surgical backlogs that has kept many people waiting — not just 

for weeks or months but for years. 

 

We will continue to look for ways to increase efficiency in our 

current system. We are also going to look at new strategies. We 

are committed to utilizing the resources that may be available to 

us to fulfill our goal to reduce surgical wait times. 

 

For the past two years we have worked effectively to build 

partnerships with the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, our 

post-secondary institutions, and other stakeholders to reduce the 

shortage of health care practitioners, nurses, and doctors in this 

province. 

 

We have also put funding in place to see our goals and our 

partnerships succeed. In 2009-2010 the Regina Qu’Appelle 

Regional Health Authority received a 12 per cent increase from 

the 2008-2009 budget to provide for general operating. This 

provides ongoing funding for 75 new full-time nursing 

positions established in 2008-2009. The region is expected to 

add 30 to 60 more nursing positions in 2009-2010. 

 

I would also like to touch briefly on responsiveness as another 

characteristic of good governance. There are a lot of ways that 

we could judge responsiveness. I think most people in rural 

Saskatchewan would say there was no response from the former 

government for many, many years. But Saskatchewan does 

have a government that is responsive now, a government that 

has responded in a number of areas, for instance the 

environment. 

 

We are moving forward, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The Minister 



3334 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2009 

Responsible for the Environment is away today to attend a 

meeting with her colleagues to discuss issues regarding our 

water supply and climate change. We are planning a new 

environmental regulatory framework and a comprehensive 

water management strategy. We are pursuing clean coal 

technology and we have built cross-border partnerships to see 

this go forward. 

 

Immigration. We have responded to the needs of Saskatchewan 

businesses to find more workers. We are being told that skilled 

workers are needed to fulfill the many jobs that are available. 

We have made improvements over the last two years, but we 

know it is not enough and we are moving forward with a new 

goal of attracting 3,400 nominations through the Saskatchewan 

immigrant nominee program. We will work to process these 

people through our system faster so that more people can start 

calling Saskatchewan home sooner rather than later. 

 

In the area of agriculture, Mr. Deputy Speaker — and I don’t 

pretend at all to know very much about agriculture — however 

I believe I would be remiss in not mentioning agriculture in this 

address. 

 

An Hon. Member: — That’s okay. The other side never knew 

anything about it. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Oh, there you go. We have responded to the 

needs of agricultural producers. For years they were faced with 

a heavy burden of property taxes and for years the former 

government did nothing to help them. Our government did not 

need a tax rebellion to recognize the problem. Instead we 

responded with the largest farm land property tax reduction in 

Saskatchewan history. We have continued to make 

improvements to crop insurance. We’ve responded to financial 

hardship with over 70 million in direct support to livestock 

producers through the cattle and hog support program. 

 

Last summer we asked Saskatchewan people what we should be 

doing with the increased revenues, and the three most common 

answers given by Saskatchewan people were debt reduction, tax 

reduction, and rebuilding our crumbling infrastructure. This 

year we don’t have those increased revenues as evidenced by 

the significant decline in potash revenues. While this represents 

a serious challenge for our province, Saskatchewan’s economy 

and finances are still in good shape, especially when we 

compare them to other provinces in Canada. 

 

While proud of what we have accomplished to date, there is still 

more we can do. I believe we have to dream big dreams, and to 

paraphrase George Bernard Shaw, let us dream things that are 

not and say, why not? What this province saw for way too many 

years was a lack of responsiveness from that government. We 

were led by a group of people who were content to be mediocre, 

a former government that was content to be a have-not 

province, content with standing idly by while people left the 

province in record numbers, and all the while saying this is a 

good thing since that leaves more here for the rest of us. 

 

Accountability. Accountability is paramount in politics of 

course. Each minister is responsible and accountable for the 

action of his or her ministry and each member of this Assembly 

is accountable to their constituents. Our government is proud of 

our record. When people go back and look at our platform from 

2007 and the promises that we have in it, they will be happy 

with what they see. 

 

If they look at it right now, only halfway through our current 

term, I think most people are pleased with what has been 

accomplished — over 100 promises kept so far, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And I believe I can speak for the entire caucus in 

saying we were all behind each one of those promises because 

they were truthful. And despite our promises being bold, they 

were attainable and ethical. We are seeing a continuation of that 

with this year’s Throne Speech, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

These are bold goals and we will have to work hard to attain 

them, along with the people of this province. Accomplishments 

such as the largest property tax reduction in Saskatchewan 

history. The largest income tax cut in our province’s history 

which took 80,000 people, low-income earners, off the 

province’s income tax rolls. And let us recall that we have 

increased assistance to low-income seniors by doubling the 

seniors’ income plan benefit. 

 

[12:00] 

 

Another hallmark of good governance is equity and 

inclusiveness. UNESCO says that society’s well-being depends 

on ensuring that all of its members feel that they have a stake in 

their organization. I’m proud to stand in this House today 

knowing that so many of my fellow members have worked 

tirelessly, listening to those who don’t always have an 

opportunity to be at the centre of government’s attention. And I 

do not just mean cabinet ministers who are meeting with 

stakeholders. I mean our entire caucus. Members who take the 

time to go meet with First Nations members on reserves and in 

their constituencies. I mean the member for Regina Qu’Appelle 

Valley, who has been working very hard on the long-term care 

initiative to make sure thoughts and concerns are being heard 

by this government. I know that the Minister of Social Services 

has met with a great number of advocacy — easy for me to say 

— and stakeholder groups over the last two years in order to 

address the concerns of the least fortunate in our society. 

 

Here is a list of what has been done as a result of listening to the 

concerns of Saskatchewan people. Increased the Saskatchewan 

rental housing supplement for low-income families between 36 

and $136 per month in August 2008, and an additional 6 to $31 

in February 2009, of course depending on the location. 

Increased shelter rates for 6,500 households on the social 

assistance plan and the transitional employment assistance, as 

well as the shelter rates for the provincial training allowance; 

80,000 low-income earners will no longer pay Saskatchewan 

income tax. 

 

Family-based exemptions are now the highest in Canada, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, more than double the maximum monthly 

Saskatchewan Income Plan benefit for single seniors and each 

member of a two-pensioner household. Increased income 

threshold for seniors to qualify for social housing. Increased 

shelter rates for 6,500 households on social assistance plan and 

the transitional employment assistance as well as shelter rates 

for the provincial training allowance. Increased the 

Saskatchewan rental housing supplement for low-income 

families between $36 and $136 per month. Minimum-wage 

increase from $8.60 per hour to $9.25 per hour. 



October 29, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3335 

The economic booster shot included 15 million for student 

housing at the U of S [University of Saskatchewan], 12 million 

for affordable housing in Regina, 2.3 million for affordable 

housing for seniors in Prince Albert. And of course taking effect 

just this past October 1st, allowances provided under the 

Saskatchewan assistance program, transitional employment 

allowance, and the Saskatchewan rental housing supplement 

will increase due to indexing. 

 

Since our government implemented changes in 2008, shelter 

allowances for our major urban communities have now 

increased nearly 12 per cent overall. For Regina and Saskatoon, 

the combined increases have been more than 25 per cent. The 

housing supplement will increase for more than 300 families 

and people with disabilities in urban communities. In 

recognition to the rapid rise in housing costs in Estevan, 

residents will now receive the same shelter allowance and 

benefits as the urban centres of Regina, Saskatoon, and 

Lloydminster. 

 

Rule of law, another hallmark of good governance. Good 

governance requires fair legal frameworks that are enforced 

impartially. It also requires full protection of human rights, 

particularly those of minorities. Impartial enforcement of law 

requires an independent judiciary and an impartial and 

incorruptible police force. As a police officer in Saskatchewan 

for 27 years, I have an intimate knowledge and an appreciation 

of how important fair legal frameworks are. 

 

There were years when Saskatchewan would make annual 

headlines across the country as being the crime capital of 

Canada. That was a time when Regina and Saskatoon were 

taking top spots on crime statistic lists. People were not feeling 

safe, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We have committed to increasing the 

number of police to 120, and 60 have already been hired. These 

officers are funded by the provincial and federal governments. 

And I know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that there is still a lot of work 

to be done in this particular area, but I’m glad to see the 

statistics for our province are continuing to improve. 

 

And as we are continuing to work towards improvements to our 

laws, not just through support to our police and judges, but 

through new responsive legislation: new legislation that will see 

the banning of texting and hand-held cellphone use while 

driving; new legislation to protect people when buying tickets 

to large events; and of course the trespass legislation, are but a 

few. 

 

As the Minister Responsible for Government Services and the 

Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority, I like to think that 

we are following these principles of good governance in our 

own ministry. I have to thank the member from Cannington 

who was my predecessor as the minister of this portfolio. He 

laid the groundwork for much that we have been able to 

accomplish. But within the Ministry of Government Services 

and Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority, we are not 

going to tie our hands by confining ourselves in a narrow, 

ideological view or bow to the pressure of any one single group 

when change means an improvement for the entire province. 

 

What I can assure everyone here today is that our government is 

continuing to reduce red tape. We want to keep this province 

moving forward, and this means facilitating the expansion of 

existing businesses and fostering the creation of new enterprise. 

In my ministry, we are seeing regulatory changes we made 

earlier in our term bear fruit. This has happened in a number of 

ways. One is the creation of delivery services for alcohol. It is a 

widely available service in other parts of Canada. This new 

service has been filled very, very quickly in Regina and 

Saskatoon. I know in particular in Regina more businesses are 

in the process of acquiring proper permits to get into this 

delivery market. And of course, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 

means more jobs, more business, and more tax revenue for the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

We also changed regulations to allow for U-brew and U-vin 

services. It does seem to me that this is long overdue, a 

common sense change. If we are going to have businesses sell 

wine kits to people, why not allow them to assist people in 

making their own wine and beer. This has meant expanding 

existing services for many businesses across the province. It’s 

another example of what a simple change can have, a simple 

change can have this huge, huge impact on some businesses. 

 

We’ve also seen the creation of specialty wine stores in the 

province. Our specialty orders at SLGA [Saskatchewan Liquor 

and Gaming Authority] stores jumped by 45 per cent in 

2007-2008. I’m very excited to see the growth in the liquor 

industry that these new stores are bringing. It means there will 

be literally thousands of new products available to the 

consumer, and we are not done yet. In a relatively short time, 

we have managed to change many regulations that have 

deserved a common sense approach. I can assure all of you here 

today that more changes are coming. 

 

Within SLGAs operations, we have seen growth in the last few 

years. Some of this has been renovations and a movement to 

bigger stores responding to the demand of the consumers of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

An Hon. Member: — A common sense approach. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Common sense. 

 

Much of our growth has simply been a corresponding increase 

with the growth of the province. I do not just mean growth in 

population. Wages are going up in Saskatchewan giving 

consumers more disposable income. And this is good news for 

everyone. 

 

We fully expect another strong year of revenue from liquor 

sales. And we will invest back into this province, back into our 

education system, back into our post-secondary students to train 

the future leaders and business people of our province, back 

into our hospitals and care homes, back into our social 

programs that care for the elderly and disadvantaged, and 

certainly back into the infrastructure investments in our 

province. We have seen our infrastructure investments helping 

to keep the economy moving forward, and this is going to 

continue. We will continue to address the infrastructure deficit 

our government has inherited. 

 

I also have the privilege of being responsible for the 

Saskatchewan Capital Commission. This commission, Capital 

Commission, will highlight Regina as being home to the seat of 

government, home to the Territorial Building which was the 



3336 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2009 

seat of the Territorial government in 1883. We have significant 

political history in our province, and we want to make this 

relevant and a source of pride for all within Saskatchewan and 

Canada. It will connect the dots of our past to the present and 

into the future. 

 

And what is the end result of good governance? Well, I think 

that is what we are seeing here today — a healthy, vibrant, and 

growing province. And I’m able to see this first-hand in my 

constituency. 

 

In Regina Wascana Plains, we have challenges in relation to the 

global economic crisis, but we’ve also seen some great 

successes. Regina has the second-lowest employment rate of 

any city in Canada. Saskatoon is the only city that has a lower 

rate. The CFIB’s recent report on Canada’s top entrepreneurial 

cities show that Saskatchewan had five out of the ten top cities 

on the list. 

 

We are seeing the development of the global transportation hub 

just west of Regina. The member from Cypress Hills is heading 

the new transportation hub authority which right now is seeing 

the construction of new Loblaws distribution centre. That 

centre, which is already providing work to many of our 

construction and tradespeople, it will provide hundreds of more 

jobs when it is completed. It is a project that I believe is 

indicative of a change this province is seeing. Not just a shift of 

power from Central Canada to Western Canada because that has 

been going on for many years, but a diffusion of opportunity is 

occurring. People, companies, and other governments are 

recognizing everything is in place for Saskatchewan to lead the 

country. 

 

And a growing province means a growth in services, both from 

the private sector and from government. In my constituency, we 

continue to see an expansion in child care services. The Awasis 

Child Care Co-operative has recently received funding for 55 

new child care spaces, and the Regina Apostolic Church is 

developing 18 spaces for a child care centre. In the current 

fiscal year, our government has put funding in place for the 

development of 1,000 new child care spaces across the 

province. These spaces are needed and very welcomed as our 

province continues to grow. 

 

The growth in my constituency is very diverse, and I think that 

speaks to the strength of this province as well. Many of my 

constituents are young families, professionals who are just 

starting their careers. Many are older couples retiring to the 

suburbs of the city. Many more of my constituents are 

immigrants to this country, who I believe were lucky enough to 

come to Saskatchewan and discover the finest place in this 

country. 

 

I see the Saskatchewan spirit alive and well in Regina Wascana 

Plains. I see people doing amazing things. Our spirit is what 

defines us as a people. I grew up witnessing this spirit and I 

understand it, and the rest of Canada is now realizing there is 

something special right here. If I may take a moment, I would 

like to insert my family into this great Saskatchewan story. A 

chapter in a soon-to-be-published book, Out of the Ashes: 

Cindercrete Products and the Tell Family, starting with my 

great-grandfather, Jacob, illustrates how this company eked out 

a living in Saskatchewan without it being a boom province. 

They did it, amazingly enough, by diversifying and creating 

partnerships and joint ventures. 

 

It speaks to the tenacity of Saskatchewan’s pioneers and the 

true spirit of this province. This spirit lives on today in 

Saskatchewan people and will ensure our province moves 

forward. I am proud of the record of our government and look 

forward to pursuing the bold goal set out in this year’s Throne 

Speech. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do not support the amendment, 

and I proudly support the 2009 Speech from the Throne. Thank 

you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 

Albert Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to begin my 

address to the Speech from the Throne by thanking a number of 

folks. First of all, I’d like to thank my wife who is exceptionally 

understanding about the demands that we have on our job and 

the time I spend away in various places around the province and 

around the country. We’ve built a beautiful home in Prince 

Albert; we have great neighbours up there. 

 

And the member from Indian Head-Milestone and the Premier 

seem very interested in my house in Prince Albert, and I’ve 

asked them to come up on a number of occasions for a cup of 

coffee or a barbecue, but they’ve yet to accept the invitation. 

And just the other day the member from Indian Head-Milestone 

was commenting on the length of my hair, and I’m beginning to 

wonder if he’s been creeping on my Facebook. You know, it’s a 

little scary. But I do live in a great place in Prince Albert right 

on the river, and we’re certainly happy there. And I’d like to 

thank again, Michelle, for all that she does for me. 

 

[12:15] 

 

Now I have the great pleasure of working with one of the best, 

if not the best, constituency assistants in the province. Many of 

the members around me are talking about how theirs is the best, 

but I tend to disagree and think that Rose does just an amazing 

job in Prince Albert. She’s active in the constituency, in the 

community of Prince Albert, and goes over and above 

whenever called on. So I’d like to thank her for the work that 

she does. 

 

I’d like to thank the rest of my family for their support as well 

because with jobs like this they rearrange their children’s 

birthday parties so I can be there — many different events in 

their lives are dictated by the work that we do in the legislature 

here. So I’d like to thank them. 

 

And I’d like to congratulate my parents who, on the 1st of 

November, will have been married 40 years. And it is an even 

more astounding accomplishment when you consider that 37 

and a half of those years they spent with me. So congratulations 

to them and best of luck on 40 more. 

 

I’d be remiss if I didn’t join in the congratulations for the 

member from Douglas Park and the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. Certainly pleased to see them in the legislature. I 

know that they will both do great work in here, and I’m inspired 

by the campaigns that they ran and by the work that they’ve 

already done in the legislature. 



October 29, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3337 

Also I’d like to congratulate the civic politicians, the newly 

elected and re-elected civic politicians in our province. I’d also 

like to congratulate the folks that put their name forward that 

weren’t successful. It is a huge undertaking to run for public 

office — any public office. 

 

Heather McIntyre ran a great campaign in Regina south and 

came up short. But you know, it’s people like her that do this 

province proud. And again I’d like to just congratulate them for 

putting their name forward. 

 

Now, a Throne Speech is supposed to look forward to the next 

year for a government. It’s their big opportunity to announce 

what their plan is for the people of Saskatchewan for the next 

year. And it’s ironic and unfortunate they spent three-quarters 

of the Throne Speech talking about all of the things that have 

been done in the past — re-announcements, things that had 

been done by the NDP, things that had been started by the NDP, 

and some of their own things. 

 

And how is it that they take all that time to look at the past and 

spend no time looking at the future? They’ve been in power for 

two years, and it’s not that they ran out of money, because 

that’s obvious. It’s that they’ve run out of ideas, and you have 

to think that the two are linked. It’s bereft of any new ideas, 

except it beats up on people who are unfortunately addicted to 

drugs. 

 

And they talked about, made some mention of wait-lists and 

reducing them in spite of the fact that, just a few days before 

that, they cut all the funding to surgical care centres in the city 

of Regina. It makes no sense. And now we find out today that 

they’re going to take that money that they would have spent on 

a surgical care centre here in Regina, in Saskatchewan, and 

they’re going to spend it in British Columbia instead. 

 

And the only way you can access a surgical care centre in 

British Columbia instead of in Saskatchewan is to pay to fly 

yourself there, put yourself up, jump the queue, and come on 

back. So what kind of health care system are they creating, 

where if you can afford to fly to BC and back, you can get 

health care? But if you can’t afford it, you wait in the back of 

their longer lines, ever-extending lines, for surgical care in this 

province. 

 

Now with this government’s incompetence over the last two 

years, my speech essentially wrote itself. I want to talk about, 

briefly, the $1.3 billion potash boondoggle. They got together 

this group of women and men and decided that potash would 

bring in $2 billion to the province this year. Now you have to 

ask yourself a couple of questions. Why was it off by this 

much? 

 

And it speaks to motivation, Mr. Speaker. I think it was off by 

this much because they built their budget first. They got 

together in some backrooms and said, you know, which 

megaproject should we build in the Premier’s name in this area 

and which megaproject should we build in the Premier’s name 

in this area? And how much money should we spend at the 

Vancouver Olympics so that the Premier can brag and show off 

and wave his pompoms? And so you build a budget based on all 

those things but then you have to come up with a number to 

match the expenditures. 

And so why do you pick potash? Well you pick potash because 

in Saskatchewan it’s essentially unique to Saskatchewan in 

terms of their ability to manipulate the numbers. 

 

If they would have picked to manipulate the value of the 

Canadian dollar versus the American dollar, you could have 

looked across Canada and said, well they’re way out of whack 

with Ontario and New Brunswick. So we can’t do that. 

 

If they’d picked the price of oil, again you could have looked at 

several different oil producing provinces in Canada and said 

well, you know, why are they 50 per cent higher than anybody 

else? 

 

But they picked potash because Saskatchewan’s the only major 

producer of potash in the province. And so it’s the only number 

that they could manipulate in their budget to satisfy the 

megaprojects that they’re building for the ego of this Premier. 

Now I’ll get back to potash a little later and we’ll ask what the 

member from Kindersley’s perspective is on it. 

 

But you know, it is interesting, speaking this late in the debate, 

considering that virtually nobody on their side has referenced 

the Throne Speech. They’ve all gotten up or many of them have 

gotten up and spent some time talking about various issues. 

 

The member from Martensville for instance got up and spent 

half her speech bragging about the ’07 election — how she won 

and if she won and how many signs she had up. And you know 

they had a song that was sung after the Throne Speech called 

the “Man in the Mirror,” and I think in this case the member 

from Martensville is the man in the mirror. All she could talk 

about is the ’07 election in the 2009 Throne Speech. 

 

So I find it sad that the Throne Speech was dead before it was 

finished being read. It has no vision. And in fact they must have 

sent it out for people to read beforehand because nobody 

showed up for it. 

 

Now the member from Saskatoon Massey Place is extremely 

fond of education and ensuring that the students of 

Saskatchewan are properly educated so he invited 50 students 

from Saskatoon. That’s the only reason that there was anybody 

in that gallery at all for the Throne Speech. So they must have 

sent out advance copies of the Throne Speech because nobody 

showed up, and none of them want to talk about it. They’ve 

raised everything . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order, order. I recognize the 

member from Prince Albert Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Well the member from Moose Jaw North 

chirps from his seat that the reason that there was nobody here 

— and he admits that there was nobody here — is that people 

trust them. After a $1.3 billion miss on potash, they think that 

people trust them. Sad and strange, but not surprising from the 

member from Moose Jaw North. 

 

Now they spent time in their throne speeches talking about 

everything from cocaine to showering in the dark but they don’t 

want to talk about the Throne Speech. Why is that? Because 



3338 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2009 

there’s nothing new in there. 

 

Now I want to talk too about what wasn’t in the Throne Speech 

because as a representative from Prince Albert, I looked very 

carefully at the things that were in there for Prince Albert. 

Absolutely nothing, absolutely nothing. They did make passing 

mention of some rooms that they made available at Woodland 

Campus, a project that was started four years ago. So they’re 

not looking back to ’06, they’re looking back all the way to ’05. 

Projects that were started by . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Now the Education minister wants to chime in and he wants to 

talk about all of the things that were done in Prince Albert. But 

none of them were in the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, none of 

them. 

 

And so the member from Prince Albert Carlton was interviewed 

prior to the fall sitting of the legislature and he was interviewed 

prior to the Throne Speech or just after the Throne Speech and 

he said, well essentially there’s nothing new in the Throne 

Speech; it would all be in the budget. He also said that this fall 

he’s going to make sure that the government keeps its promises 

to the people of Prince Albert. This is the same person who took 

out an ad that said “A vote for Darryl is a vote for the mill open 

and people working.” He’s going to make sure the government 

keeps their promises. It’s unbelievable and truly unbelievable to 

the people of Prince Albert. They don’t believe it and, you 

know, I talk to them every day. 

 

Now it’s sad that today was the best day ever for the former 

minister of Corrections and Public Safety, when he didn’t say a 

word. The new Minister for Corrections and Public Safety has 

bungled his file so badly he makes the last one look good. It’s 

unbelievable. 

 

So what else isn’t in this Throne Speech for Prince Albert? Well 

the bridge that the Premier promised in the run-up to the 

election when he stood on the bridge with Mayor Jim Stiglitz — 

at the time he was the mayor — and did a photo op saying that a 

second bridge for Prince Albert would be a great idea and I 

support that. Well he supports it in words but he doesn’t support 

it in vision, and he doesn’t support it with dollars. So he comes 

in and promises a bridge, and there’s nothing for that in the 

Throne Speech. I was waiting for it in 2007, an announcement 

in 2008 and 2009 . . . They’re running out of time, and certainly 

they’ve run out of dollars. But we’re hopeful that the member 

from Prince Albert Carlton is right and we can expect 

something new in the budget in the spring. 

 

Now you know what else wasn’t in the Throne Speech? Airport 

improvements. The Premier flew into the city of Prince Albert 

unannounced and held a press conference at the airport and 

said, we’re going to provide airport improvements to the city of 

Prince Albert. And they interviewed the mayor after and he 

said, well I don’t know about that; we have other priorities we’d 

rather address, but if they’re going to give us money for an 

airport I guess we’ll take it. Well apparently it was simply a 

ploy to get somebody elected in Prince Albert. 

 

I waited during the Throne Speech to hear, you know, we’re 

going to make infrastructure improvements and improve the 

airport in Prince Albert. But I guess since they’ve gone as far as 

they can to kill the forestry industry and have added nothing of 

value in mining in Saskatchewan that they don’t need an airport 

to be improved in Prince Albert. 

 

So again it’s unfortunate that this speech is notable more for 

what’s not in it than what’s in it. Absolutely zero for forestry. 

It’s the second Throne Speech in a row that didn’t make 

mention of it. There are families in Saskatchewan on the forest 

fringe and in the North who have depended on this industry for 

years and years and years. And what has this government done 

to support it? Zero. They won’t even mention it in the Throne 

Speech. Don’t even give it passing mention. 

 

The first thing that they did when they took office was to rip up 

an MOU [memorandum of understanding] that was signed in 

good faith with the government and Domtar. Now if you rip it 

up for ideology and have another plan to replace it, that’s one 

thing. But if you rip it up with absolutely no plan to support 

those families that depended on those jobs, it’s absolutely, 

purely political and shameful. But that’s what they did. They 

had no plan. 

 

Now the member from Batoche struck a task force, spent the 

people’s money to run around the province and make a plan for 

forestry. And when we ask him what’s in his plan, not only can 

he not name one point; he says it’s for internal. I don’t know for 

internal what, but he said it’s for internal. Well did he eat it? 

How internal is it? But they had no plan even after they struck 

that task force. 

 

Now we had a forestry centre that was developed to add value 

to the forestry industry in Saskatchewan, and these guys didn’t 

like the name of it. So they thought, well we’re going to make a 

big impact in forestry; let’s change the name to ForestFirst. 

That’ll solve all our problems. So they changed the name to 

ForestFirst, and the minister responsible is so proud of the 

change that he doesn’t even go to the announcement. They put 

out 1,100 press releases in one year, and this isn’t one of them. 

 

So it was so important to them to do that, that a couple of 

months later they closed it down and they fired all the workers. 

So this is their support for the forestry industry in Prince Albert 

and area. More that’s not in the Throne Speech. 

 

[12:30] 

 

What’s in the Throne Speech for agriculture? Absolutely 

nothing. The Minister Responsible for Agriculture says that it 

was his policy in opposition to do and say anything to get 

elected. So apparently it worked. But where . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . You know, he’s chirping from his seat now. 

It’s worked well four times, he says. But where is he on spot 

loss hail? And now he’s silent. Now he’s silent. 

 

Where is he standing up for the hog producers in this province 

when this year alone there’s a 33 per cent reduction in 

marketing hogs in Saskatchewan? Where is he for beef 

producers in this province when there’s a 33 per cent decrease 

in heifers for slaughter in 2009 under his watch? He brags about 

having an enormous budget for agriculture. It’s half what it was 

four years ago. Why is that? They took another $20 million out 

of the programs last week. 

 

The only thing they did include was moving some bureaucrats 

from one city to another and that’s supposed to solve all the 



October 29, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3339 

problems in agriculture in Saskatchewan. 

 

What’s in the Throne Speech to add value to any of the 

industries in this province? Nothing for agriculture. We’ve got 

20 per cent of the crops still in the field. Where is the help? 

Where is the program to help those farmers? Not a word from 

the Agriculture ministry. 

 

What have they done to add value to the forestry industry of 

Saskatchewan? They’ve done everything they can to virtually 

kill the industry. 

 

What have they done to add value to the mining industry in 

Saskatchewan? They struck such a harmful process with their 

UDP [Uranium Development Partnership] that it’s actually hurt 

the industry. And what have they done to add value to diamond 

mining in Saskatchewan? What have they done to facilitate 

anything on that front? They haven’t done anything. 

 

What have they done for manufacturing in the province? Their 

policy is so stagnant when it comes to energy development that 

our own wind producing plant that produce windmills in 

Saskatchewan has to close. So they haven’t done anything to 

add value to manufacturing. 

 

And where’s Enterprise Saskatchewan in all of this? Well the 

cowboy they had riding herd on that file rode off into the sunset 

long ago. 

 

Now why is it that they talk about wait-lists in their speech — 

and that’s the biggest part of the Throne Speech is wait-lists; 

it’s what got all the media after — when just earlier in the week 

before, they cancelled $3 million in support for a surgical care 

centre in Regina and now they’re going to farm it all out? 

 

So why is there nothing in this Throne Speech? Because 

they’ve got no money left. And because if they’ve got no 

money left, they ran out of ideas. 

 

So where is the Energy minister at when they’re building a 

budget that’s off by $1.3 billion on potash . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . He made an analogy that they’re just like 

farmers. Farmers do a much better job of budgeting than that 

group of men and women do. And he should’ve known better. 

And why should he have known better? Because it’s his file. 

 

He talks to folks on a daily basis in that industry, and what did 

he say at budget time? He says: 

 

And in fact in the marketplace recently, the Russians have 

sold a significant quantity of potash to Brazil . . . for $750 

US per tonne . . . So our 556, when you look at 

comparables that are out there in the marketplace right 

now, is extremely reasonable. And in fact, we may see a 

significant increase in the amount of potash royalties for 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

That’s what he said. He said there could be more than 2 billion. 

They’re off by 1.3 billion and he admitted that they were almost 

a lot more wrong than that. And he also said something that was 

interesting in his speech right after the budget. He said, “So I 

think as members on this side of the House all thought these 

members would know, these numbers are not just something 

that is picked out of thin air.” Well he ought to explain where 

they pick them from because there is a process. There’s been a 

process in government for years and years and years on how to 

book potash and the royalties that you’ll get from it. 

 

And the Premier admits that he checked them once, twice, and 

three times, and they’re sure they got them right. Well it’s a 

good thing he didn’t check them any more than that; they’d 

have been off by five billion. And I want to read a quote that’s 

in Hansard, and it reads like this: 

 

And the members opposite for some reason want to 

suggest that that just simply isn’t going to be the case and 

we’re on a fiscal train wreck, I think [this] is . . . one of 

the members suggested with respect to that, even though 

he was dead wrong in terms of the calculations of it. So 

you have to wonder a little bit about his credibility on the 

whole issue of potash taxes . . . 

 

You know who said that? It was the Minister Responsible of 

Energy and Resources. Unbelievable. And, like, it’s shocking 

that that’s the industry he’s responsible for, and that’s what he 

says at budget time, when they’re so wrong. 

 

I just want to read a couple more points. And one is that he’s 

talking about the sale of Crown land for natural resources. And 

this is how absolutely ridiculous his perspective is on this. They 

got potash that wrong, and this is how wrong he is on some 

other things. He says: 

 

The October sale of Crown petroleum and natural gas 

rates has brought in $32.4 million in revenue for the 

province, the largest sale of the year . . . 

 

“This shows we continue to be on the right track,” Energy 

and Resources Minister Bill Boyd said. “Revenue from 

the October sale is over double that received from the 

August sale.” 

 

What he fails to mention is that in 2009 to date there’s $83.2 

million in land sales compared to the previous year, which was 

1.12 billion. He’s down by 90 per cent, and his quote is, “This 

shows we continue to be on the right track.” Well I guess that 

depends where the train’s going. 

 

Now you talk to the folks from Kindersley about the Minister 

Responsible for Energy and Resources, and this is what they 

say — they’re referencing the Leader of the NDP — and they 

say, he could have gone someplace else and sent somebody in 

his place, but he chose to come here. And it looks good on him. 

And this person said that, adding “that it might work for them 

because Kindersley does not get much contact from MLA Bill 

Boyd.” That’s from his own paper. So it’s shocking that, not 

only is he wrong when he’s in here, he’s never at home. 

Somebody has to explain just what he is doing on behalf of the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now you’ve heard about a few members on their front bench. 

What about the conductor of this foul orchestra, the 

museum-curator-turned-Premier? How does he fit into this? He 

brags about the debt and how much they’ve paid. And we want 

to know, one, if it’s actually paid. We’ll find out that in the 

mid-term report. But he doesn’t talk about where he was when 



3340 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2009 

they racked up that debt. He was supporting the men and 

women who increased the debt in this province by over $1 

billion a year for nine straight years. So he brags about paying 

off the debt that he helped the province incur. And you know 

whose money he used to pay it off? He used the money that was 

left behind from the previous administration. So I’m not sure 

why he’d brag about that. 

 

He also brags about oil and gas exploration and development 

and how he’s the big proponent of that industry. And you know 

what happens when you go to meet with folks that have 

significant operations in Saskatchewan? You know what they 

say? They say we’re going to give the new government credit, 

and we’re going to give them credit because they kept the 

regime where the NDP had it. 

 

So how he goes around Canada — especially Alberta — and 

brags about what they’ve done for that sector . . . They know 

better. The folks there know better. And they never mention 

that they’re glad that the Premier waves pompoms. That doesn’t 

enter into the debate. What they want to know is, what’s the 

regime and who set it and how long it’s been there. And they’re 

extremely pleased with the fact that it began in 1991 and it’s 

been steady ever since. And so he goes around bragging about 

it, but really he’s bragging about somebody else’s policy. 

 

He brags about carbon sequestration and how it’s something 

new to the province of Saskatchewan. Well obviously it’s not 

new. It was begun in the mid-’90s when the state-run oil 

company from Alberta got together with folks from 

Saskatchewan and decided that carbon sequestration might be a 

good idea. And the Premier brags about this like it’s something 

new. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Or that he did it. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Or that it’s something he did. But it’s neither 

of the two. It was begun 10 years ago by the NDP government. 

 

So it’s interesting. People want to know who this Premier is. 

And we found out something this week, a little bit about him. 

He’s scared. He’s scared of the men and women in this 

province, mostly women, who come to the legislature to protest 

his policy peacefully. He’s so scared he locks them out. Now I 

asked the Minister of Health, was it you that locked them out? 

And he said, you don’t know how things operate in here. So he 

threw his Premier under the bus and said it was the Premier that 

made that choice. So how is it that the Premier of this province 

locks out the women and men who work in the seniors’ care 

homes in this province, cleaning and cooking? Eighty per cent 

of them were women, and he locks them out of this legislature. 

 

It’s the people’s legislature. We’ve had protests in here in the 

past where farming men and women in this province have come 

and brought sleeping bags. They were going to stay. Were they 

kicked out? No. We’ve had hundreds and hundreds of people 

ascend on this great building, and were they ever locked out? 

No. But when a few hundred women and men who work for 

that government want to protest their policies, come to this 

legislature . . . 

 

The members opposite often refer to this legislature when 

they’ve got their friends in the gallery as, welcome to your 

legislature. But it’s only the people’s legislature if you agree 

with this government. It’s not the people’s legislature if you’ve 

got a problem with this government. Then you’ll get locked out, 

because the Premier’s scared. 

 

Now I look online at the Premier’s resumé. He’s got his resumé 

online and it says that he “worked in government.” Well you 

should ought to ask what he did in government. Where did he 

work in government? He was a MA [ministerial assistant] for 

the Devine Tories. Why he doesn’t want to admit that is 

probably obvious. And some of the things that he did there have 

been well-documented. Now what he did there was advise a 

group of folks who ended up driving this province into debt — 

some of whom were charged with offences, he worked directly 

for. 

 

And who else did he work for? Well he worked for the 

Mulroney Conservatives in Ottawa. And he’s talked about the 

past and the ’80s and what people were doing and where certain 

members of this legislature have lived at different points in their 

lives and where they’ve worked. And he’s afraid to admit on 

the government website that he worked for Mulroney in 

Ottawa, and I wonder why that is. And you begin to see a 

pattern when you check the website and look at what his history 

is. 

 

It also says that he created small businesses. That’s a quote — 

created small businesses. Well what it doesn’t say is what 

happened to those businesses. And you know what else it 

doesn’t say? That he only really created one of them, and the 

other one was a golden parachute to get out of this building 

when the rats were scurrying in 1991. Several of them ended up 

in Swift Current and that’s probably the remnants of the 1991 

Devine Tories. So he says he created . . . 

 

[12:45] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I’d warn the member to watch the 

language and to respect other members and other people that 

aren’t here. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Devine Tories is certainly a swear word in this 

legislature. 

 

We’ll continue to talk about the small businesses that were 

created. Now what small business was created by the member 

from Swift Current? He created, spent time getting a golden 

parachute out of this building with a $150,000 grant to start a 

guitar museum in Swift Current. He took government money, 

taxpayer dollars to start a guitar museum in Swift Current, an 

area where I’ve danced in the bars to a lot of country music, and 

they love their George Strait. 

 

Now the museum hired the Premier right after 1991 to run that 

organization. And he said, at that time, there’d be between 28 

and 34,000 visitors a year to that facility. But the museum 

attracted just an average of 2,500 people a year for three years. 

So he was off on his projections for attendance at the museum 

more than he was off on potash projections this year. So you 

notice a pattern. He worked for Devine, he worked for 

Mulroney, but can’t sell country music to people in Swift 

Current. And this is the part of the resumé he tries to hide. So in 

less than five years the museum went bankrupt. Taxpayer 



October 29, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3341 

dollars disappeared. They moved the museum, and that’s the 

started businesses part of his resumé. 

 

Now they want to talk about some other things that are going on 

in the 1990s, and during the by-elections they wanted to talk 

about the ’80s and ’90s and what other members were doing. 

Well we’ve got documentation. The Premier of this province 

was involved in a scandal that involved . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I would ask the opposition members 

not to drown out their own member while he’s speaking. I 

recognize the member for Prince Albert Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Now there was one 

other thing that was going on that the Premier’s running from. 

He didn’t put it on his resumé and everybody over there is 

afraid. They don’t want to talk about it, and why would you? 

He was part of an organization, many of whom went to jail — 

well-documented — but what a lot of the people in Prince 

Albert don’t know, he said he was glad to have been part of an 

organization that lost its way so he could learn the lessons. 

 

But he wasn’t a part of the organization that lost its way; he was 

a part of the process. He was a ministerial assistant in this 

building when more liquor was being taken out of the back door 

than was being sold out of the front doors of the liquor stores in 

Saskatchewan. So there is a certain amount of hypocrisy in the 

things that he said in the past when he wants to only go back to 

1991. 

 

I think we should go back a little further. And I want to read a 

quote from the former minister of Finance, Andrew Thomson. 

I’ll quote from the Hansard from some time ago. It said, the 

minister pointed out the hypocrisy and dishonesty in the House 

saying: 

 

I want to read into the record from Provincial Auditor’s 

report . . . 

 

I’m quoting from page 20 of a report from 1992: 

 

The Liquor Board did not have adequate systems and 

procedures to safeguard its assets. The Liquor Board 

reported approximately $19,285 of liquor was supplied 

to ministers’ offices. The Liquor Board had no written 

request from the ministers or their assistants for this 

liquor . . . The Liquor Board does not have policies that 

authorize ministers and officials to take liquor for their 

own use. Accordingly there was a loss to the Crown . . . 

of $19,285. 

 

Now it’s interesting to note that there is a few names on the 

requisitions for this alcohol, and one of them happens to be the 

now Premier of this province. And I’m not surprised that he 

wouldn’t want to include that on his resumé. But here it is in 

black and white for everybody to see. And the reason it’s 

mentioned is because many of the people of Saskatchewan 

don’t know it. And they should ought to know who their 

Premier is. 

 

So for that reason and many others, I’ll be supporting the 

amendment and not the speech from this throne. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Meadow 

Lake. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. It’s a pleasure to rise in the House here today 

to speak to the Speech from the Throne. 

 

Before I get into the meat of my remarks, I think I want to 

comment though on some of the remarks made by the previous 

speaker, the member for P.A. Carlton. And you know, frankly, 

Mr. Speaker, I think the personal vitriol coming from that side 

of the House since we’ve got back into this Chamber is, I think 

it’s unbecoming of this Chamber, Mr. Speaker. And we see that 

from the member for P.A. Carlton, the member for P.A. Carlton 

who comes across as a very angry young man, Mr. Speaker — a 

very angry young man which I guess is some contrast to the 

Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker, quite a contrast with the 

Leader of the Opposition. 

 

An Hon. Member: — P.A. Northcote. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Sorry. P.A. Northcote. But you know 

what, Mr. Speaker? I had the chance to look at the resumé . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Will the Leader of the 

Opposition come to order. I recognize the member of Meadow 

Lake. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I’ve heard a lot of talk about resumés 

from the member from Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker, and I 

actually had the opportunity to take a look at the bio that that 

member had posted on his website. 

 

And you know what, Mr. Speaker? We know that that member 

had worked in this building before, but it doesn’t say for who, 

Mr. Speaker. Who did that member work for? Who did he work 

for, Mr. Speaker? Oh, we see a lot of people looking at their 

feet over there. I think it was probably the member for Regina 

Dewdney and frankly, Mr. Speaker, I wouldn’t want to admit to 

having worked for that member either. 

 

But you know what, Mr. Speaker? I’d like to welcome the new 

members to the Assembly here today. The member for 

Saskatoon Riversdale, I think she’s going to make a very 

valuable contribution to this Assembly in her time here, and 

also the member for Regina Douglas Park who is returning after 

a long absence as a Calgary big oil lobbyist. I guess we’re 

happy to see him in the Assembly as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I’ve known that member for some number of years, for 

some number of years, and he actually referenced in his speech, 

and I’ll reference as well, that his son, a fine young man, a fine 

young man genuinely, worked for me when I was a Tory 

Member of Parliament for two summers in my Ottawa office 

and in my constituency office as well. And I can recall over that 

period of time, recalling many interesting conversations with 

the Leader of the Opposition — many interesting conversations 

which we may have cause to relate at some point in the future. 

 



3342 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2009 

But you know, Mr. Speaker, what I would like to do right now 

actually is congratulate, as the Minister of Municipal Affairs, 

the newly elected councillors and mayors right across the 

province. 

 

Yesterday we saw a well-conducted municipal election from 

one end of the province to the other, and I would like to 

congratulate Mayor Don Atchison from Saskatoon, re-elected to 

office; Mayor Pat Fiacco from Regina, re-elected to office; Mr. 

Jerrod Schafer, newly elected mayor of Swift Current; James 

Wilson, a newly elected mayor of Yorkton; Ian Hamilton, 

newly elected mayor of North Battleford; Gary St. Onge, 

incumbent re-elected by acclamation in Estevan; Debra Button, 

re-elected in Weyburn; Gord Rutten, new elected in 

Martensville — the new city of Martensville, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Meadow Lake, my very good friend, Darwin Obrigewitsch, 

acclaimed re-elected in Meadow Lake; in Melville, Walter 

Streelasky, an incumbent who was re-elected by acclamation; 

Jim Scarrow in Prince Albert who was re-elected; Glenn Hagel 

from Moose Jaw, newly elected; Jeff Mulligan from 

Lloydminster, newly elected; Malcolm Eaton, re-elected in the 

city of Humboldt; and Kevin Phillips, who was an incumbent, 

re-elected as the mayor of Melfort, Mr. Speaker. So I’d like to 

take that opportunity to congratulate those individuals. 

 

Also I would really like to congratulate Thomas Sierzycki, a 

young man elected at the age of 21 as the mayor of La Ronge, a 

great young guy, had served on my constituency executive in 

the past, and I know he’s going to do a fantastic job as the 

mayor of La Ronge. 

 

Also we had an interesting discussion with the member for 

Thunder Creek today, Mr. Speaker, who had a very scary 

incident happen this morning where he was attacked in an 

attempted carjacking, was cut in the hand and stabbed in the 

leg, still showed up for work, Mr. Speaker, and was able though 

to defend himself and his property with great effect. And, you 

know, one of the things I said, Mr. Speaker, is that member 

from Thunder Creek is the personification that the Sask Party is 

tough on crime. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, before I get into my remarks I’d also like to 

acknowledge my family, as other members have done in the 

early part of their remarks. My wife, Alaina, who has been with 

me since we’ve been about 18 or 19 and has been through about 

8 or 10 moves in that period of time, Mr. Speaker, across the 

country from one end to the other, who is a fantastic partner, a 

brilliant political mind, and who I’m very proud to call my wife. 

And our new addition, my son, MacGregor, who is now nine 

months old. He has just learned how to crawl, Mr. Speaker, so 

nothing is safe in the house. 

 

Also like to thank my mom and dad. My father, Tom, who 

continues to be a civil servant in this province — 37 years — 

working for the Ministry of the Environment, director in 

Meadow Lake, also a great political mind and a great adviser to 

me over the years. My mom, Lorna, also in Meadow Lake, 

where we’ve lived now for nearly 30 years, Mr. Speaker, where 

they’ve lived for nearly 30 years and I have as well. So I 

wanted to acknowledge that. 

 

And also, Mr. Speaker, thank the people of Meadow Lake, the 

wonderful people of the Meadow Lake constituency who saw 

fit to send me to this Chamber, and before that saw fit to send 

me to the House of Commons. A wonderful, wonderful 

constituency, a wonderful community, my home city of 

Meadow Lake which the Premier and I had cause to announce 

this summer. Probably one of the proudest days that I’ve ever 

had, Mr. Speaker, was announcing that Meadow Lake was now 

a city, so it really was a great day. 

 

And in terms of, you know, this government really has been 

delivering for the Meadow Lake constituency as well, Mr. 

Speaker. Whether it be Highway 26, whether it be Highway 3, 

whether it be Highway 303, whether it be Highway 4, Mr. 

Speaker, we’ve done a lot of highways work. And I thank the 

member for Cypress Hills, grasslands for the work he did, and 

thank the member for Rosetown-Elrose for the work that they 

did in making that a reality. 

 

And in terms of some of the projects that we’ve had occasion to 

announce, we have a brand new courthouse going up in 

Meadow Lake right now, Mr. Speaker, a beautiful building, 

three-storey building, which the Minister of Justice, myself, and 

the Chief Justice of Saskatchewan announced not that long ago. 

And already we can see the completion of the project in sight, 

Mr. Speaker. A new long-term care facility which is going in 

Meadow lake, and we look forward to that being completed as 

well. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The time of adjournment having been 

reached, this House now stands adjourned until 1:30 Monday 

afternoon. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 13:00.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 3317 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3317 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3317 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3317 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3317 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3317 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3317 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3318 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Lieutenant Justin Garrett Boyes 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3318 

 Kindergarten Students Visit Constituency Office 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3319 

 Trick-or-Treat Proceeds for African Children 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3319 

 Prince Albert Hosts National Council of Women Convention 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3319 

 Habitat for Humanity Key Ceremony 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3320 

 Results of Municipal Elections 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3320 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3320 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Public Safety Procedures 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3320 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3320 

 H1N1 Pandemic Planning 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3321 

  McMorris ....................................................................................................................................................................... 3321, 3323 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3323 

 Health Care Options 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3322 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3322 

 Energy Issues 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3323 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3324 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Not Debatable) 

 Return No. 1 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3325 

 Return No. 2 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3325 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3325 

  Chisholm .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3330 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3332 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3336 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3341 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium Development 

Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

 Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

Government House Leader 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. James Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Capital Commission 


