




















































Hansard: March 04, 2009


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 27A  WEDNESDAY, MARCH 4, 2009, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2129 

 March 4, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

honour again today to recognize and introduce 17 grade 5 

students seated in the east gallery and their teacher, Ms. Sandy 

Jost. 

 

This group has come . . . I know Ms. Jost has been here a 

number of times. The Huda School in my constituency has 

visited the legislature I think every year and I don’t want to say 

how many years because it dates me. But they’re an amazing 

group and I just have to share, Mr. Speaker, as we were going 

through the opening prayer, I have a Islamic prayer rug hanging 

on the wall in my office here that was presented to me in the 

first visit of this, from the Huda School. And I will cherish that 

prayer rug always. 

 

I invite all colleagues to join with me in welcoming this very 

good-looking and very smart group from the Huda School in 

Regina Coronation Park. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you, I’d like to introduce to all members of the Assembly a 

group of graduate student leaders that are seated in your gallery 

today, Mr. Speaker. On our far right we have Janice Victor, 

who is the president of the Graduate Students’ Association at 

the University of Saskatchewan. Beside her is Merlyn 

Richelhoff, the president of the University of Regina Graduate 

Students’ Association. And the last individual in the group is 

Daniel Zhang who is the VP [vice-president] academic of the 

GSA [Graduate Students’ Association] at the U of S [University 

of Saskatchewan]. 

 

Janice is pursuing her Ph.D. [Doctor of Philosophy] in 

psychology. Merlyn is pursing his M.P.A. [Master of Public 

Administration] at the Johnson-Shoyama school of public 

policy. And Daniel is pursuing his Ph.D. in ed admin. 

 

Thank you. I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming this 

group of student leaders to their Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, it’s with great pleasure to 

introduce to you and through you to the members of this Hon. 

Assembly the student leaders from both the University of 

Saskatchewan and University of Regina. We just had a pleasant 

lunch. Daniel, thanks very much for coming. And I hope all 

members will join in to reiterate that welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I stand 

today to present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan residents 

in support of the government’s policy on green vehicles. And 

the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government ministers named in this petition to follow their 

own platform and government policies, and trade in their 

Jeep Libertys for vehicles that are on the SGI’s 2008 list of 

recommended fuel-efficient vehicles. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by residents of the 

communities of Battleford, North Battleford, Meota, and 

Mervin, Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition that speaks to the crunch for seniors 

when they’re accessing the housing market, that the changes 

over the past number of years have translated into more 

difficulty for seniors, especially those on fixed incomes, 

accessing quality housing. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to act as quickly as possible to expand 

affordable housing options for Saskatchewan’s senior 

citizens. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well to 

present a petition. This one’s entitled wage equity for CBO 

[community-based organization] workers. And we know that 

the low wage that is paid to CBO workers result in high staff 

turnover and subsequent lack of continuous care. And this has a 

negative impact on the quality of care that’s given. And I’d like 

to read the prayer: 



2130 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2009 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the development and 

implementation of a multi-year funding plan to ensure that 

CBO workers achieve wage equity with employees who 

perform work of equal value in government departments. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And these good folks are from the city of Moose Jaw. Thank 

you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

pleased today to present a petition in support of a new 

Saskatchewan Hospital in North Battleford. Mr. Speaker, the 

petitioners note that Prairie North Regional Health Authority 

has indicated that the construction of a new hospital is a priority 

and they have committed resources to develop the facilities. Mr. 

Speaker, the petitioners pray: 

 

. . . that the Hon. Legislative Assembly may be pleased to 

call upon the Government of Saskatchewan to 

immediately recommit funds and resources for the 

continued development and construction of a new 

Saskatchewan Hospital at North Battleford and provide the 

Prairie North Regional Health Authority with the authority 

necessary to complete this essential and much-needed 

project. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by residents of The 

Battlefords and surrounding area, the majority of whom live in 

the constituency of Cut Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 

stand today and present a petition in support of expansion of the 

graduate retention program. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately expand the graduate retention 

program to include master’s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals that signed this petition are 

students at the University of Saskatchewan, the University of 

Regina, as well as a number of health care professionals 

working in the province who hold graduate degrees. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I now recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions in support of needed expansion to child care 

within Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government through consultation with the child care 

community to immediately invest in growing the capacity 

of the early child care community to enable new child care 

spaces. This investment must include infrastructure 

funding for new facilities and expansion, funding to 

significantly increase the number of early childhood 

diploma and certificate training seats, and funding to 

ensure that the sector is able to increase its wages and 

benefits to attract and retain the needed personnel. 

 

These petitions, Mr. Speaker, are signed by good folks from 

Oxbow, Redvers, Arcola, Carievale, and Carnduff. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Red Cross Month 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. March is 

Red Cross Month, so it’s an honour today to speak about this 

dedicated group of people that help those suffering from 

devastating disasters. 

 

The international movement of the Red Cross was born on the 

battlefield in 1859 in Solferino, Italy. A Swiss businessman 

witnessed the aftermath of a grim battle that left 40,000 dead 

and wounded on the battlefield with few military or local 

services to tend the wounded. Horrified by what he saw, he 

organized local villagers to care for the casualties. He ensured 

that all victims from both sides received food, water, and 

medical attention. The impact of this experience changed his 

life. 

 

Today the Red Cross emblem continues as an internationally 

recognized symbol of protection and neutrality. The emblem 

identifies people, programs, and objects connected with the 

humanitarian activities of the International Red Cross. 

 

Recently the Red Cross chapter in Moose Jaw has been put to 

the test helping many fire victims find shelter and provide care 

in some difficult situations. We often think of the Red Cross as 

an international organization, but they are here helping those 

with needs right in our own communities. 

 

Those of us who live without armed conflict must protect, 

nurture, and spread knowledge of the true meaning of the Red 

Cross. Each of us should do our part to increase this awareness. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join with me in recognizing 

Red Cross Month. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



March 4, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2131 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Condolences Following Tragic Death in Biggar 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 

Tuesday, February 17, a blanket of uncertainty, disbelief, and 

fear fell over the community of Biggar as the word of the 

killing of 82-year-old Ruby Macaroff began to spread. Ruby’s 

death, in her own home in the late afternoon, was a shock to the 

residents of the small community and resulted in doors being 

locked, older women that live alone staying with each other, 

and others wondering if the person they are passing on the street 

could be the one responsible. 

 

A sense of relief came at the announcement of an arrest on 

February 21, and on February 23 a community meeting put on 

by the traumatic events response team gave residents the 

opportunity to learn more details about the tragedy and dispel 

some of the many rumours that were floating around. The 

gathering also allowed everyone to share their emotions of fear, 

sorrow, and anger, and exchange tips on how to deal with these 

emotions as well as ideas of how to keep safe and watch out for 

each other. They also had the opportunity to recall fond 

memories of Ruby and how she touched the lives of so many in 

our community. 

 

I’d like to commend the traumatic events response team for 

hosting this meeting, along with the RCMP [Royal Canadian 

Mounted Police] for their professionalism and interaction with 

the public and the diligent efforts in finding a suspect. 

 

I’d like to ask the members of this legislature to join with me in 

expressing condolences to the family and friends of Ruby 

Macaroff. She will be missed in the community. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Regina Public Library Round Dance 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I stand 

today to recognize the Regina Public Library for its 

commitment to building bridges and stronger relationships 

between peoples and cultures in our community. In particular I 

want to commend RPL [Regina Public Library] CEO [chief 

executive officer], Jeff Barber, and Albert Community Library 

branch head, Wendy Sinclair, for their leadership role in this 

regard and for putting on a fantastic round dance this past 

Friday evening at the Regina Performing Arts Centre in the fair 

constituency of Regina Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

The round dance is a traditional First Nations gathering held 

during the winter months for memorials and celebrations. I 

want to thank Isadore Pelletier and the elders who lifted their 

pipes to get things started in a good way. I want to thank Rick 

Favel, Roland Kaye, and all the escapiosuk and the people who 

helped to serve up a wonderful feast. And I want to thank MCs 

[master of ceremonies] Mike Pinay and Howard Walker and the 

stick men and the singers for helping the hundreds of people 

who came out to “dance and sway the Aboriginal way.” And 

last but certainly not least, I want to thank all the volunteers 

who came out to help the RPL and the community, especially 

the Albert Library Community Council and community council 

Chair, Lisa Workman, and her dream team of volunteers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this round dance is part of efforts by the Regina 

Public Library and the provincial library system to encourage 

more Aboriginal content programming. This new vision of 

outreach serves not only Aboriginal peoples, but also educates 

the general public as a whole. 

 

I encourage this Assembly to recognize and applaud the 

Saskatchewan public library system for its dedication to 

building a better future for all Saskatchewan people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Meadow Lake. 

 

Engineering and Geoscience Week 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, I stand today to talk about 

Engineering and Geoscience Week being recognized across 

Saskatchewan as a time to take note of those who are helping to 

build our province. 

 

Few places in Canada are touched by these professions more 

profoundly than Saskatchewan. We are blessed with an 

abundance of resources, and that requires us to have the skill 

and expertise to successfully find it and extract it. That’s where 

our engineers and geoscientists come into the picture. 

 

Today our province is benefiting from resources such as the 

Bakken play due to the innovations that allow us to recover 

previously inaccessible deposits. When you drive on a new 

highway, connect to the Internet, or fabricate a product, you’re 

utilizing the fruits of the labours from more than 7,000 

engineers and geoscientists in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we are about to embark on a busy summer of 

construction thanks to our $500 million economic booster shot, 

I would invite all residents to thank those who helped bring 

those projects together from conception to construction. The 

design of our new facilities and infrastructure is vital to our 

province’s future, and while this is the week to acknowledge 

their work, our engineers and geoscientists are working hard all 

year long. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Soldiers March for Telemiracle 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 737 

Communication Squadron reserve unit is located in my 

constituency of Saskatoon Meewasin. As members know, I 

have another personal connection as well. 

 

From February 13 to February 15 the reserve unit conducted its 

annual marchathon to raise funds for the Saskatchewan 



2132 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2009 

Telemiracle. On the night of February 13, members of the unit 

set up tents for the marchathon base next to the Vimy memorial 

on the banks of the South Saskatchewan River. Commencing at 

noon on Saturday, February 14, they marched in teams wearing 

backpacks in successive laps around the west-east banks of the 

river, day and night, for 24 hours. 

 

They did not deliberately choose one of the coldest weekends of 

a cold winter; it just worked out that way. But there was never 

any question that they would show up. They did just that, and 

raised more than $6,000 for Telemiracle. 

 

I managed the first lap with the first team out. Not to be 

competitive, but I understand that Corporal Nathan Quennell 

completed the second most laps at 18. Corporal John McFarlane 

completed the most laps at 19. 

 

Members of the unit will also be performing at Telemiracle. 

They have pulled together a band that has successfully 

auditioned to play during the broadcast. It may not be the 

musical highlight of the performances, but it will no doubt 

showcase the spirit of a group of young people willing to march 

that extra mile to serve their community and their country. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 

 

Colorectal Cancer Awareness Month 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

March is Colorectal Cancer Awareness Month as people across 

the country work to promote awareness about this deadly but 

treatable disease. Colorectal cancer is the second leading cause 

of cancer deaths in Canada, despite the fact that it is highly 

preventable if detected early. In Saskatchewan, colorectal 

cancer is the second most common cancer in men and women. 

In 2005 about 650 Saskatchewan residents were diagnosed with 

colorectal cancer, and 250 died from the disease. 

 

Mr. Speaker, far too many families suffer tragic losses due to 

this disease that is highly treatable. I ask that my fellow MLAs 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly] join me in urging 

everyone to speak with their family physician and determine if 

and when they should be screened. 

 

I’m pleased to acknowledge that our government has taken 

steps in the fight against colorectal cancer. We provided $1.1 

million in funding a pilot project, colorectal cancer screening 

project, in the Five Hills Health Region. We are also fully 

funding the cancer drug Avastin so that patients with advanced 

colorectal cancer can have more precious time to spend with 

their families. 

 

Our first budget provided a $10.7 million increase in cancer 

care in Saskatchewan. By raising awareness and increasing 

screening, we can beat this disease. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Heart of the City Piano Program 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It was my 

pleasure to attend a Christmas recital put on by the Heart of the 

City Piano Program at Rosemont Community School. It 

included piano, drumming, and dance. 

 

I want to thank Rae Pelletier, community coordinator at 

Rosemont Community School, for her leadership to this 

program. I want to recognize the piano teachers who volunteer 

weekly: Marjorie Burns, Dorothy Cook, Gail Garden, and Barb 

Willows. I would also like to recognize Ramses Calderon for 

teaching guitar and Kristy Obrigewitsch for facilitating the 

drum group. 

 

This program receives full support of Principal John Finlayson, 

VP [Vice-Principal] Lisa Frei, teachers, and staff of Rosemont. 

It would not be possible without the support of the Regina 

Public School Division or Ranch Ehrlo Society and its 

coordinator, Lana Currie-Lingelbach. 

 

I must say that through this program Rosemont has inspired a 

culture of arts, music, and dance within the school and 

community. This is impressive. 

 

Heart of the City Piano Program is sponsored by the 

Saskatchewan Music Educators Association and its aim is to 

enhance the lives and learning opportunities for children and 

youth in the community through music. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this Assembly to join with 

me in commending the students, and in thanking and 

recognizing the volunteers and partners for making this fine 

program possible. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Graduate Retention Program 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, there is no doubt that the 

innovation, knowledge, and ideas that come with higher 

education are an essential factor in fuelling a modern economy. 

If we want Saskatchewan to thrive, we must encourage those 

with higher education to build their lives here and contribute to 

our economy. But the Sask Party doesn’t seem to get that. They 

axed the successful NDP [New Democratic Party] graduate tax 

exemption program and replaced it with a pared-down graduate 

retention program. Sadly the Sask Party’s version of the 

program leaves masters and Ph.D. graduates out in the cold. 

Those who pursue their education beyond undergraduate 

degrees are completely excluded from the program. 

 

Today in our gallery, we have the presidents of the grad student 

associations from the U of R [University of Regina] and the U 

of S. They have come here to hear from the Minister of 

Advanced Education why they’re being excluded by the Sask 

Party government. 

 



March 4, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2133 

To the minister: why is he discouraging masters and Ph.D. 

graduates from making their home here in Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I really appreciate the 

opportunity to talk about this vitally important part of our 

advanced educational programming in the province. Mr. 

Speaker, we’ve got about 3,900 graduate students in the 

province. About half of those already receive support, Mr. 

Speaker. And what we can begin to look at is, we already have 

the third lowest, on average, tuition of graduate programming 

right across Canada. 

 

What we have been able to do is ensure that not just graduate 

students but others right across the province are benefiting from 

affordability measures we put in place. For example a family of 

four with an income of about 35,000 is already saving over 

$2,600, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, what we can say is a single 

parent with two children making $15,000 saving over $1,000, 

Mr. Speaker. Both of those add up to more than anything that 

the previous government had in place. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Our province needs those with graduate level 

degrees. We need to recruit physiotherapists, social workers, 

psychologists, academics, and business grads as much as the 

professions already included in the retention program. Mr. 

Speaker, after a lot of pressure the Sask Party has already 

admitted that it was wrong to exclude out-of-province 

graduates. Now it’s time they realized their other failure and 

extend the program to those with graduate level training. These 

are all careers where the competition with other provinces to 

retain our best and brightest is steep. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government claims that it is capable of 

learning from its mistakes and fixing them. Today I submitted a 

petition from students and professionals, all agreeing that the 

minister was wrong to exclude so many needed graduates. 

 

To the minister: when will he admit that the Sask Party is 

discouraging master’s and Ph.D. graduates from settling in our 

province? When will he admit that this is a mistake and reverse 

this short-sighted policy? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, on February 5 the member 

opposite met with graduate students at the University of 

Saskatchewan and he happened to mention, saying that it was 

the opposition that put pressure in order to expand the graduate 

retention program, the most aggressive youth retention program 

. . . 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — So, Mr. Speaker, rather than be 

self-referential, why don’t we just see what others are talking 

about the graduate retention program? Mr. Speaker, 

“Saskatchewan’s gain P.E.I.’s drain?” From the editorial, 

December 2, 2008, from PEI: 

 

The province should take note of Saskatchewan’s recent 

pitch to attract university and college grads from across 

the country. It’s a strategy that could work well for 

Saskatchewan . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, rather than speaking to themselves in the midst of 

a leadership race, Mr. Speaker, why don’t they listen to what 

others are saying about Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? Over 

15,000 people have come to the province, Mr. Speaker. 

Saskatchewan is leading Canada in economic growth and an air 

of optimism. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll be frank. I’m beginning to 

become a little creeped out by the minister’s preoccupation with 

my daily itinerary. If only he would spend the same amount of 

time tracking my movement in the province as he would fixing 

his failed programs, we might be getting somewhere. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the graduate student leaders in 

attendance today deserve some real answers from this province. 

Graduate students in our province want to know why they’re 

being ignored and unappreciated by this Sask Party 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, instead of shutting the door on Saskatchewan 

graduates who want to remain in Saskatchewan or move here to 

build a future, we should be opening doors to people like 

physiotherapists, speech language pathologists, business 

graduates. Instead of staged photo ops and ceremonial 

cake-cuttings, the government should be focused on real action. 

 

To the minister: will he take concrete action today, admit he 

was wrong, and expand the graduate retention program to 

include all Saskatchewan students? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t take much to track 

someone at a snail’s pace and that’s what they’re moving at 

over there. Mr. Speaker. What we can say is there’s a lot more 

to do. We know that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Obviously what we’re looking at is we’re working very closely 

to ensure that there’s greater coordination with Ottawa. What 

we’ve seen in recent years for example, Mr. Speaker, out of 



2134 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2009 

NSERC [Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council 

of Canada] and SSHRC [Social Sciences and Humanities 

Research Council of Canada] grants, we’ve seen that 

Saskatchewan has received less than 2 per cent of the national 

amounts. 

 

What we’ve seen from Ottawa is that there’s an increase of 50 

per cent of SSHRC grants over the last three years. We need to 

be doing a better job. The federal government has just 

announced an additional 500 Ph.D. scholarships nationally as 

well as 2,000 master’s degree scholarships. 

 

I’m having meetings in the coming days to ensure that the 

universities are doing more to ensure that we’re actually 

attracting our fair share of national dollars. Then we can begin 

to look at programs to help ensure that we’re complementing 

instead of competing with other jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

SaskTel Email Service 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. SaskTel has confirmed 

that they want to privatize sasktel.net email services, and in fact 

they’ve issued a request for proposal to some 25 different 

companies. 

 

To the minister: can the minister tell us which companies are 

included in the request for proposal? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, as Deputy Premier, I’d like to answer that 

question on behalf of government. Mr. Speaker, for a number of 

years we have listened to the NDP talk about privatization. 

They have fought the last election on privatization. They want 

to fight the next election on privatization, Mr. Speaker. What 

the member opposite is confusing, and I think the president of 

SaskTel made it very clear this morning, the difference between 

something called outsourcing and something called 

privatization. 

 

We have said very clearly that we are not, we are not supporting 

privatization. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, there’s a pretty good example in this 

Legislative Assembly about outsourcing. There’s a candidate in 

this building, internal candidate for the leadership of the NDP, 

who is in this building. But do you know what? The NDP, they 

want to outsource it. They want to outsource it to Alberta and 

get back a candidate from Alberta, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. No one’s fooled. New 

Democrats have a . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize . . . Order. I recognize the 

member from Regina Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Media reports suggest 

that these companies are located outside of Saskatchewan and 

include at least one American company based in Fort 

Lauderdale, Florida. Can the minister tell us where the rest of 

the 25 companies are located? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite has 

asked a very technical question. I understand that that 

information was provided by the president of SaskTel. He’s 

indicated on the process that is being followed. That has not 

been completed, Mr. Speaker, that is the process that is under 

way. And the Minister Responsible for Crown Corporations 

will provide that information to that member. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I do want to clarify the answer that I gave in 

the first question. Mr. Speaker, outsourcing by the NDP. I 

indicated that there was an internal candidate that was being . . . 

that was on the agenda, is put the name forward. But, Mr. 

Speaker, I did forget to mention that the outsourcing is not 

supported by all of the members opposite. Outsourcing is only 

supported by a small group over there on that side. They would 

like to outsource rather than look internally within their own 

ranks, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, now back to SaskTel and our 

Crown corporations and the people of Saskatchewan. Mr. 

Speaker, there have been already media reports indicating that 

one of the companies is based in the United States. 

Saskatchewan people, quite frankly, deserve better than the 

government that tries to hide the truth on such a serious issue. 

 

To the minister: will he at least confirm that the one of these 

companies is Hostopia, a company based in Fort Lauderdale, 

Florida? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve indicated, I know 

the NDP want to fight the next election over the issue of 

privatization. The questions, the technical questions that the 

member asks here in the Legislative Assembly were answered 

this morning by the president of SaskTel. He indicated all of the 

answers to the questions that the member has asked, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you know, there’s an interesting dynamic 



March 4, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2135 

developing within the NDP . . . 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — You know, Mr. Speaker, as the 

government we’re looking forward. We’re looking forward to 

growth in the province of Saskatchewan. We’re looking 

forward to development. But you know, not all members 

opposite have a very good view about themselves or especially 

the potential of the next election, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to quote from the Estevan paper where the 

member for Regina Rosemont was there. And he spoke to 18 

people, and this is his quote, Mr. Speaker, this is his quote: “I 

don’t think there’s any probability as far as a likelihood of 

winning government in 2011.” Mr. Speaker, that’s a member of 

the Dwain Lingenfelter team saying, sorry, Mr. Leader, you 

don’t stand a chance in 2011. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that the people 

whose jobs at SaskTel are at stake are finding this most 

interesting. The reports in the media give no firm timelines as to 

the SaskTel’s schedule for privatization, but the people of 

Saskatchewan, the owners of SaskTel, deserve better than that 

and they deserve to know how much longer an important and 

growing part of SaskTel will remain in public hands. To the 

minister: what is the Sask Party timeline for the privatization of 

sasktel.net? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — The member opposite, as I’ve indicated, 

is confusing outsourcing with privatization. The president of 

SaskTel made it very clear that in the year 2004 SaskTel had 

pursued outsourcing. They had pursued outsourcing on various 

sources. So, Mr. Speaker, for the member opposite to stand up 

in this . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — The NDP’s plan in 2004 was to pursue 

opportunities for what might enhance the province of 

Saskatchewan. The president of SaskTel today has indicated 

that that is the plan for SaskTel today — continue with the plan 

that was developed in 2004. So, Mr. Speaker, how can the 

member opposite stand and say that is the plan now for 

privatization, but that was our plan in 2004, but we just didn’t 

call it privatization? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party government’s 

decision to privatize, to privatize a significant component of our 

communications company, SaskTel, will have direct impact on 

the 150,000-plus subscribers to sasktel.net, a number that is 

growing, Mr. Speaker. But beyond that it has potential to affect 

every citizen in this province because, Mr. Speaker, every 

citizen in this province is a shareholder of SaskTel, and those 

citizens elect men and women to this Chamber to be responsible 

for their investment in SaskTel. 

 

My question — not to the Deputy Premier who wants to talk 

about everything under the sun but the question he’s put — my 

question is to the acting Minister Responsible for the Crown 

Investments Corporation. My question is this: why in the world 

did you not inform the people of Saskatchewan of this decision 

to outsource, to privatize sasktel.net? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, a question that I will carry 

on to the Minister Responsible for CIC [Crown Investments 

Corporation of Saskatchewan]. And I will take notice of that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Strategy for Crown Corporations 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we will anticipate an 

answer at the next sitting of this legislature to the very question 

which is at the heart of this debate. Why did this government 

not inform the people of Saskatchewan of this very significant 

outsourcing of a extremely important component of SaskTel? 

 

Well keeping secrets, Mr. Speaker, seems to becoming a habit 

for this government. Just witness the past few weeks. Last week 

we learned that this government had cut funding to the First 

Nations University of Canada — didn’t tell the public; it was a 

source in a newspaper that did that. 

 

Before that, what do we find out in January? This government 

has created something called the P3 [public-private partnership] 

secretariat to begin to look at public-private partnerships, Mr. 

Speaker, without telling the public. They’re sitting on a report 

from one of their own members around property taxation in this 

province, not telling the public what’s in the report. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I repeat my question, and this can go to the 

Deputy Premier: why the secrecy about these important issues 

facing Saskatchewan people? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, it would be unfortunate if 



2136 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2009 

we were to politicize the events and activities at First Nations 

University, but I do want to stand on the record to ensure 

there’s a correction made. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on July 29, officials from First Nations University 

came and met with officials from this government. As a 

response, we were able to determine that there was a fiscal 

situation that needed to be addressed. Mr. Speaker, we were 

then in a position to respond. We responded with $1.6 million 

in additional funding, as well as $400,000 that was made 

available for a governance study and a strategic focus going 

forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for the record, $1.1 million has been paid to help 

take care of a collective bargaining agreement, collective 

bargaining agreement that has been outstanding since 2005, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, $500,000 was made available for operating funds. 

That has been rolled out into three different segments. The first 

two have been paid, Mr. Speaker, and for the record, the 2,000 

remain frozen, but I’m optimistic that we’re making progress on 

this file. I don’t think it’s helpful that this issue is raised in that 

fashion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, if I recall, my question was why 

were the taxpayers, the citizens, the shareholders of this 

province and SaskTel not informed publicly of this decision? 

Why is it that they — members of the opposition, members of 

the press — are obliged to find this information out through 

sources to daily newspapers? 

 

Mr. Speaker, they’ve been caught again not wanting to tell the 

people of Saskatchewan what they’re doing. Well now that they 

have been caught, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to ask again to the 

acting Minister Responsible for the Crown Investments 

Corporation, I’m going to ask that minister: will he put this 

privatization plan on hold at least until the people of 

Saskatchewan, the shareholders of SaskTel, can debate and 

consider this issue? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I may have 

to be corrected but, in 2004, I do not recall the NDP putting a 

public release that says that we are outsourcing services in 

2004. I don’t recall that, Mr. Speaker. And maybe the member 

opposite can stand up and say yes, that we were planning to 

privatize an outsource, and we told the people of the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was made very clear this morning by the 

president of SaskTel that in fact, in terms of the services that are 

being provided currently by members in SaskTel, there would 

be no job losses wherever, wherever this service is provided. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, for the member opposite to say that there’s 

this massive plan of privatization, we’ve been very clear about 

that. I think the member wants to go back in time and look at 

fighting that last election when the members opposite, many of 

them know, they’ve already given up on the next election. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday in this very legislature, 

we welcomed people who have come to this province to build 

their futures here. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Can you imagine, Mr. Speaker, then the irony 

of this, the very day after we find out that the government is 

secretly, secretly trying to outsource jobs from Saskatchewan 

perhaps to Ontario; perhaps to British Columbia; perhaps to 

Fort Lauderdale, Florida. Mr. Speaker, my question to the 

government, and again I put it . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I ask all members to allow the 

Leader of Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition to place his 

question. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — My question, Mr. Speaker, again to the acting 

Minister Responsible for the Crown Investments Corporation, is 

as follows: how in the world can the prospect of outsourcing, 

outsourcing jobs from Saskatchewan to some other part of the 

continent or the globe square with their Sask-first policy for the 

Crowns, which declares it is the intention of this government to 

build the strength of the Crowns in Saskatchewan, to provide 

opportunities for Saskatchewan people, to provide strength for 

our economy? 

 

How can this outsourcing plan, this privatization plan, square 

with the Sask-first policy which they say they believe in? Or, 

Mr. Speaker, is this another example of you say one thing and 

you do something quite different? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, across Canada, across Canada, especially with the 

Conference Board of Canada, they are looking at Saskatchewan. 

They are looking at Saskatchewan with very positive eyes, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan will lead the country with 

5.4 per cent economic growth in ’08. Saskatchewan will 

continue to lead the country with 1.6 per cent economic growth 

in 2009. All other provinces except Manitoba will suffer 

negative . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Well, Mr. Speaker, with that kind of 

reaction to the possibilities here in Saskatchewan. I want to look 

back at some of things that the NDP did. The member opposite 

seems to think that the NDP did not look at anything outside of 



March 4, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2137 

this province. Just for the record, Mr. Speaker, ask whether or 

not the NDP consulted publicly with the public in 

Saskatchewan over losing 6.7 million into tappedinto.com, 9.4 

million into Persona, 43.4 million into Navigata, 16 million into 

NST [Network Services of Chicago]. Mr. Speaker, 1.9 million 

into Clickabid, and the list goes on. Did the NDP consult with 

the people of Saskatchewan over those losses? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, why. The 

shareholders of SaskTel and the people of Saskatchewan do not 

trust this group of men and women in government with their 

Crown investments. 

 

I’ll tell you why. You’ll recall, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan 

people will recall that just prior, just prior the election in 2007, 

the now minister, acting minister responsible for CIC said as 

follows about SecurTek. When pushed on the question on the 

privatization of SecurTek, he said, well no, we’re not selling 

that company, you know, we’re not selling SaskTel. We’re just 

going to transfer the employees into a different department. I 

see. We’re not going to sell it, we’re just going to shut it down 

and transfer the employees. 

 

Well now the policy’s gone further. We’re going to shut it 

down and transfer the employees to Florida or somewhere. Mr. 

Speaker, how in the world can this outsourcing be consistent 

with the Sask Party pledge that they are going to grow the 

Crowns and that that the Crowns will serve the people of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — You know, Mr. Speaker, there are so 

many good things happening in this province. We’ve had the 

Conference Board of Canada recognize these things. Mr. 

Speaker, from their report just issued a couple of days ago, 

there are quotations that I want to put on the record. And these 

are this: “. . . massive income tax cuts, combined with the swift 

increase in infrastructure spending, will boost Saskatchewan’s 

economy by 1.6 per cent in 2009.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, second quote: “. . . the province will benefit from 

an enhanced infrastructure investment program.” Mr. Speaker, 

which SaskTel just received 19 million additional dollars to 

ensure that we have high-speed Internet all across 

Saskatchewan, unlike what the NDP did, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a second quote: “. . . incomes will get a further 

boost from the province’s $300 million personal income tax cut 

. . . ”. Mr. Speaker, this is a great place to live, unlike what the 

NDP thinks about Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:15] 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 79 — The Education Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2)/ 

Loi n
o
 2 de 2009 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

move that Bill No. 79, The Education Amendment Act, 2009 

(No. 2) be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Education that Bill No. 79, The Education Amendment Act, 

2009 (No. 2) be now read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, 

I’d like to move a series of condolence motions with respect to 

three former members of the Assembly, as well as allow for 

leave for others to move motions of condolence for two 

members of the judiciary and one additional member of this 

Assembly, an Ombudsman. 

 

The Speaker: — The Deputy Premier has asked for leave to 

introduce condolence motions. Is the leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Deputy 

Premier. 

 

CONDOLENCES 

 

Laurence Edwin Tchorzewski 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, members in the Legislative Assembly know that 

almost every year we move to a day, today to recognize past 

members of this Legislative Assembly. And this year we have 

expanded that to include members of the judiciary and an 

Ombudsman. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today we will recognize the careers of three 

former members of the Legislative Assembly, and I would like 

to begin first with the first member. Mr. Speaker, I will be 

introducing a motion at the end of my remarks that will be this: 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly and 



2138 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2009 

expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 

made to his community, his constituency, and the 

province. 

 

Laurence Edwin Tchorzewski, who passed away on June 

6, 2008, was a member of the Legislative Assembly from 

1971 until 1982 and again from 1985 until 1999. He 

represented the constituencies of Humboldt, Regina 

Northeast, and Regina Dewdney for the New Democratic 

Party. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski was born on April 22, 1943 in Alvena, 

Saskatchewan. He spent his formative years on the family 

farm and attended local schools in Hudson Bay. He 

continued his studies at the University of Saskatchewan 

and later graduated with a Bachelor of Arts degree in 

political science and a teacher’s certificate. Mr. 

Tchorzewski married Shirley Stasiuk on August 6, 1966. 

He is survived by his wife, four children, and nine 

grandchildren. 

 

A teacher by training, Mr. Tchorzewski began and ended 

his professional career instructing elementary school 

students in Humboldt and Regina. He later put his 

extensive knowledge of public affairs to use as a 

consultant for Rawlco Communications. In his private life, 

Mr. Tchorzewski was active in a number of community 

and professional organizations. The Knights of Columbus 

and the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation were two 

groups that benefited from his participation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do recall attending the celebration here in 

springtime where there are a number of different cultures that 

put on displays, and I recalled at one of those such occasions 

Mr. Tchorzewski was the host, and he greeted me at the door 

when I entered and made me feel welcome. And that was the 

role that he played especially within that Ukrainian community. 

He was admired by many in terms of the amount of time and 

the amount of dedication that he gave. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski’s involvement with politics extended 

over four decades and encompassed positions in elected 

and party offices at both the provincial and federal levels. 

He first entered this Assembly in 1971 and continued to 

represent the Humboldt area until 1982. He subsequently 

returned to elected office in the constituency of Regina 

Northeast after winning a by-election in 1985. He retained 

his seat in the next three elections before announcing his 

retirement in 1999. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski held numerous portfolios in the cabinets 

of Allan Blakeney and Roy Romanow, including minister 

of Finance, Health, Education, Provincial Secretary, 

Municipal Government, Consumer Affairs, and Culture 

and Youth. Over the course of his tenure in this Assembly, 

he served as deputy premier, as a government 

backbencher, and as an opposition critic. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski lent his expertise to the New Democratic 

Party by taking on positions as a party advisor and 

provincial campaign manager. He was elected president of 

the federal NDP in 1997 and later served as the chief of 

staff to the federal NDP leader. 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 

this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 

members of the bereaved family. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — The Deputy Premier has moved a motion of 

condolences in regards to Mr. Laurence Edwin Tchorzewski. Is 

the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the Leader of 

Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 

I am pleased to acknowledge, and to welcome to the Chamber, 

Ed’s wife Shirley and some of their family who have joined us. 

And we appreciate having you here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if I may say, I’ve had opportunity over the years 

to participate in a number of these condolence motions, and in 

some ways this is probably the hardest condolence that I’ve 

ever had to move or speak to in this House. 

 

It’s sometimes said in public life that we have many, many 

acquaintances, but very few friends. And remembering Ed 

Tchorzewski as we are today, I remember a friend, and he is a 

friend that I miss. I miss coffee at Chapters and I miss the 

conversations in the office and I miss the conversations in the 

circles of our party. 

 

Ed was my counsellor; he was my colleague; he was my critic; 

and he was my confidante. And I believe that could be said for 

others of us, past and present, within this legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Ed Tchorzewski was loyal. He was loyal, ever 

loyal to our party. He was ever loyal to the premier that he 

served as a deputy premier. He was ever loyal to all of his 

colleagues and, if I may say, ever loyal to all of his principles. 

Through this condolence motion so graciously read by the 

Deputy Premier, we recognize all of Ed’s contributions to this 

legislature and to the public life of Saskatchewan. 

 

You know, within this Chamber, within this legislature, Ed 

Tchorzewski virtually served in every role that exists within this 

room. He sat first as a private member in government. He sat in 

Executive Council. I think Ed was one of the youngest 

individuals ever named to a cabinet post in this province. He 

served as a time as an opposition member of the legislature, and 

as identified, he served in a variety of portfolios and ministries 

and he served as minister of Finance, post 1991, and deputy 

premier at the same time. 

 

I think the only chair that Ed Tchorzewski . . . On the floor of 

this legislature, with the exception of yours, Mr. Speaker, the 

only chair that Ed Tchorzewski did not occupy in this 

legislature was the chair of Premier. And I can tell you Roy 

Romanow has said on many, many occasions how relieved he 

was that Ed Tchorzewski did not seek the leadership of our 

party. 

 

As the motion has indicated, Ed was first and always a teacher. 

And I can say whether it was in the classroom or whether it was 

in the caucus room or whether it was in the cabinet room, Ed 

taught many of us very well. 

 



March 4, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2139 

He was first elected in Humboldt, and I’m sure as the current 

member from Humboldt will know, Ed never lost his roots in 

the Humboldt constituency. He never lost his deep love for the 

people, beginning with Alvena and then into Humboldt and 

Humboldt constituency. And you can be sure, Mr. Speaker — 

and I hope other members have done the same — that if Ed 

were alive today, he’d be on that website voting for Hockeyville 

in Humboldt. I am sure of it. 

 

It was the coldest by-election that I can remember. The absolute 

coldest by-election that I can remember, knocking on doors 

with Ed Tchorzewski when he was re-elected back into this 

Chamber here in Regina in the mid-1980s — 1985, I think it 

was. And he was without question, in my mind, the role model 

of a constituency MLA. There are few in my memory of this 

place can equate to Ed Tchorzewski when it came to serving his 

constituency. One comes to mind, Ned Shillington. 

 

Ed taught us much about serving the constituency. A little thing 

that he taught to myself and a former member, Glenn Hagel, 

was that a nice gesture at Christmastime is to go to your senior 

citizens’ residences and bring a poinsettia. Ed did it for years 

and he taught others of us to do it. And some of us can return to 

some of those places and find those poinsettias still alive. 

 

I want to say today, Mr. Speaker, in the context of this 

legislature and for history, as the deputy premier and as the 

minister of Finance in what some of us would argue were this 

province’s darkest hours, when we faced the verge of 

bankruptcy, Ed, Ed Tchorzewski, more than any other 

individual — without exception, more than any other individual 

— it was Ed Tchorzewski that led this province back, that set 

the path to get us back from that verge of bankruptcy. You 

know, some of us used to call him Steady Eddy. And it was his 

steadfastness, his calm, his steady hand that kept our caucus and 

our government at that time intact, and with the ability to tackle 

some of those very, very difficult, very, very difficult decisions. 

It may well be Ed’s greatest contribution in public life in this 

province. 

 

And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, those of us who knew Ed well saw 

what the public of Saskatchewan did not see. We saw the toll 

that that period of time took on that man and the tough 

decisions. 

 

But again, as the Deputy Premier has indicated in the motion, 

not only did Ed fill virtually every role in this legislature, in our 

own political party, he filled virtually every role there too. I 

mean, he was a party member. He was a party councillor, 

president of the national party, member, candidate — successful 

and unsuccessful. He served as chief of staff to our national 

leader. He served as the CEO of our provincial wing. Ed 

Tchorzewski loved the party and believed in the party and gave 

a great deal to this party of ours. And I don’t know if I know of 

a more faithful New Democratic Party member. 

 

And I believe it’s fair to say, and I think the family would agree 

with me, that Ed was competitive — no doubt about that. And 

that was true on the golf course as much as on the campaign 

trail. And Ed was a man who always appreciated and sought 

and expected excellence. Whether it was in public policy or 

whether it was in political organization or whether it was in the 

most well-manicured lawn on the block, Ed Tchorzewski 

expected excellence. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, alternately, you know, we’ve called him Mr. 

T. We’ve called him Eddy T. And on occasion, we used to call 

him Two-Button Eddy because, you see, you could never get 

that distinctive last name on one election button, so he became 

known to us as Two-Button Eddy. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Above all else, Mr. Speaker, above all else Ed Tchorzewski was 

a son and a husband and a father and a grandfather. And 

nothing mattered more to Ed Tchorzewski than those he loved 

and who loved him in return. Never were his words more kind 

than when he spoke about his mother. And never were his eyes 

more warm than when he spoke of Shirley. And never was his 

voice more proud than when he spoke of his children. And 

never did I see Ed Tchorzewski more happy than when he was 

with his grandchildren. I think our last visit in my office Ed was 

accompanied by grandchildren. 

 

He was an able politician. He believed in the worth of public 

service. He was an able teacher. And from the days of my 

beginning in public life to the very last few days of his, Ed was 

my friend and my teacher. 

 

He was a man of faith. He was faithful to his God. He was 

faithful to the church into which he was baptized. He was 

faithful to his convictions. He was faithful to his party. He was 

faithful to his friends and faithful to his family. And in all the 

words of scripture that I might find that I think would apply to 

Ed Tchorzewski, I can think of no more appropriate words than 

those of Paul who wrote these words to his young friend 

Timothy: 

 

The time of my departure has come. I have fought the 

good fight. I have finished the race. And I have kept the 

faith. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know it’s not required, but I would seek to serve 

as seconder to the condolence motion. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour for me 

to add my words of condolence to Shirley and the family, and to 

say a few words about the man that we knew as Ed who was 

always there. 

 

He was always available for consultation. He was always 

available for very good advice. And many times, he would 

come when he knew you needed advice, but you hadn’t asked 

him. And I think that was a real secret, especially for me, in the 

last number of years when he lived in my constituency. Because 

no matter what year of his political career — which spanned 40 

years — that he was in the community, he was able to have 

conversations with people anywhere and pick up some concern, 

some issue which needed to be dealt with. And I think that’s 

what initially led him into politics. But over the years, that was 

a gift that he had which was taught to others, but ultimately we 

couldn’t have the same kind of gift that he did because his was 

really a special gift. 



2140 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2009 

When I was first nominated to run in the election in 1995, Ed 

came to spend some time with me to tell me what this was 

about. And that was really important because he was very 

skilled in teaching. But what was also really important was that 

he gave to me some of his best people that had worked with him 

over many years. And in that 1995 election, as long as I listened 

to him and to the people that he had who gave me advice, I did 

very well. And I have often thought back to those weeks of that 

’95 election, as I’ve come forward in my own political career, 

of how important the conversations that I had then were and 

continue to be in my role as a politician. 

 

When election days came over the last few elections, one of the 

honours that I had on election day was to stay out of the way of 

everybody who was making sure the election went the way it 

should. And so part of those days I would go and visit Shirley 

because she had some of the best food in the neighbourhood, 

but more importantly, she had been through so many of these 

elections as a spouse of a politician that she had very calm and 

very wise advice. And I want to say a special thank you to 

Shirley for that kind of a role which she played, I think, for 

many people in our caucus but especially for me. 

 

I know that the children and grandchildren had a huge influence 

on how Ed perceived issues as we dealt with them in 

government, but more importantly, I think they were also why 

he was in politics. And I know that his children feel that way, 

and I am sure that the grandchildren will figure that out as the 

years unfold because the tough decisions, the tough situations 

that he had to deal with, but also all the things that were built 

across the province were built for the children and the 

grandchildren. 

 

I know that one of the excitements in the family over the next 

couple of months is another, the 10th grandchild coming. And 

in many ways, I think that’s an important legacy of Ed’s as well 

because it’s a signal that here in Saskatchewan we’re building 

for all of us, but we’re especially building for the future 

generations. And I want to say thank you to Shirley and to the 

family, but we all want to be thankful for such a solid citizen as 

Ed was for the province of Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

extremely pleased to stand this afternoon and take a few 

minutes to honour Ed Tchorzewski. I knew Ed differently than 

some of my other colleagues. I never had the opportunity to 

serve with Ed in the legislature, but I had the opportunity to sit 

on Ed’s executive, work with Ed through a number of elections, 

and to learn a great deal from Ed Tchorzewski. I had the 

opportunity in 1999 to replace Ed — if anybody could ever 

replace Ed — in the constituency of Regina Dewdney. 

 

And we’re honouring a man today who was perhaps bigger than 

life in some ways, who always took the high road, who believed 

in this province, and so very much cared about the people of 

this province. I can remember the conversations I had with him 

as we were going through the difficult times in the early 1990s 

when very difficult decisions had to be made, and how difficult 

those decisions were, and the painful and difficult times he went 

through having to make difficult decisions that he knew would 

hurt people and that he didn’t want to make but knew he had to. 

And those are the types of things that determine the true ability 

of an individual and show us that he’s in fact bigger than life 

itself. 

 

But Mr. Tchorzewski’s real love in his life was his family. I can 

remember talking around the table after a constituency meeting 

or over a drink after, talking about his children, his wife, and 

you could see, as he was talking about his children, a gleam 

come in his eye. He talked about how smart they were, how 

capable they were, and how they meant the most to him of 

anything in his life. He was so proud of them. He was so proud 

of his family. Mr. Speaker, those are his true legacy, and it’s 

what he cared about most. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he felt the same way about his grandchildren. He 

waited for the day he would be a grandfather, and he was so 

very happy when he became a grandfather. And, Mr. Speaker, 

he loved his grandchildren, and they became the focus of his 

life. He gave more than 40 years of his life to the public of this 

province, but he cared most about his family as it always should 

be. He was a devoted Catholic who cared about his church. He 

was a very compassionate individual who kept the faith of his 

church. And, Mr. Speaker, he was a man who didn’t think 

selfishly a single day in his life. He wanted what was best for 

this province and for its people and for his family. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, he honestly, in his entire life, worked for the 

betterment of this province. And we lost a very important 

Saskatchewan citizen and one that should be remembered for 

many years to come. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

humbling thing to rise in this debate of the condolence motion, 

and it’s quite humbling to stand here amongst our colleagues, 

before Shirley and family, in this place that Ed loved very 

much. 

 

In the funeral for Ed, the point was made in a few different 

ways — the attachment of Ed and of the family to these 

chambers. And there was one story related about the grandkids 

going to visit grandpa over at grandpa’s house — the legislature 

— or the picture with Ed in his chair on the floor here, taking 

his place with his grandkids. And it’s very humbling to be 

participating in this debate. When we all come to this Chamber 

and when we’re brought in as new members, we all of course 

get to sign the roll. And of course there have been many 

tremendous people that have signed that roll over the years, and 

it blows you away to think about the contributions that have 

been made and the calibre of people that have signed that roll. 

And one of the people I thought about when I got to sign the 

roll, you know, in this sort of amazement that you’re getting to 

sign the roll — Tommy Douglas, Walter Scott, Thatcher, and 

Romanow — one of the people I thought about was Ed 

Tchorzewski. 

 

And I got to know Ed as a member of the party’s youth wing, 

and I got to know Ed working together when he was the chief of 

staff to Alexa McDonough. And as has been well stated here, 

there was hardly a job in the party that Ed didn’t do. And it 



March 4, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2141 

wasn’t of course, as was joked about at the funeral, because he 

had trouble holding down a job; it was just because that call 

always came from so many quarters. We’ve got a hard job to 

do. Who better to do it than Ed Tchorzewski? 

 

And of course, you know, chief of staff to the federal NDP — 

that’s a tough gig. But Shirley and Ed packed up and moved out 

to Ottawa, and Ed did that job very well. I still have a picture on 

my wall from a column that Jeffrey Simpson had done in The 

Globe and Mail where . . . It was a story about Ed coming to the 

federal NDP, and it’s got Ed lifting weights because he was 

going to bring some muscle to the cause. And he certainly did 

that. 

 

One of my memories of Ed will always be . . . In opposition of 

course you rarely win motions, and Lorne Nystrom, who I was 

working for at the time, won a private member’s motion. And it 

was a suppertime vote, so I had to run down to the press gallery 

to distribute a release and was heading back to the opposition 

lobby and ran into Ed along the way. And Ed and I walked 

along together and he said, you know, this feels great, doesn’t 

it? And I was so excited that we’d won and he put his arm 

around my shoulder and he said, you know what? This is what 

it’s like in government every day. 

 

[14:45] 

 

And it’s something that I thought about when we’d win votes 

on the government side, and it’s something that I think about 

when we lose votes on the opposition side. And I know that Ed, 

being the happy warrior that he is, was, and shall be in our 

memories, he’ll be there with the legacy of lessons that he 

taught us and the example he set out before us in terms of what 

it takes to not just win power but to exercise power before the 

people. 

 

I just want to say a couple other things about that example, Mr. 

Speaker. I’ve read in other places where there are politicians 

who don’t lose a night’s sleep wrestling with the issues, who 

are able to sort of leave the job here at the legislature or out in 

the community. And certainly Ed had his places of refuge at 

Crystal Lake or in his home that was made so well, with his 

family, but Ed took so much to heart in terms of trying to steer 

through the bad times that you wonder about it, in these politics, 

what a toll it takes on a person to make those tough decisions. 

 

And Ed had a heart so big that you knew that he may have been 

keeping it calm and strong on the outside for the people in 

caucus and the people of the province, but you knew, you knew 

it took a toll. And we owe all the much more to him and to the 

family for that sacrifice in labour for the people of the province. 

 

I want to say that one of the things I will also remember about 

Ed is that he would, in terms of doing, you know . . . There was 

never a job beneath him in the party. There’s a great story from 

Peter Lougheed: if you want to be the person in the front of the 

room, you should be the person at the back helping to clean up 

the chairs at the end. And that was very much Ed’s approach to 

politics. 

 

And you know, there’s a particularly great story from the 

mid-’80s, when the finances weren’t as great in the party, about 

Ed auctioning off his services to go paint Tommy Douglas 

House, and then trundling off on a hot day in the summer and 

painting up Tommy Douglas House, because that’s what the 

party needed Ed to do, and that’s what he did, with a joyful 

spirit and a giving heart. 

 

I’d be remiss if I didn’t say that Ed was very, very proud of his 

heritage. And, you know, to go to the Poltava Pavilion, there 

will be many people that will be looking for him just inside the 

door, you know, making sure that everything runs smooth, 

making sure that everybody is seated and enjoying the good 

times. 

 

And Ed did his Ukrainian heritage proud. He was of a 

generation where, and again our leader has talked about . . . You 

know, Roy Romanow has said many times how glad he was 

that Ed did not stand to challenge him in the mid-’80s. But I 

mean here’s a man who was a deputy premier when not a 

generation before there are many people in this room that know 

the prejudice and the bigotry that would be put towards people 

of Ukrainian descent in Saskatchewan. 

 

So he blazed the trail and moved things forward there, and in so 

many regards we will miss him. He was a great guy and did 

such a wonderful thing for the province, and our hearts break 

with the Tchorzewski family. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

real honour to say a few words about my friend and colleague, 

Ed Tchorzewski. I have several memories of Ed, but I think I’ll 

refer to just a few today. 

 

I was on the party executive in the early 1980s after that defeat 

of the Allan Blakeney government in 1982, and I think it’s fair 

to say that our caucus was reduced to a very small group of 

people that sat on this side of the House. And Ed Tchorzewski 

was not one of those people, but when a by-election came up, I 

believe it was 1985 in the city of Regina, Ed was asked to run in 

that by-election and he did. And for those of us that were 

already candidates for the 1986 election, we went to work in 

that by-election. And it was the coldest by-election that I can 

remember. 

 

And I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, maybe you worked in that 

by-election too. But the one thing I do remember was that the 

Devine government had introduced the tax on used cars and we 

had ourselves a winner on the doorstep, because we were going 

to make sure that we needed to elect one more voice in 

opposition to a tax on used cars, and this was part of our 

campaign. And we went door to door to door to door, talked 

about the tax on used cars, and Ed was overwhelmingly elected 

in that by-election and he came into this House. And I know 

Allan Blakeney was sincerely grateful that we had one more 

caucus member to ask questions in the House and do the work 

of the opposition. Shortly thereafter, I believe, Mr. Devine took 

off that tax on used cars. So that’s one memory. 

 

The second memory I have is coming into this House as a 

newly elected member in 1986 and Eddy T was a member 

who’d been in this place for some time. And I think there were 

16 brand new members that were elected in that 1986 general 



2142 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2009 

election. And I think it’s fair to say that we paid a lot of 

attention to Ed and the work that he did in this Assembly and 

the way he asked questions in the Assembly — and just paid 

attention to him because he was a mentor for many of us. 

 

There were three of us that came into the House in 1986 and we 

were three women members of the caucus. And I don’t think 

the NDP had elected any women since the 1960s. And I can say 

with certainty that Eddy T treated these three women members 

of the legislature with respect. And he always was helpful and 

supportive and he made sure that we had opportunities to hone 

our political skills and ask questions in this Assembly, and for 

that I will always be grateful. 

 

The other memory I have of Ed is the coming into the 

government in 1991 and Premier Romanow had named him 

minister of Finance. And, you know, you have to think about 

this. He’s the minister of Finance. There are 55 members in our 

caucus — 55 MLAs — and we’ve been waiting to get into 

government for some time. We’ve been waiting for nine years. 

And we had all kinds of ideas and all kinds of programs and all 

kinds of things that we wanted to get done. And we were 

greeted with this tremendous fiscal mess, so to speak, and debt 

that was in the stratosphere, and I think it’s fair to say that Ed 

Tchorzewski as the minister of Finance had a huge sell job to 

do, not only with the public in terms of getting our fiscal house 

in order but also with those 55 members of the legislature. And 

he was respectful and very, I guess, earnest in some ways, but 

also he was a teacher in terms of making sure that we 

understood what we had to do in order to get our province’s 

finances put back together again. 

 

Now in those days, we had to go back to our constituencies and 

talk to our constituents about what was happening in the 

legislature, and we had to give a report to our constituents. And 

this was a time when we had reduced spending significantly, 

programs had been changed, reduced, deleted, and so on and so 

forth. And Eddy T was there at all times making sure that we 

had the information, supporting us, assisting us in any way he 

could to ensure that we could explain to our constituents why 

we were implementing the program changes we were in order to 

get our financial house in order. 

 

And I think it’s fair to say that there were many, many, many 

debates in our caucus about some of the things that we had to 

do, and he was patient and wise and careful and prudent, and 

for that I will always be grateful. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are some that will say that it was others that 

got our financial house in order, but for those of us that were 

there in 1991, we know. And the person that did the legwork, 

who did the heavy lifting, was Ed Tchorzewski. And I hope the 

history books will show that someday — that it was Ed 

Tchorzewski that helped put this province back on the right 

track. 

 

And I think he paid a price for that. In fact I know he did 

because shortly thereafter he asked to be relieved of his duties 

as the Finance minister. He went on to other portfolios, and then 

he made the eventual decision to leave politics. And when he 

made that decision to leave the cabinet, he and I became 

seatmates. And when the House wasn’t sitting, he went back to 

his first love and that first love was teaching. And I think it was 

St. Angela’s or St. Theresa’s — I can’t remember the school — 

elementary school, but he was back in the classroom and he 

absolutely loved it because Ed of course always was a teacher. 

And as a former teacher myself, I always appreciated the fact 

that when issues around teaching and education came up in 

caucus, in cabinet, he was always extremely supportive of those 

people in the teaching profession. 

 

One of my last memories of Ed was about a little over, I guess, 

maybe a year and a half ago. He had come to see the Leader of 

the Opposition. Clay Serby, another former deputy premier, was 

there. All of us had bad backs that day, and we somehow ended 

up in my office and we decided that we were just totally 

hopeless; that now that we were no longer in government that 

obviously all the stress was leaving our various portions of our 

bodies and we were all bent over and feeling, I guess, getting 

rid of all of that stress. And the Opposition Leader came down 

the hallway wondering what all of this laughter was emanating 

from my office. Well it was Ed Tchorzewski, Pat Atkinson, and 

Clay Serby having a very, very good laugh. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other memory I have of Ed is going to his 

house, and his lawn was absolutely perfect. I think he alternated 

between moving the mower one way and then maybe moving 

the mower diagonally, but he had the best looking grass on his 

street. And we used to tease him about his perfectionism when 

it came to his yard. He had a beautiful yard. I don’t know if he 

was totally responsible for it, Shirley, but when it came to 

talking to us it seemed as though he was, and he was truly an 

impressive gardener. 

 

And my final, final memory of Ed is Ed talking about his 

grandkids. And he made an effort with all of his little grandkids 

to have a picture taken in this Assembly with them. And even 

when he was very sick, he had another grandchild that needed 

to have a picture taken in this Assembly, and he came here and 

had that picture taken. And I know as, you know, a much older 

grandchild now, I have my pictures of myself and my 

grandparents and they are something I treasure, and I know that 

Ed’s grandchildren will treasure those pictures forever. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank you for allowing me 

to participate in this recognition of Ed Tchorzewski — a good 

friend, a faithful colleague, and a favourite son of our province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

[15:00] 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My remarks won’t be 

that long, Mr. Speaker, but I wanted to take the opportunity to 

stand and express a few thoughts and join with my colleagues in 

expressing my condolences to the Tchorzewski family. 

 

Ed will certainly be remembered as someone who served his 

fellow citizens with honour and integrity. On a personal note, 

Ed was the individual who moved the motion of condolence for 

my grandfather, Hans Broten, and I would like his family to 

know how much my family appreciated him doing so and for 

the kind words that he expressed at that time. I believe between 

1975 and 1982, Ed represented much of the same area 

geographically that my grandfather did. 



March 4, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2143 

Though I did not know Ed well on a personal level, his example 

of public service and a work ethic that was second to none 

serves an example for all members of this Assembly. As a 

relatively new member of the Assembly, it’s certainly an 

example that I would seek to emulate and model my own 

behaviour after. 

 

In closing I would like express my heartfelt sympathy to the 

Tchorzewski family and thank them for the role they have 

played and will continue to play in the affairs of our province. 

We all know politics is a family affair, and our province owes a 

great amount of thanks to the Tchorzewski family. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, it’s an honour today 

to speak on behalf of my colleagues in caucus and our 

government about the accomplished life of a dedicated public 

servant and to offer our condolences to his family, his friends, 

and his former colleagues. 

 

Ed Tchorzewski spent his life serving Saskatchewan people — 

first as a teacher, then as an elected member of this legislature. 

It is this life of service to others that we are recognizing today. 

 

Despite our ideological differences, I can readily attest to how 

much Ed sacrificed for the province he loved. No one who 

served with Ed in these chambers could dispute his prolific 

work ethic and dedication to the job. Ed clearly agonized over 

tough fiscal decisions that he needed to make as the Finance 

minister — agonized over both internal and external conflicts 

arising from those discussions. Ed’s agonizing over his 

responsibility is evidence that he took the burden of public 

service very seriously. 

 

Ed Tchorzewski’s story is a classic Saskatchewan tale. Born of 

a Polish Saskatchewan family, raised in a three bedroom house 

with no electricity, and having spent his formative years on the 

family’s Hudson Bay area farm, Ed’s meagre beginnings, his 

family’s life on the land, and the pioneering spirit of the 

fledgling Hudson Bay area farmers he grew up around would 

have been familiar to any Saskatchewan homesteader. 

 

Ed’s rural, small-town background no doubt informed his 

political sensibility. Ed’s first speech in the legislature 

demonstrated how passionately he identified with the struggle 

of Saskatchewan’s farmers. There is no doubt this passion was a 

source of most of Ed’s angst over decisions made regarding 

rural Saskatchewan in the early 1990s, but he complemented 

this with a toughness even his opponents could not deny. Ed 

overcame his humble beginnings and received a bachelor’s 

degree in political science and earned a teaching certificate at 

the University of Saskatchewan in the 1960s. 

 

Ed’s career trajectory was off to a fast track after that. After his 

brief career as a teacher, he was elected to the legislature in 

1971 and was quickly appointed to cabinet by then Premier 

Allan Blakeney. With intellect, initiative, and hard work, Ed 

overcame the obstacles before him, turning the strong work 

ethic he learned around the farmers in Hudson Bay into a long 

political career serving the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Ed’s particular calling was politics, but his story is 

quintessential Saskatchewan — a success story born of hard 

work and sacrifice, much like this province. And while Ed and I 

may not have agreed on much politically, he clearly had a knack 

with people that served him well at the ballot box. He got 

elected time and again because people could relate to his story 

and because of the small-town sensibilities he gained growing 

up in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

This was a valuable political skill set that made Ed a formidable 

opponent both inside this Chamber and on the doorsteps at 

campaign time. In his initial 1972 speech to the legislature, Ed 

made mention of how simple, small things like hockey can knit 

a community together. In a reference that is timely now as it 

was then, he lauded his constituents in Humboldt for rallying 

around their hockey team. As he said in 1972, and I quote, 

“Humboldt is one of the rare towns of its size that can boast a 

junior A hockey team.” As a Humboldt Bronco fan, Ed would 

no doubt be clicking furiously to make Humboldt Canada’s 

Hockeyville this year. 

 

Other than former Premier Roy Romanow, Ed was the central 

figure on the NDP side in my early days as an opposition 

politician. And some people may disagree with me on that 

because they were sitting there at the time. I know that we tried 

to give him a rough ride at times, as rough a ride as a 

10-member opposition could do. And it won’t surprise members 

opposite that even as a rookie MLA, I hounded Ed from my seat 

as much as I could. But even as we disagreed with some of his 

decisions, our caucus at all times had a grudging respect for his 

sometimes surprisingly candid nature. 

 

This was an admirable but not always politically expedient 

quality. To this day, I still carry a copy of Hansard from July 

30, 1992, in which Ed admitted that Saskatchewan had 

significant debt way back before 1982 election, debt that he was 

still dealing with as the Finance minister in 1992. I carried it 

because I recognized the power of a quotation from a man of his 

calibre. 

 

In the 1990s, both sides of the House fought over the tough 

fiscal decisions that needed to be made. But Ed also faced the 

additional burden of quelling concerns in his own ranks. For 

those of us around at the time, it was no small secret that this 

battle took quite a personal toll on Ed. I bring this up only 

because it speaks to the more admirable side of Ed’s character. 

He took the decisions personally because he cared. Whether you 

agreed with his ideology, there’s no doubt he fretted over 

decisions because of his desire to have a positive impact on this 

province. 

 

Perhaps the most compelling evidence of Ed’s character came 

late in his career. We politicians are often accused of lingering 

in this career strictly for reasons of vanity. Ed left cabinet and 

later left the legislature altogether. His frank admission that he 

had not spent enough time with family, that he had regrets 

about being at the office too much, was a refreshing reminder 

that the rewards of politics are not always enough. 

 

Ed made the humble decision to rebalance his life, to put his 

responsibilities to his family first instead of stubbornly clinging 

to power. Furthermore Ed opted to end his career with a return 

to serving this province at the grassroots level. Despite a long 



2144 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2009 

absence from teaching, Ed returned to his original calling — 

taking a job at St. Theresa elementary here in Regina. No matter 

what political stripe you were, you have to admire that Ed chose 

to serve the people of this province in whatever capacity he 

could. For that we owe him a debt of gratitude. 

 

On behalf of our caucus and our government, I’d like to thank 

the Speaker for allowing me this time to honour the life of a 

distinguished member of this legislature, Ed Tchorzewski. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I would ask leave of members to make a few 

comments in regard to Mr. Tchorzewski’s life. Thank you, 

members. I guess of the members from that ’86 period, I’m 

probably one of the few members left that would remember Mr. 

Tchorzewski a bit. And when I first came to sit in this 

Legislative Chamber, I remember he sat exactly where I believe 

the member from Regina Douglas Park sits today. 

 

He was a critic at the time. And one thing I remember about Mr. 

Tchorzewski was budget day. I’m not sure if we quite achieved 

of what . . . the things that Mr. Tchorzewski could achieve. In 

fact I often thought that he took great pride in responding to the 

budget debate. And sometimes I thought his responses were 

exceptionally long. I’m not sure if it was because of his passion 

to speak or if it was his attempt to rally the guests who were 

members of the opposition or if it was his attempt to demoralize 

the guests that were members there as the government side. But 

I know Mr. Tchorzewski took great pride in speaking on the 

floor of this Chamber. He certainly had a competitive nature. 

 

As has been mentioned by many of the members who have 

spoken this afternoon, members of all parties, when you put 

your name forward and are elected, you sacrifice a lot. Oh and I 

understand that Mr. Tchorzewski, elected in 1971 . . . One thing 

I never really got the opportunity to do was to sit down and find 

out how young his family was at that time and how many may 

have been added to thereafter. 

 

But I do know when I was elected at that time in 1986, my 

daughter was two. My boys were six and eight. And for many 

members, you think back to those times and you think of the 

periods in your life as a politician where, when your family 

being that young, and you miss a lot of things. 

 

But I would like to say to Shirley, thank you. As spouses we fail 

to say thank you to our spouses long enough, and I know if it 

wasn’t for the support of my wife, I wouldn’t be as proud a 

father as I am today or a grandparent as I am today. Our 

spouses certainly contribute and contribute. Each and every one 

of us, I am sure, would acknowledge the work of our spouses, 

and we can say thank you to them. So I would say thank you to 

Shirley and her family for sharing your husband, your father, 

with the people of Saskatchewan as a member of this 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

At this time I want to say thank you to the Deputy Premier, the 

Leader of Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition, and all the members 

who have participated in the debate, and I bring forward the 

motion by the Deputy Premier: 

 

That this Assembly, in recording its deepest sense of loss 

and bereavement, expresses its most sincere sympathy to 

members of the bereaved family. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. Thank you. I recognize the Deputy 

Premier. 

 

Josef Saxinger 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

on behalf of the government I would like to honour the next 

former member of the Legislative Assembly. And I move the 

following motion: 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly, and 

expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 

made to his community, his constituency, and the 

province. 

 

Josef Saxinger, who passed away on July 3, 2008, was a 

member of the Legislative Assembly from 1986 until 

1991. He represented the constituency of Kinistino for the 

Progressive Conservative Party. Mr. Saxinger was born on 

February 2, 1930, in Niederbrunst, Germany. He attended 

local schools in Haag and Passau and trained as a tool and 

dye maker. Mr. Saxinger immigrated to Canada on July 

11, 1954, and settled near relatives in the Cudworth 

district. In 1956 he married Eleonore Lobl and they had 

five children. Much later in life he married Delphine 

Nielsen in 2006. 

 

Mr. Saxinger spent the majority of his professional career 

in the agricultural field. He operated Saxinger Motors 

from the early 1960s until 1982. In 1992 he opened 

Saxinger Farm Parts and Implements in Cudworth. Later 

Mr. Saxinger joined a partnership that established the 

Sagehill Buffalo Ranch on the former Dana radar base. 

 

Mr. Saxinger’s dedication to his fellow citizens was 

evident in his lengthy and diverse public service. His 

tenure as Cudworth fire chief extended over two decades. 

Mr. Saxinger was a charter member of the Cudworth 

Lions Club and served as district 5CN governor in 1982. 

He was instrumental in establishing the Lions Eye Bank of 

Saskatchewan and the Cudworth municipal airstrip. 

 

Mr. Saxinger’s involvement with politics began at the 

local level, as a member of the Cudworth Town Council. 

He was elected to this Assembly in 1986 and served as the 

legislative assistant to the Minister of Trade and Industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in recording its own deep sense of loss and 

bereavement, this Assembly expresses its most sincere 

sympathy with members of the bereaved family. 

 

I so move. 

 

[15:15] 

 

The Speaker: — The Deputy Premier has moved the motion of 



March 4, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2145 

condolences to the Saxinger family. Is the Assembly ready for 

the question? I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s Loyal 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to bring a few 

remarks to this condolence motion to the Saxinger family on 

behalf of the official opposition. The numbers of us who 

occupied this Chamber with Joe are becoming fewer and fewer, 

but there are those of us here who do remember Joe Saxinger. 

 

We came, many of us, as newly elected MLAs at the same time; 

some of us on this side, and Joe and others of course on the 

government side at that time, in 1986. And I sense there is a 

bond that occurs between members when they are first elected. 

It doesn’t matter if we’re sitting on one side of the House or the 

other, there is a certain bond between the newly elected, which I 

predict, Mr. Speaker, 20 years hence, members who were 

recently elected in the election most recent will recognize. 

There was a bond established, and that doesn’t change. And so 

while those of us who sat with Joe, with Joe Saxinger, did not 

sit as political colleagues, we did sit as colleagues, and I’m sure 

we have memories. 

 

One of my clearest memories of Joe, and I think it would be 

shared by others, was the warmth of that German accent when 

he spoke in this legislature. Now I might not have liked what he 

was saying, but it sure sounded good. And I’m not sure that 

since the time of Joe that we’ve had someone with that, with 

that depth of the German accent and the warmth that he 

brought. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, he had something to say and he said it here. 

He said it on behalf of his constituents. He brought to this 

House the talents that he obviously, obviously had in terms of 

the small-business world. And he brought to this House the 

same kind of passion that I think the people of Cudworth 

particularly — and the Kinistino constituency generally, but 

Cudworth particularly — he brought to this House the kind of 

skill and talent and passion that they saw in the man they 

elected. 

 

I had an opportunity at one time to serve in the United Church 

in Wakaw, and in that experience came to know people of that 

constituency, even some from Cudworth. And over my time in 

public life — either as an MLA, a minister, and as premier — 

had opportunity to visit Cudworth. 

 

And I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that 

constituencies tend to elect people who reflect the kind of 

people they are. And the people of that constituency — Wakaw, 

Cudworth, that area — they’re hard-working; they’re 

hard-working, determined people. And Joe, I recognized 

immediately in meeting him here, was one of those — 

hard-working, determined, but ever hospitable and ever 

believing in community. 

 

And we hear from Joe’s description of the work he’s done for 

the Lions Club and the work he did in Cudworth, how he did 

believe in that community. He served his community well. He 

served this legislature well. And though some of us may have 

not shared the political views, we shared a bond. 

 

And today, on behalf of those who sat with Joe at that time and 

on behalf of all of the current members of the opposition, we’d 

want to extend our condolence along with this motion to Joe’s 

family and friends in Cudworth. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Members, I would ask for leave . . . Oh 

pardon me. I recognize the member from Batoche. 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to thank 

the members of this Assembly for the honour and the privilege 

of speaking on the condolence motion for Mr. Josef Saxinger. I 

will be referring to him as Joe because that’s the name I knew 

him by. 

 

I first met Joe when he was the Case dealer in Cudworth. Now 

Cudworth is a town of under 500, and it was from this base that 

Joe built a huge dealership. It was the top 10 Case dealerships 

in all of North America 16 years in a row, and three of them as 

number one. This is from a town of Cudworth. With no 

technology like today — computers, fax machines, and 

cellphones — Joe ran his dealership. And with Joe in his 

airplane and if he had to, he flew the parts to where they were. 

And he was known throughout the country as Mr. Case. That’s 

the kind of man Joe was. 

 

When he took on a job, he didn’t just do the job — he excelled 

at it. Joe was a man of vision and a man of passion. Whatever 

he tackled, he gave it his all — whether it was Case dealerships 

or the Lions Club. He was a founding member of the Cudworth 

club and once again therein he found a mission, and that was 

the Lions Eye Bank of Saskatchewan. 

 

Joe was also passionate about his politics. In 1986 Joe decided 

that he could do some good in Regina, so he became the 

candidate and won the election for the constituency of Kinistino 

and served under Grant Devine from 1986 to 1992. Joe was 

very proud of his years of service for the people of his 

constituency and once again put his entire being into the job. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Joe and his family have been friends to me. His 

daughter, Barb, was a close friend and very instrumental in my 

nomination run. Unfortunately we lost her to cancer this winter. 

Joe was a big supporter of mine from day one, but most of all, 

he was my mentor. Joe was always available to me and never 

pushed his view. He would just offer his opinion. For his 

friendship, his advice, and wisdom, I will be forever grateful. 

 

Joe was born in Germany and he never forgot his heritage. And 

Cudworth Oktoberfest won’t be the same without Joe in his 

lederhosen and Bavarian hat. He was quite a sight. 

 

Joe was one of those unique individuals who stood out in a 

crowd. At a little over 5 feet, he stood very, very tall for his 

family, his community, and his province. Joe believed in living 

life, not just standing there and watching life go by. 

 

Thank you, Joe, and thank you to his family for sharing him 

with us. The legacy he leaves for us here in Regina is one of 

honesty, integrity, and work ethics second to none. The legacy 

he leaves for his family is one of pride and accomplishment and 

integrity, but above all, love — the love of his family, the love 

of his church and community and his province. Thank you. 



2146 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2009 

The Speaker: — I would ask leave of members to make a few 

comments in regards to Mr. Saxinger’s acknowledgement. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I was one of the members that was elected at 

the same time Mr. Saxinger was elected, and as the Leader of 

Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition has already indicated, a 

number of new members arrived on the scene in 1986. 

 

One thing I remember about Mr. Saxinger, as has already been 

mentioned by the member from Batoche, was a very shrewd 

businessman. And he was a man, as was referred to, of action. 

 

And the one thing I remember very distinctly. He found this 

place, I mean not quite exactly what he had anticipated. In fact 

he found it somewhat dull, and he found it moved very slowly. 

He had anticipated that he would arrive on the scene and that he 

would be able to do things for his constituents and they would 

happen now. Not tomorrow or a year from now — now. And so 

in some of those ways, Mr. Saxinger did find it a little 

frustrating. 

 

And it was actually, I believe, the premier of the day found it 

somewhat difficult —and for the Whips, you would understand 

some of the frustrations — trying to keep him in his seat or 

even around the city if he had things to do. But that was, that 

was Joe. 

 

He came to this Assembly on a mission and he was going to do 

it and if it wasn’t getting done, he’d get out and he’d do it. But I 

really appreciated him. As the Leader of the Opposition said, 

his German accent was certainly intriguing to listen to as he 

expressed his views on political issues. 

 

There’s very interesting stories when you talk about Joe, and 

one of them was his passion for flying. And I think the premier 

of the day is certainly appreciative of the fact that on numerous 

occasions, he’d have a small twin-engine plane and he’d have it 

full of MLAs. And I think the premier was just praying that that 

plane wouldn’t go down somewhere because his caucus would 

be cut almost in half with the number of MLAs he’d carry 

around. But Joe just enjoyed flying. 

 

Another comment. I’d come back on a Monday and ask Joe, 

what did you do on the weekend? Well he got in the plane and 

he was flying around northern Saskatchewan. He liked 

witching. And he was trying to see what was available up there, 

and he kept coming back and saying, you know, there’s 

diamonds up there. There’s minerals up there. And he was truly 

an interesting individual. 

 

But I would also say that he was certainly a family man. He 

truly enjoyed his family, was very proud of his family. 

 

And one other thing I’d like to say in regards to Mr. Saxinger, 

when you talk about his business ethics and making sure he 

provided and looked after his constituents and his customers. 

Shortly before his death, as was mentioned, he was running this 

bison ranch and he would process bison. He would pick up, and 

he had customers that would order and he would actually 

personally deliver. 

 

And it was about a week or so before he had gone to deliver 

some bison to be processed, picked up the previously processed 

meat, arrived back in order to . . . and changed into his suit to 

go to a graduation ceremony and, on the way, delivered the 

bison that had been ordered by a customer. He got the job done. 

He just did it. He got it done on the way. 

 

And so, we find from Mr. Saxinger an example of someone 

who had a real passion for this province and this country that he 

came to, that he called home. He certainly contributed to this 

province and I want to extend to his family my sympathies as 

well, joining with the Deputy Premier and the members of this 

Assembly in extending our condolences to the Saxinger family. 

 

At this time, I present the motion by the Deputy Premier: 

 

That this Assembly in recording its own deep sense of loss 

and bereavement expresses its most sincere sympathy with 

members of the bereaved family. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Deputy 

Premier. 

 

Lorne Aubrey McLaren 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

again would like to move the following motion with regards to 

one of our former members: 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly and 

expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 

made to his community, his constituency, and the 

province. 

 

Lorne Aubrey McLaren, who passed away on January 4, 

2009, represented the constituency of Yorkton as a 

member of the Legislative Assembly from 1982 until 

1991. 

 

Mr. McLaren was born in Saltcoats on August 17, 1928, 

and was raised on the family farm. He worked for 30 years 

in farm implement manufacturing, eventually becoming 

president of the Morris Rod Weeder Company in Yorkton. 

 

Moving into the political scene, Mr. McLaren was first 

elected in 1982 and became the new Progressive 

Conservative government’s minister of Labour. After 

re-election in 1986, he was named government caucus 

Chair. He held this last position until his retirement from 

politics in 1991. 

 

Mr. McLaren is remembered by his colleagues as a hard 

working man, committed to his constituents. He is also 

credited with helping to build a strong agricultural 

industry in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. McLaren is survived by his wife Barbara, four 

children, and numerous stepchildren, grandchildren and 



March 4, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2147 

great-grandchildren. 

 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 

this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 

members of the bereaved family. 

 

I so move. 

 

[15:30] 

 

The Speaker: — The Deputy Premier has moved: 

 

That this Assembly express its most sincere sympathy 

with members of the Lorne McLaren family. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, if I may, just a word or two in 

the debate, the condolence motion for Lorne McLaren. 

 

Lorne McLaren, to many of us, the name Lorne McLaren, the 

person of Lorne McLaren is virtually a name and a person 

synonymous with Yorkton. For many years when we thought 

about Yorkton, we would think about Lorne McLaren, and 

when we heard the name or thought about Lorne, we thought 

about Yorkton. 

 

And equally over time his name was synonymous almost with 

the Morris Rod Weeder Company, that very, very successful 

implement manufacturer in Yorkton in our province. Again 

when we thought about Lorne McLaren, we thought about 

Morris Rod Weeder. 

 

He came to this Assembly, as the Deputy Minister’s indicated, 

in 1982, in that large majority government. He brought with 

him the expertise, his managerial expertise, honed over many 

years in the Morris Rod Weeder. And when I think of positions 

that we are often called upon to occupy within government or 

within the legislature, within the political process, and think 

about Lorne McLaren, he was handed, I would argue, two of 

the most difficult assignments, in government particularly. 

 

In that first term he was handed the assignment of minister of 

Labour. And I’m not sure if it’s harder being a minister of 

Labour in a left-of-centre government or harder being a minister 

of Labour from a right-of-centre government, but it’s a tough 

assignment. And those of us who used to challenge Lorne as 

minister of Labour also recognized that he earned a certain 

respect in the trade union movement, in the labour movement. 

While there were some deep disagreements, there was a certain 

civility that Lorne McLaren brought to that work, a civility that 

was respected. 

 

And of course not having been part of that group, I can 

recognize that when Lorne was asked or was chosen to serve as 

the caucus Chair, my experience around government tells me 

that to serve as a caucus Chair in any caucus, and particularly in 

the government caucus, is not easy work. It is challenging work 

and there are some in the room who I think, having filled that 

role, would testify to the fact that as caucus Chair there is a 

certain diplomacy. There is a certain respect that needs to be 

earned by all members in that caucus. And my hunch is that 

Lorne had the respect of his caucus colleagues in what can be, 

Mr. Speaker, a very difficult role. 

 

I have come to conclude, Mr. Speaker, and I say this with the 

member of Yorkton in our company, that somehow you can 

take a member out of Yorkton but you can never take Yorkton 

out of the member. I watched Mr. McLaren and if there was 

ever a passionate advocate for Yorkton, it was Lorne McLaren. 

 

And I was served and call a good friend, Mr. Clay Serby, who 

served as my deputy premier — again I met nothing but a 

passionate advocate for Yorkton. And then I watched in the 

most recent election campaign how our candidate and the 

successful new member from Yorkton, both passionate 

advocates for the city and the community and the people of 

Yorkton . . . Lorne McLaren was that. He was a passionate 

spokesperson, a passionate advocate, a passionate worker on 

behalf of his city, his community, and his people. 

 

So it is with respect that we remember Lorne McLaren’s 

contribution to the political process, to this legislature, to public 

life and debate, and on behalf of my colleagues in opposition — 

some of whom again have sat with Mr. McLaren, others of 

whom have not — to extend our deep condolences to the 

McLaren family and to the friends and neighbours of Yorkton. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I’d like to 

thank the member of the opposition, the Leader of the 

Opposition, for those kind comments about the constituency of 

Yorkton, all of which are very true. 

 

I wish too to rise today and take this opportunity to convey 

condolences to the Lorne McLaren family on behalf of my 

family and the constituency of Yorkton. 

 

Mr. McLaren, who passed away on January 4, 2009 in Regina 

at the age of 80, was a long-term resident of Yorkton and area 

and very well known. Being born near Saltcoats and working in 

the farming and agriculture industry for most of his career, 

including his 30 years with Morris Rod Weeder, was well 

known with this well-known and worldwide company, and 

made him very well known in the area. His involvement with 

Morris Industries saw him rise to company president in ’79 and 

for a time he did serve as the Chair of the Prairie Implement 

Manufacturers Association. 

 

Because of Mr. McLaren’s interest in politics, he ran 

provincially for the Progressive Conservative Party and won the 

Yorkton constituency in 1982, where he served for nine years 

until his retirement. 

 

Although I never knew Mr. McLaren personally, I do know 

members of his family well, and I again extend my prayers and 

condolences to them. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 



2148 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2009 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to add my 

words of condolences to the Lorne McLaren family. 

 

In my previous career as a lawyer, I remember quite well the 

1982 election and the new names that showed up around the 

legislature, and one of the names that showed up in that election 

was Lorne McLaren from Yorkton. And this was a person of 

good stature and he was a known commodity and somebody 

who I know that we, in my office, were quite pleased was 

coming forward from Yorkton to be part of the new 

government. 

 

And I know that in those years in my professional capacity, 

there were a number of times when I had a chance to meet him 

or work with him and was always impressed by his leadership 

at his company, Morris Rod Weeder, from before, but also as he 

stepped into some of the very difficult roles as our leader has 

outlined today. Because when you are asked to step forward and 

are newly elected and then given a very tough job, we all know 

that it’s a very steep learning curve and you really need to take 

the people who have skills from many places. I think that Mr. 

McLaren showed that and that he served the people of the 

province well in the jobs that he was given. 

 

And to his family and children and grandchildren, we need to 

say thank you for the good work that he did for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — Members, I would ask leave to make a few 

comments in regards to Mr. McLaren. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Thank you, members. I would just like to also 

add my few comments to the remembrances and condolences. 

When I first met Mr. McLaren it was at a Conservative 

convention prior to him even getting involved in politics. And I 

remember sitting down with Mr. McLaren as president of 

Morris Rod Weeder and talking about the province and talking 

about where they were as a company and talking about the 

challenges when you’re in leadership in a company and 

working with the men and women and working on the floor. 

And I got a sense that Mr. McLaren certainly had a passion for 

his employees, for his company, and was doing very well. 

 

When Mr. McLaren ran and won, it was a period when I wasn’t 

as involved. But afterwards I learned that Mr. McLaren really 

didn’t desire to get involved in politics. He was quite happy to 

be president of Morris Rod Weeder. In fact in the Saltcoats 

history book, he says a little bit about this. It wasn’t his 

intention nor his desire. He felt there were other people that 

were more qualified, but as has already been indicated, there 

was a lot of respect in the community for what he represented, 

what he stood for. And then he decided that with the pressure 

that he would seek nomination. And lo and behold, he was 

elected. 

 

Next thing you knew, he was on the floor of the Assembly. And 

one of the things that I understand, and I know from Mr. 

McLaren, while he enjoyed representing the constituency, he 

found it very difficult to speak on the floor — that wasn’t really 

his forte. His forte was to sit around a coffee table and enjoy a 

cup of coffee, rather than the real debate on the floor. But he 

still had a heart for his constituents. 

 

In his biography that he placed in the Saltcoats history book, he 

also acknowledges that the darkest days of his life were the late 

’80s and the fact that, at that period of time as Chair of the 

Conservative caucus, he failed to adequately manage the 

caucus, and as a result he paid a very serious price for it. And 

Mr. McLaren acknowledged that, although there was a sense as 

well that probably was more placed on his shoulders than he 

was actually responsible for. But he acknowledged that. And 

that’s in the history books as well. 

 

As we heard earlier today, being in public life isn’t easy and 

you sacrifice a lot. So I would also like to express my 

appreciation for the work that Mr. McLaren did. 

 

And having kept in touch with him on numerous occasions over 

the past few years, he wasn’t someone just to sit back and feel 

sorry for himself. He got involved in business again. 

 

And then he really enjoyed, what he really enjoyed, the passion 

of his life was his family and his grandchildren. That’s why I 

wanted to extend on my behalf to Barb and her family and all of 

the family, my deepest sympathy on the passing of Lorne 

Aubrey McLaren. 

 

The question before the Assembly is the motion by the Deputy 

Premier: 

 

That this Assembly in recording its own deep loss, sense 

of loss and bereavement express its most sincere sympathy 

with members of the bereaved family. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Minister of 

Justice. 

 

Donald Murray Brown 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in the House today to 

request leave to move: 

 

That the Assembly offer condolences on the passing of 

one of our Provincial Court judges and express sympathy 

to the family of Judge Donald Murray Brown. 

 

I understand that in the past the House has not previously heard 

condolences for judges, Mr. Speaker, but I believe that we 

should recognize their services and it is a precedent that I would 

be pleased to set. 

 

The Speaker: — I thank the member. I would like to also 

acknowledge the Deputy Premier has already requested leave 

for all condolence motions, so we’ll move forward. Minister of 

Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For over 30 

years Murray Brown served the people of Saskatchewan, first 

with the Ministry of Justice and Attorney General, and then 

later on as a judge of the Provincial Court. 



March 4, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2149 

During my time as opposition Justice critic, he was one of the 

officials that frequently appeared for estimates or second 

reading of Bills during committee, and was one of the 

individuals that you could count on to be fair, competent, 

courteous, and professional. I would like to express 

condolences to his family on behalf of the Government of 

Saskatchewan and, on a personal note, to convey my respect for 

his dedication and commitment throughout his career. 

 

Judge Brown was born and raised in Melville, Saskatchewan. 

He continued his education at the University of Saskatchewan, 

obtaining an honours degree in psychology in 1972 and a law 

degree three years later. He became a Crown prosecutor upon 

graduation, rising to the director of appeals in 1988 and director 

of public prosecutions in 2001. As director, he played a crucial 

role in the development of our domestic violence courts and 

northern cultural courts. He was involved in legal education, 

teaching at the Saskatchewan Police College, speaking to 

prosecutors across Canada, and as a mentor to many in the legal 

community. 

 

Murray Brown was appointed to the Provincial Court in 

October 2007. It is a tragedy that his career on the bench was 

cut short by illness. I had the privilege of attending Judge 

Brown’s funeral in Melville last month, an event that included 

many senior judges, members of the legal community, and 

Judge Brown’s wide circle of friends and family. He will be 

truly missed by all who knew him. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to move: 

 

That the Assembly offer condolences and to extend 

expressions of sympathy to the family of Judge Brown. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved that we 

extend condolences to the family of Judge Murray Brown. Is 

the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a sad thing to 

rise today to speak to this matter, to this motion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Judge Brown, Murray Brown, dedicated his life to public 

service and to the law. I didn’t meet him until 2004. I’d become 

minister of Justice and was usually briefed by deputy minister, 

assistant or associate deputy ministers. But on matters of 

criminal prosecution — those rare ones that get to a minister’s 

office, those most sensitive ones, Mr. Speaker — I would be 

briefed by the director of public prosecutions. And that’s how I 

became familiar with Murray Brown. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Judge Brown — Mr. Brown when I first knew him — cared 

about three things more than anything else. He cared about the 

law; he cared about justice which we hope is usually the same 

thing; and he cared very much about the truth, and he had very 

high standards. He had very high standards for himself, and he 

expected a great deal of people around him, and more so of 

people entrusted with responsibility. And so he had very high 

expectations, in particular, for members of the judiciary. 

Sometimes he was disappointed and sometimes people did not 

meet those expectations. 

 

And I learned quickly about Murray, that he had a sense of 

humour which I had some sympathy with. It protected him a 

little bit from the failings of his fellow human beings. And 

sometimes he would make a comment about a court’s decision 

— usually a court’s decision. And I for a second would think, 

Murray doesn’t really think that, and of course he didn’t. But he 

would make these comments, these humorous comments, with a 

very dry wit and with a very deadpanned face, and we were 

usually discussing fairly serious matters. So it was always a 

pleasure when Murray’s wit, as dry and pointed and sharp as it 

could be, broke into the conversation. 

 

I suppose, Mr. Speaker, I was always fortunate that I didn’t 

report to Murray Brown, that Murray Brown reported to me. 

But I developed a very strong appreciation, over time, of his 

qualities, of his integrity, of his honesty, and of his high 

standards. 

 

I often said at the swearing-in of a Provincial Court judge — I 

don’t know if I said it at Murray’s — that in my view the 

Provincial Court is the most important court. It may be the 

lowest court, and it’s not the court decisions which are cited by 

academics when they’re explaining which way the law is going. 

No one takes much notice of the Provincial Court in academic 

circles. For a matter to become of importance, he has to go 

through a couple of appellate courts before it is noted and 

considered to be indicative of how the courts are deciding 

matters. 

 

But the reason I believe the Provincial Court is the most 

important court is this is the court that deals with 90 per cent 

criminal cases. It deals with all the small claims cases, Mr. 

Speaker. So it deals with most accused, most victims, most 

unrepresented litigates. That is the court where people who 

cannot afford arbitrariness — an arbitrary decision, a negligent 

mistake, people who can least afford that — who although they 

may have a legal right to appeal, often have no resources for an 

effective appeal. That’s the court that those people go to. That’s 

the face of the justice system, and for many of them, that’s the 

only court that they see. 

 

And the Supreme Court and our Court of Appeal can make all 

kinds of pronouncements about our rights and our freedoms and 

the principle of legality and the rule of law. But if the Provincial 

Court doesn’t put those into effect — when people who often 

don’t get a second chance in life and can’t afford their first 

chance to be ill-used — if those pronouncements aren’t put in 

place by the Provincial Court, then they are of little effect in the 

lives of many, many common people. 

 

Murray Brown, I think, understood that. He was a prosecutor in 

that court, and he directed public prosecutions in that court. 

And he became director of public prosecutions after a very 

rocky history — legal history — in this province. When he took 

over in 2001, he, I believe, did much to raise the standard for 

public prosecutions for the administration of justice in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I was extremely pleased when Murray Brown accepted our 

request to become a Provincial Court judge. I believe he would 



2150 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2009 

have been a very interesting Provincial Court judge. I believe he 

was. I believe he would have been influential despite sitting on 

the Provincial Court to an extent that some higher court judges 

or superior court judges are not. He would have provided great 

service. I know he did provide great service from the date of his 

appointment to the date of his incapacity. I only wish that he 

could have served so much longer. His early death, his 

premature death, and his departure from service to the law and 

service to the people of Saskatchewan is a tragedy, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I personally will miss him greatly. And I wish that I could still 

receive on occasion his dry but very insightful comment upon 

the working of our justice system and the actors within it. I was 

shocked that his potential on that court could not carry on 

longer. We are the poorer for it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to participate in 

comments about Judge Murray Brown with my own 

non-political experience. When I attended police college, 18, 19 

years ago, Murray Brown was our criminal law instructor, and 

it was quite a thing to see. You have 20 bright-eyed, 

bushy-tailed young officers in the making, and when he walked 

in the room, nobody even breathed a word. He taught us to love 

the law, to understand it and apply it in an even-mannered, fair 

way, in the sense that you need to prove the charge that you’re 

investigating. 

 

He did have a dry sense of humour which I found myself 

laughing aloud many times. He taught a group of men and 

women to love and respect our laws and to care about the 

people of this province when dealing with them in the legal 

manner. 

 

So I would like to express my profound sorrow that Murray 

died too early to finish or live through what would have been a 

wonderful, fair career on the bench. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly is a motion 

presented by the Justice minister: 

 

That this Assembly record its condolence and expresses its 

sympathy to the family of Judge Murray Brown. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Minister of 

Justice. 

 

Barrett Douglas Halderman 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to rise today to 

move another motion of condolence and expression of 

sympathy for the family of Judge Barrett Douglas Halderman. 

Barrett Halderman passed away early in the new year following 

a lengthy illness. He is remembered as a dedicated public 

servant, legal counsel, and Provincial Court judge. 

 

Barrett Halderman grew up in Shaunavon and studied at the 

University of Saskatchewan and Dalhousie Law School. From 

the mid-1960s he was an assistant, first to Woodrow Lloyd, 

then to T.C. Douglas, and then legal secretary for the Crown 

corporations ministry. In 1976 he moved to legal aid, working 

in Weyburn and in Saskatoon, and then on to private practice in 

Humboldt where he and his wife, Betty, raised their two 

children, Amy and Jeffrey. After 20 years of private practice, 

Barrett Halderman was appointed to Provincial Court where he 

served for eight years. 

 

As a lawyer I had a number of occasions where I had files 

opposite Mr. Halderman. He was always ethical, professional, 

and competent to deal with. He had a keen sense of humour and 

on our files we were able to share some significant political 

banter. 

 

On behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan, I wish to 

convey to his family our condolences on his passing and our 

thanks for his many years of public service. 

 

I move: 

 

That the Assembly record its condolences and expresses 

its sympathy to the family of Judge Barrett Halderman. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved: 

 

That the Assembly record its condolences and expresses 

its sympathy to the family of Judge Halderman. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

I recognize the member from Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It was on March 10, 

1999, that I had the honour of announcing that Barrett 

Halderman would become a judge of the Provincial Court of 

Saskatchewan after serving as a lawyer in Humboldt for 20 

years. And I remember that week — which is about exactly 10 

years ago from this week — when I phoned Barrett up. And one 

of the questions that always comes is, when you serve as a 

lawyer in a smaller town, you usually have to move to another 

town to be the judge. So this meant that he had to move to 

Melfort. And he basically said, this is an important thing for me 

to do, to serve the people of Saskatchewan. And I think as the 

colleague across the way has outlined, he served Saskatchewan 

people in quite a number of different roles in his career as a 

lawyer. 

 

Barrett Halderman was a man with many interests and I got to 

know him in practice much as my colleague across the way did 

so that I knew him before I got into politics. But it was quite 

fascinating to go as attorney general and visit the bar in the 

Humboldt area because he was always one of the leaders there 

and you’d end up with a very good discussion. And I think the 

present Attorney General knows about the discussions coming 

out from Humboldt on quite a number of issues. Well I think in 

a lot of ways it’s just the nature of the bar in that area. 

 

But Barrett always had a broader perspective on how you would 

deal with politics, with world issues, with how he served as a 

judge making decisions on a daily basis, basing it on all of the 



March 4, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2151 

experience that he had. 

 

He grew up down in Shaunavon area but his family had a farm 

out Frontier way, and I think that many people who know that 

area know that many of our leaders in our province have come 

from that particular part of the province. And sometimes the 

way to capture the sense of how that works is recognizing that 

that’s the same kind of area where Mr. Stegner came from when 

he wrote about Saskatchewan. And it was this sense of being on 

the prairie, being in a place that gave you an obligation to go 

and be with people, serve people. I think that a lot of that 

showed up for Barrett no matter where he lived. 

 

I also had a special affinity with Barrett. We enjoyed visiting 

because he loved to read. He loved to read all kinds of topics of 

books and whenever I would see him — and I think I last saw 

him not this last winter but the previous winter — and he was 

telling me about some things that he had been looking at and 

reading. And it felt right to have that kind of a conversation 

with him. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Barrett served the people well. He was a good 

judge for eight years until he became ill, and I know that we all 

want to thank his wife, Betty, and his family for the good work 

that he did for the people of Saskatchewan. I know especially in 

the Humboldt and Melfort areas, they will remember his legacy 

for a long time. Thank you. 

 

[16:00] 

 

The Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly is the 

motion by the Minister of Justice: 

 

That this Assembly record its deepest condolences and 

express its sympathy to the family of Judge Halderman. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Gerald McLellan 

 

The Speaker: — Members, I wish to advise the Assembly also 

of the passing of a former officer of this Assembly, and express 

our grateful appreciation for the contribution he made to his 

community and to this province. Gerald McLellan, who passed 

away on January 5, 2009, served this Legislative Assembly as 

provincial ombudsman from 1987 until 1993. 

 

Born in Arcola, Saskatchewan on March 9, 1932, Mr. McLellan 

moved to Saskatoon as a young man. At the University of 

Saskatchewan, he earned degrees in law and commerce. He 

served as a bencher of the Law Society of Saskatchewan and as 

a trustee on the Estevan Board of Education. After practising 

law in Regina and Estevan, Mr. McLellan was appointed to the 

position of ombudsman in 1987. 

 

He worked on many important files during his tenure as 

ombudsman, including an investigation into youth group homes 

and an examination of the province’s investment regulation 

system. Mr. McLellan also supported amendments to The 

Ombudsman and Children’s Advocate Act which authorized his 

office to resolve conflicts using non-adversarial means such as 

negotiation and mediation. 

 

Apart from his professional life, Mr. McLellan enjoyed curling, 

golf, playing duplicate bridge, and going for regular walks. He 

had countless friends and kept in contact with many former 

colleagues. He was married to Wanda for 43 years, and the 

couple cherished their two daughters and four grandchildren. 

 

I ask all members to join me in conveying the Assembly’s 

condolences to the bereaved family. 

 

I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By leave of 

the Assembly, I would like to move: 

 

That notwithstanding rule 8(2) of the Rules and 

Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 

an audio-video record of the oral tributes, together with 

the Hansard transcript and the resolutions adopted, be 

communicated in memory of the deceased to the bereaved 

families on behalf of the Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 

Leader, by leave of the Assembly: 

 

That notwithstanding rule 8(2) of the Rules and 

Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 

an audio-video record of the oral tributes, together with 

the Hansard transcript and the resolutions adopted, be 

communicated in memory of the deceased to the bereaved 

families on behalf of the Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this House 

do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. This Assembly stands adjourned until 

tomorrow morning at 10 a.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:04.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2129 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2129 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2129 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2129 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2129 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2129 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2130 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2130 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2130 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Red Cross Month 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2130 

 Condolences Following Tragic Death in Biggar 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2131 

 Regina Public Library Round Dance 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2131 

 Engineering and Geoscience Week 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2131 

 Soldiers March for Telemiracle 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2131 

 Colorectal Cancer Awareness Month 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2132 

 Heart of the City Piano Program 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2132 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Graduate Retention Program 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2132 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2133 

 SaskTel Email Service 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2134 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2134 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2135 

 Strategy for Crown Corporations 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2135 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2135 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2136 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 79 — The Education Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2)/ 

 Loi n
o
 2 de 2009 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2137 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

CONDOLENCES 

 Laurence Edwin Tchorzewski 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2137 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2138 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2139 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2140 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2140 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2141 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2142 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2143 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2144 

 Josef Saxinger 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2144 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2145 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2145 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2146 

 Lorne Aubrey McLaren 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2146 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2147 



 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2147 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2148 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2148 

 Donald Murray Brown 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2148 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2149 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2150 

 Barrett Douglas Halderman 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2150 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2150 

 Gerald McLellan 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2151 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 


