




















































Hansard: May 04, 2009


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 57A  MONDAY, MAY 4, 2009, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2937 

 May 4, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for First 

Nations and Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

it’s my pleasure to introduce through you and to you to all 

members of the legislature today, a group of very special guests 

assembled in your gallery. 

 

Today we have members from the intercultural leadership 

program, along with the course instructor, Annette Ermine, and 

intercultural leadership program advisory Co-Chairs, Dr. Rick 

Kleer and Shannon Avison. 

 

The students here today — maybe they could give us a wave — 

Laura Starblanket, Keenan Cummings. Today we also have Pat 

Sparvier, Gloria Poorman, Lauri Guppelin, and Stuart Manhas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would also like to introduce a very special 

person today, Rebecca Sangwais who is with our group. 

Rebecca is the First Nations University of Canada Pow Wow 

Princess for 2009. Rebecca is from the Ochapowace First 

Nation, is a first-year student in business administration 

program at the First Nations University of Canada. She’s 

talented and beautiful and capable. And I ask everyone to join 

with me in welcoming the whole group to their legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to join with the Minister for First Nations and Métis 

Relations and welcome the group from the intercultural 

leadership program to the legislature. It’s good to see Annette 

Ermine here and Pat Sparvier, the Co-Chairs with the program, 

and of course especially the students. 

 

And it’s also great to welcome her majesty to the legislature. 

The Pow Wow Princess is a highly sought-after position and 

certainly the FNU [First Nations University] Pow Wow 

Princess has a lot of very talented, quality individuals that have 

served in that capacity. So I’d like to join with the minister and 

encourage all members to welcome these fine individuals to 

their Legislative Assembly. Ta wow. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, with leave for an extended 

introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has asked for leave for an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would assume 

that most of my colleagues in the House would understand that 

almost every introduction I give is extended. Maybe I should 

quit asking for leave but, Mr. Speaker, it’s a privilege for me to 

stand in the House again today and introduce the latest group of 

participants in the parliamentary program for public service 

employees. We have 25 of the attendees in the gallery today. 

You want to all just acknowledge who you are for our sake? 

Thank you very much. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have participants from the following 

ministries: Advanced Education, Employment and Labour; 

from the Ministry of Education, from Health, from Highways 

and Infrastructure, Municipal Affairs, the Public Service 

Commission, Social Services, and the Legislative Assembly 

Service. And as I was going through the list today, Mr. Speaker, 

I noticed that there were some who had enrolled but weren’t 

able to participate in today’s event. 

 

This is at least the fourth such program in this spring session. I 

think there are at least one or maybe even two more to come, 

but this seems to be a very popular program and very well 

attended from across the various ministries. The program 

includes an in-depth history and tour of the Legislative 

Building, briefings by the Legislative Library, the Legislative 

Assembly Clerk’s office, Exec Council, and they will be 

observing the proceedings of the House through to the end of 

question period. 

 

They’ll meet with members from both sides of the Legislative 

Assembly and finally, Mr. Speaker, if the two of us who are 

dealing with the program prior to your arrival keep within our 

time constraints, you’ll get a chance to talk to them as well. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’d like all of our colleagues to welcome these 

participants in the parliamentary program today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On behalf 

of the official opposition, I would like to join with the minister 

and welcome our civil servants here this afternoon, and hope 

you enjoy the proceedings this afternoon. Normally it would be 

the minister and myself joining you later this afternoon, but 

because I’m going to be in committee, one of my colleagues 

will be attending on my behalf. And if we can keep to those 

time frames, Mr. Speaker, you’ll get your few minutes as well. 

 

But welcome to your legislature on our behalf, and thank you 

very much for attending and I hope you enjoy your afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



2938 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2009 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 

the west gallery is three people that are very important in my 

life. My wife Debbie is sitting up there along with our two 

grandchildren. Taylor is five and Jacob is three. 

 

Now Taylor is the artist and the craftsman. In fact yesterday 

before church I had to glue two stones together for a craft that 

was going to take place after church, but I think it got forgotten. 

And as far as Jacob, I hardly recognize him without his hockey 

gloves. He’s three years old and he’s a fan of the Calgary 

Flames. And before he plays, either his grandmother or I have 

to sing O Canada before he starts. So please welcome him to 

your legislature. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, in the east gallery are 40 students 

and their school staff from Holy Cross High School in 

Saskatoon Eastview. This program is an English as an 

additional language program, and they’re accompanied by their 

school staff, Rita Wolfe, Yvonne Musey Johnson, and Sheila 

Kohle. I hope I’ve pronounced your names right. Would you 

just give a wave. And welcome to the legislature, and I hope 

everyone joins with me in that welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 

and through you to all members of this Assembly I’d like to 

introduce six guests that are seated in your gallery. First of all 

I’ll introduce Patrick Dupuis. And I ask them to give a wave 

just so we know where you are. Patrick is from Estevan, and 

he’s with the firm of Meyers Norris Penny. And now that the 

April 30 tax deadline is past, he’s kind of allowed out of the 

office. So welcome, Patrick. 

 

Accompanying Patrick are his father, Paul Dupuis from 

Winnipeg; Leonard Samoisette from Gravelbourg who’s 

Patrick’s father-in-law; Dave Punga from Gravelbourg; Gerry 

Piche from Gravelbourg; and Ted Reaves from Gravelbourg. 

And, Mr. Speaker, some of these guests, it’s their first visit to 

the legislature so I ask all members to greet them warmly. 

Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you, 

through you and to all members of the Assembly I’d like to 

introduce two guests seated in the Speaker’s gallery: Deb 

Mortensen is a dear friend of mine from childhood, and she’s 

here visiting from Vancouver right now. And she’s 

accompanying her father. Her father is Ed Morgan. Perhaps 

they could both just give a wave so we can identify who they 

are. 

 

And Ed has been a dedicated employee and servant of the Sask 

Archives Board for 31 years and is currently enjoying his 

retirement and his children and his grandchildren. And I’d like 

to welcome them to the legislature today and wish them a good 

future and hope that they enjoy today’s proceedings. Thank 

you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In your gallery 

I have a number of people that are workers with the victims 

services program in Saskatoon. These people are an integral 

part of our administration of justice, Mr. Speaker. They work 

hard to ensure that victims are made comfortable and are able to 

arrive in court understanding what’s expected of them, and that 

they have the necessary supports and resources as they go 

through what is often a very critical and trying time for them. 

Sometimes they’re witnesses. Sometimes they’re there as 

victims and also as witnesses. And we commend them for their 

very good work. 

 

The individuals are Marie Hildebrandt, Linda Perrett, Dorthea 

Swiftwolfe, Janice Linklater. And then two of them are 

volunteers, and they’ve done this for many years without 

getting paid at all. They are Bev Kinshella and Cathy Anderson. 

Another member that was not able to be with us today was 

Brenda Douglas. They are joined by two of our staff members 

from Saskatoon, Dwight Lawrence and Pat Thiele, that operate 

the program. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these people do a very good job in 

sometimes very trying times. And I would ask that all members 

welcome them to their legislature and thank them for the very 

good work that they do. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

to you and through you I would like to introduce some guests 

seated in the west gallery from Weyburn. I had the opportunity 

to have a brief meeting with them in the lobby before the 

session started today. We have a brand new RN [registered 

nurse] that has been recruited from the Philippines with us, also 

an RN that has been working in Weyburn for eight years, also 

from the Philippines. They have a guest that is visiting them 

from London. She’s an RN — may be considering relocating to 

Saskatchewan also. We also have a medical technician along 

with them. So it’s wonderful to see them here today. 

 

Now they are in a bit of a rush because they’re off to the 

museum. The young man sitting in the gallery there wants to 

get over to the museum and see what Regina has to offer. So 

please welcome them to our House today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



May 4, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2939 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I rise to present a petition that speaks to the need for 

the government to recognize the essential role of all health care 

providers as valued members of the health care team. 

Specifically this one speaks to SEIU [Service Employees 

International Union] West members who are employed at 

Cypress, Five Hills, Heartland, and Saskatoon regional health 

authorities. The petition also speaks to the need for a 

commitment to adequate funding and the installation of good 

faith in the provincial bargaining process. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to maintaining quality health care 

services and job security for all health care providers. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present on behalf of residents and workers in 

Moose Jaw and Saskatoon. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Before I recognize anyone further in 

petitions, just a quick reminder to the guests. We really 

welcome you, but just to ask you not to participate in any of the 

debate on the floor. That would be greatly appreciated. 

 

I recognize the member from Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand and present 

a petition in support of indexing the minimum wage. Mr. 

Speaker, we all understand that increases to the minimum wage 

help low-income individuals and families to improve their 

standards of living. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to indexing Saskatchewan 

minimum wage to ensure that the standard of living of 

minimum wage earners is maintained in the face of cost of 

living increases. 

 

And as is in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by residents of Saskatoon, 

Prince Albert, and Birch Hills. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of wage equity for CBO 

[community-based organization] workers. And we know, Mr. 

Speaker, that the low wages paid to those who work in the 

community-based organizations sector results in high staff 

turnover, the subsequent lack of caregiver continuity, and this 

has a negative impact on the quality of care clients receive. I’d 

like to read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the development and 

implementation of a multi-year funding plan to ensure that 

CBO workers achieve wage equity with employees who 

perform work of equal value in government departments. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these citizens signing this petition come 

from the cities of Regina and Weyburn. Thank you very much, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present a petition on behalf of rural residents of 

Saskatchewan who question why the Sask Party government is 

leaving them behind with respect to providing safe and 

affordable water. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to financially assist the town of Duck Lake 

residents for the good of their health and safety due to the 

exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency, and that this government fulfills its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good residents of 

Saskatoon, Duck Lake, Carlton, Ciskaciwan Reserve, Prince 

Albert, and Sandy Bay. I so present. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

in support of a long-term care facility in La Ronge. The prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 

Hon. Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately invest in the planning and 

construction of a long-term care facility in La Ronge. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by the good people of La Ronge and area. I so 

present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

May Day 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, last Friday on May 1, working 

people around the world celebrated International Workers’ Day 

or, as it is known, May Day. The origins of International 



2940 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2009 

Workers’ Day are bound up in the struggle of working people 

and their unions to secure better working conditions and a 

living wage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, New Democrats acknowledge the importance of 

unions in building a more fair and caring society. Unions fight 

for women who still to this day earn less than men. Unions fight 

for decent, secure work in an economy that generates more and 

more part-time jobs at the expense of full-time careers. And 

unions continue to fight for democracy when right wing, 

conservative governments systematically dismantle the rights of 

workers to join unions and earn a decent living. 

 

Mr. Speaker, New Democrats stand opposed to the Sask Party 

government’s growing list of attacks on the rights of 

Saskatchewan working people, whether it was Bills 5 and 6 

which take away workers’ democratic rights, the new attack on 

our skilled building trades workers with Bill 80, or the Sask 

Party’s trespassing Bill that without the NDP’s [New 

Democratic Party] amendment may interfere with the right to 

demonstrate peacefully. New Democrats stand firmly alongside 

the working people of our province and against these 

government-led attacks on the rights of Saskatchewan workers. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood River. 

 

Snowbirds’ Acceptance Show 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Friday 

myself and the members from Moose Jaw North and Moose 

Jaw Wakamow had the distinct pleasure of attending the 

Snowbirds’ formal acceptance show. The show was performed 

for the approval by the commander of 1 Canadian Air Division, 

Major-General Marcel Duval, and Canadian and US [United 

States] air traffic regulators. 

 

In conjunction with the Snowbirds’ show, the F-86 Saber Hawk 

One flight was also approved. Hawk One constitutes a tribute to 

the commemoration of 100 years of flight, as this year marks 

the 100th anniversary of the first powered flight in Canada. On 

February 23, 1909, Douglas McCurdy took the Silver Dart on 

its inaugural flight at Baddeck, Nova Scotia. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Snowbirds, in their 39th season, have flown in 

well over 2,000 shows before more than 125 million spectators. 

The 2009 team will fly in 65 shows in 45 locations across North 

America this season. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Snowbirds’ mission is to demonstrate the skill, 

professionalism, and teamwork of the men and women in the 

Canadian Forces. These three words provide the framework for 

what they do, what they represent, and more important, who 

they represent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to congratulate Major Chris Bard and his 

team for an excellent acceptance show. And I’d ask all 

members to join me in congratulating the Snowbirds and 

wishing them a successful season. Thank you. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — It must be early in the week, but it just seems 

that while members have been trying to do statements, we’ve 

had a fair bit of conversation going on which has kind of 

distracted from the statements. So I’d ask members to be 

mindful of the right of members to share their statements 

without interference. 

 

The member from Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Saskatoon and District Labour Council 

Celebrates 100 Years 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on Saturday, May 2 at TCU 

Place in Saskatoon, I along with members from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow and Saskatoon Centre and Saskatoon Nutana and 

over 250 people came together to celebrate the achievements of 

the last 100 years of the Saskatoon and District Labour Council, 

and to relive some of the momentous historical achievements of 

this proud organization. 

 

The Saskatoon Trades and Labour Council, who had affiliate 

with the Trades and Labour Congress of Canada, brought 

workers together in February 1909 to fight for economic justice. 

And so began the proud history of the Saskatoon and District 

Labour Council as we know it today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the council has been at the forefront of working 

people’s struggles for a better life at work, at home, and in the 

community. Some of the more notable accomplishments of the 

council are the partnership agreement that it has been able to 

forge with the United Way of Saskatoon & Area, a partnership 

agreement that was signed with the United Way in 1995 and is 

recognized as one of the most successful and respected such 

agreements within Canada. Also the summer snack program — 

the program was initiated in 1988 and provides nutritious 

lunches to children at inner-city playgrounds every summer in 

Saskatoon. Last year alone, over 3,000 nutritious meals were 

provided to children at four inner-city parks. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatoon and District Labour Council not 

only has a proud history, but its continuous efforts bring 

promise of a better future for working people in the community 

of Saskatoon. I want to congratulate Kelly Harrington, president 

of the Saskatoon and District Labour Council, and Jim Bitinsky, 

Chair of the gala committee, and all the volunteers for an 

evening of memories, great speeches, and entertainment. Again 

congratulations for a job well done. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Job Opportunities for Persons with Cognitive Disabilities 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 

pleased to stand in the House today to speak about an 

announcement made this morning by the Minister Responsible 

for the Public Service Commission. The announcement was 

regarding the creation of a more representative workforce by 

expanding job opportunities in the Public Service Commission 



May 4, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2941 

for persons with cognitive disabilities. 

 

Originally this initiative was limited to the Ministry of Social 

Services and the Ministry of Highways and Infrastructure, 

where there are currently 19 people working as general program 

assistants in these ministries. Thanks to the work at these 

ministries, the work of hiring managers in the government, and 

the co-operation of the public service unions and the 

community-based organizations, we are now in a position to 

expand this program to all ministries. 

 

This program will help to promote a more diverse workplace 

within the public service. Employees with cognitive disabilities 

will gain new strengths, new skills, and take on tasks that will 

contribute to a more effective workplace. It will also create a 

positive work environment where everyone’s contribution is 

valued. Public service unions have been consulted and are on 

board with this new initiative. 

 

Employees under this program will earn $11.20 to $13.63 per 

hour, which is in between minimum wage and the lowest 

in-scope pay rate. The staff working in the Department of 

Highways as general program assistants with the cleaning 

duties as well as assistants with mechanics . . . Thank you very 

much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

National Mental Health Week 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mental health is an 

essential part of overall health and well-being. Good health 

means more than feeling physically fit; it also means feeling 

mentally fit. Spreading awareness of the importance of 

maintaining mental health is the mandate of National Mental 

Health Week. 

 

Today we recognize that good mental health is not just the 

absence of mental illness. These new understandings of mental 

health are prompting a new kind of focus that identifies 

components of mental wellness and mental fitness and explores 

ways to encourage them. 

 

It’s also important to acknowledge that mental health problems 

can affect any person, regardless of age or circumstance. The 

Canadian Mental Health Association reports that Canada’s 

youth suicide rate is the third highest in the industrialized 

world. Serious emotional and mental health disorders in 

children and youth are real and treatable. It is never too early to 

consider children’s mental health. That is why the first week 

this year is dedicated to increasing public awareness of mental 

well-being and social development of children in Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all need to increase our awareness of mental 

health issues. I hope we can all take the time to listen to or 

participate in information sessions during this special week. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Weyburn. 

 

New Democratic Party Memberships 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Well well well, Mr. Speaker. Just last week, 

the NDP member from Regina Dewdney was openly bragging 

about how Dwain Lingenfelter has the NDP leadership race in 

the bag, mainly because of the 1,100 memberships they sold in 

Meadow Lake constituency. It’ll be interesting to see if he has 

as much to say about the phony membership scandal that has 

now erupted in the Lingenfelter campaign. 

 

This morning Mr. Lingenfelter admitted to paying for these 

phony memberships. That’s over $10,000 from a guy who 

didn’t donate anything to the NDP last year. Mr. Speaker, Mr. 

Lingenfelter has a lot of questions to answer: who knew about 

these phony memberships? Why was his campaign paying for 

these phony memberships? How do we know there aren’t other 

phony memberships in other parts of the province? 

 

Mr. Speaker, in typical NDP fashion, the NDP is trying to 

downplay the phony membership scandal, comparing it to 

buying a Reader’s Digest subscription for someone else. So, 

Mr. Speaker, I picked up this month’s Reader’s Digest, and the 

very first article on page 1 is entitled “Managing the mess.” So 

maybe it is a little like joining the NDP. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will be expecting a full and open accounting of 

the NDP’s phony membership scandal, not just the Reader’s 

Digest version. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Autism Services Spring Gala 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past Saturday 

evening, I attended the Autism Services 11th Annual Spring 

Gala at TCU Place in Saskatoon. The event — which included a 

reception, silent auction, dinner, and superb jazz singer, 

Jennifer Hanson — raised funds that will enable Autism 

Services to continue increasing the awareness of autism among 

the general public and to help provide programs and services 

for children and adults with this complex disorder. 

 

Autism usually appears within the first three years of an 

affected person’s life. It is the result of a neurological disorder 

that hinders the normal development of the brain in regards to 

social interaction, communication, and cognitive function. 

 

Mr. Speaker, statistics show that 1 in every 150 Canadians is 

affected by autism. This is an increase of 600 per cent in the 

past 10 years. Autism is now the most common neurological 

disorder affecting children. 

 

Since 1979 Autism Services, based in Saskatoon, has been 

providing support for children and adults and has expanded its 

delivery of programs substantially. While it receives financial 

support from the provincial government and the Saskatoon 

Health Region, most of its program funding comes from 

memberships, donations, and fundraising events like the spring 



2942 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2009 

gala this past Saturday. 

 

I ask members to join me in extending the very best wishes to 

Autism Services and other organizations that provide research, 

information, and programs on autism. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Supplementary Health Program Services 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Clients of the 

supplementary health program have been having difficulty in 

recent weeks obtaining dentures. In one case brought to our 

attention, a senior stopped eating properly and started rapidly 

losing weight. In another case, family members have become 

concerned that a woman might choke on her dentures in the 

middle of the night. The inability to get coverage for dentures 

poses a risk to the health of a growing number of people. 

 

My question to the minister is simple. What is the Sask Party 

going to do about this situation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we’re very 

aware of the issue around dentists and the contract that they 

have with the provincial government to supply services to these 

citizens that the critic just talked about. We have been in 

negotiations with the dental association, with the dentists in the 

province. I think we’re getting very close to an agreement that 

will see services fulfilled through the whole . . . all the 

practising dentists who service clients, the denturists that 

service the clients that the critic just had mentioned. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — This question is about denturists, not dentists. 

And I know the Sask Party’s ultimately responsible for reaching 

an agreement that ensures clients of the supplementary health 

program do get the services that they need and that denturists 

are fairly compensated. 

 

But a year of negotiations has ground to a halt on the 

government’s watch and the health of low-income seniors and 

families has been put at risk. The government was able to find 

$7 million to spend on the Olympics, so I know the issue can’t 

be money. 

 

To the minister: how much longer will these seniors and 

families have to wait for the Sask Party to ensure that they get 

the denturist services that they need? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said in my earlier 

answer, negotiations have been going on between the denturists 

and the provincial government. That work is being done. I am 

pretty confident that an agreement will be struck in the very 

near future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as you can imagine there are a number of 

contracts that the provincial government has, that the Ministry 

of Health has with a number of suppliers. Denturists are one of 

them and we, as I said, have been in negotiations with them. I 

think we’ll be seeing a agreement coming to fruition in the near 

future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I know these issues are the subject 

of negotiations. And I do see that there’s a failure to move 

forward on these issues. I asked the question in estimates. I had 

the same answer then and that was almost a month ago. So I 

think that we should be concerned when we hear stories about 

people who are in frail health who can’t eat, who are starting to 

lose weight, whose dentures are floating and it could choke 

them. And my question to the minister is, how much longer do 

these people have to wait? I mean you’re saying it’s going to be 

soon. When? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the fact is is that a 

number of dentists are still — and denturists — are still 

supplying services to this clientele, maybe not to the full 

amount that has been there, but she’s implying that there are no 

services supplied whatsoever across the province, which is 

absolutely wrong. 

 

Some dentists and denturists have pulled their services back 

until a contract is reached. Some are still supplying the service. 

I am telling this Assembly that we are working with the 

denturists and plan on having an agreement in the very near 

future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Drinking Water for Duck Lake 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, while this government was 

spending $7.2 million on the Vancouver Olympics, at least 25 

people in the real world lost their water service because they 

couldn’t afford monthly bills of more than $160 a month. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this situation has been dragging on for months, 

and it is taking its toll on families in the Duck Lake area. 

Community leaders are beginning to despair of any meaningful 



May 4, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2943 

help with their predicament. 

 

To the Minister of Municipal Affairs: what is he doing to ensure 

families in Duck Lake have access to save, clean, and 

affordable drinking water? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Mr. Speaker, memories are indeed 

short. In recent debate, we’ve reminded members of the 

opposition that problems with Duck Lake’s water system first 

came to light, not last week or last month or even last year, but 

way back, way back in 2003 when the province had an NDP 

government. 

 

We reminded them that their government had four years to 

solve this problem and infrastructure problems like it in the rest 

of our communities, and they didn’t get the job done. Although 

I’m sure if you ask them, they had the best of intentions, they 

simply didn’t get around to it. 

 

What did the member from Regina Walsh Acres have to say 

about all of this at that time? She said we shouldn’t worry about 

all of the emergency boil-water orders imposed by the NDP 

government on Duck Lake. And her reason — it was just water 

lines breaking, you know, year after year after year. Now why 

would that happen, Mr. Speaker? That happened, of course, 

because her government systematically ignored the needs of 

Duck Lake and other communities year after year after year. 

 

We’re doing much better, Mr. Speaker, and I welcome another 

question to explain the details. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Well the Duck Lake residents would beg to 

differ on the doing much better. Quite frankly, the water quality 

didn’t diminish until 2007, and this government has been in 

power for 18 months and hasn’t even had the courtesy of 

responding to them. Mr. Speaker, the minister keeps talking 

about the Building Canada fund as a source of possible 

assistance, but doesn’t seem to understand the criteria for 

assistance under that fund. 

 

The Canada Saskatchewan Building Canada website states that: 

 

Projects are ineligible if construction work (e.g. physical 

changes to land above or below ground level or buildings) 

has started in advance of the approval of the Ministers or 

the completion and approval of the environmental 

assessment. 

 

Building Canada is “for shovel-ready projects,” but the Duck 

Lake water plant is already completed and the shovels were put 

away a long time ago, Mr. Speaker. When will this minister 

stop throwing out red herrings and start providing real support 

to rural families who simply can’t afford the cost of safe water? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m awfully sorry that 

the member hasn’t done her homework. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

awfully sorry she doesn’t understand the eligibility criteria for 

the Building Canada fund. But I am pleased to be able to 

recommend the following information for her digestion, 

consumption. 

 

Here’s what’s happening. The second phase of this particular 

project is 100 per cent eligible for Building Canada funding, 

and we have worked hand in hand, the ministry officials and the 

town officials, to put together a top quality application for BCF 

[Building Canada fund]. That’s already in the hopper, Mr. 

Speaker. We’ll just have to wait for the adjudication panel to 

review and give their decision. That’s coming in the weeks and 

months ahead. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — The second phase will have absolutely no 

impact on the water prices that they are currently paying. And 

the weeks and months away for the lagoon are again weeks and 

months away. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister claims that there has been regular 

contact with community leaders in Duck Lake, but those same 

leaders report that he hasn’t talked to them at all. Families in 

Duck Lake don’t need more empty promises. They need this 

government’s help to provide safe and affordable drinking 

water. Instead of encouraging the town to apply for programs 

that won’t help them in this situation, will the minister commit 

to sitting down with Duck Lake’s community leaders and 

finding an actual, workable solution? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Mr. Speaker, I welcome this 

opportunity to clarify to the member and all of the members the 

following: we actually have sat down with an official from the 

town of Duck Lake. We met firstly here in the Legislative 

Building with the deputy mayor when he came a couple of 

months ago. 

 

What have we been doing since then? We’ve been working on 

making sure that they have a top-quality application for the next 

phase of Building Canada fund which of course, as I said just a 

minute ago, is 100 per cent eligible for funding. Also historic 

increases in revenue sharing, also municipal economic 

enhancement funding — the kind of funding, the kind of 

financial support never imagined, never provided by the 



2944 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2009 

opposition members when they were in government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Drinking Water for Saskatchewan Communities 

 

Ms. Morin: — The residents of Duck Lake appreciate the help 

with this intake of the Building Canada fund, but they need 

solutions for their water bills that they’re paying now, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, citizens in Hepburn face similar problems in the 

near future. A project of more than $5 million, installation costs 

of more than 10,000 per household, and water bills of more than 

$100 a month. As of Friday, May 1, 2009 there were 153 

precautionary drinking water advisories . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The member for Regina Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — As of Friday, May 1, 2009 there were 153 

precautionary drinking water advisories and 52 emergency 

boil-water orders in effect, and the Watershed Authority’s plan 

for the coming year also says there are at least two other 

high-risk communities where the authority will be conducting 

an assessment. 

 

To the Minister Responsible for the Watershed Authority: what 

are the names of those communities? And just how big is the 

water crisis in rural Saskatchewan and what does she plan to do 

about it? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I’m surprised that the 

member is suddenly so interested in this. The NDP tested water 

in one town and then walked away from the program. We have 

reinstituted the program to do free testing for communities that 

may be facing some situations with their water, and Hepburn 

was the last but, Mr. Speaker, going forward we are working as 

a government on integrated water management strategies so that 

we make the right decisions for our province going forward on 

quality and quantity of water. 

 

And we’ll have announcements for that later this year, Mr. 

Speaker, but the people of this province can be guaranteed that 

water is one of the priorities in my ministry, and that is one of 

my focuses. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Consultation Regarding Energy Sources 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, two weeks ago we introduced the 

energy development partnership which would investigate 

energy options to meet the province’s energy needs in the most 

cost-effective and environmentally friendly way possible. The 

Minister for CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan], the Minister for Enterprise and Innovation, and 

the Premier all agreed that it had merit, but instead of accepting 

it, they trotted out their Crown Corporations Committee, a 

proposal that begs more questions than it answers. 

 

To the Minister of CIC: this government has said our plan has 

merit, yet they refuse to implement it. So what part of our plan 

do they not accept? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. As I indicated previously in this House, we welcome 

the suggestions made by the opposition going forward, and how 

we can analyze better all types of power generation in the 

province. The best way to do that — and I think all members 

had a look at it, and members have participated before in this 

committee — it’s through the Crown Corporations Committee. 

 

It’s an all-party committee, I would remind the member 

opposite, that members from the opposition, a couple of 

members will be a official part of the committee meetings. All 

members are free to sit in and to learn and to educate 

themselves. 

 

I look forward to the process. I think it’ll be well done. And the 

people of Saskatchewan will be well served, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Well if our proposal has merit, then why does 

their proposal look nothing like ours? Mr. Speaker, the 

government could potentially be putting the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan at risks for billions of dollars to build nuclear 

reactors in this province, yet they’ll not engage Saskatchewan 

people in an informed, meaningful, comparative debate on 

energy options. 

 

Mr. Speaker, depending on who you talk to on that side and 

whether you read the UDP [Uranium Development Partnership] 

report or Bruce Power’s report, the province needs between 

1000 and 3000 megawatts of power to meet future need. 

 

To the minister: will he guarantee today that his Crown 

committee will be equipped with resources to fully study the 

future energy needs of this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. I’ll remind the member opposite, it’s not my 



May 4, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2945 

committee. It’s not our committee on this side of the House. It’s 

a committee of this legislature; a committee that involves all 

members. 

 

In doing this, I’m trying to be bipartisan here. I’m trying to be 

as fair . . . Well members opposite may find that humorous, but 

I’m saying the energy future of this province is too important 

for political purposes for one person. We don’t have all the 

answers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We certainly are looking forward, going forward. What’s the 

portfolio going to look like? We welcome the information that 

the New Democratic Party puts forward. We welcome the 

information that the Green Party brought forward and other 

parties. We’ll look at all the information, and we’ll come up 

with the best decisions going forward for SaskPower, for the 

Government of Saskatchewan, and for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, the problem isn’t that they don’t 

have all the answers; it’s they don’t have any answers. People 

attending these meetings are going to have technical questions 

they need answered in order to provide meaningful advice to 

the government. 

 

To the minister: which one of the committee members is an 

energy expert that he feels is qualified to travel the province and 

answer any technical questions that the public might have? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much for the 

question, Mr. Speaker. It may surprise the hon. member, but we 

do indeed have experts in Saskatchewan housed within 

SaskPower: those that look at wind energy, those that look at 

hydro development, those that look at solar, those that look at 

biomass, those that look at imports, those that look at all types 

of generation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The one area where we didn’t have the expertise was in the 

nuclear file. That’s why the Uranium Development Partnership 

was put into place. That’s why hearings are going to start later 

this month. They will do that information; we will do our work. 

And together hopefully we will find the best portfolio mix to 

ensure that we can continue to have the strongest economy in 

the country and the safe, reliable, and sustainable power to 

ensure that that happens. That’s what we’re doing. That’s what 

should be done. And that’s what will be done, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Now I asked him a simple question. I asked 

him which members of the committee are experts, and he says 

that people from SaskPower are experts. Are they on the 

committee? Is he going to appoint them to the committee, and is 

he going to make part of the committee all of the different 

potential energy experts in this province? 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government has pushed this nuclear agenda in 

spite of the fact that 40 per cent of the people in this province 

feel that they’re not properly informed. People of Saskatchewan 

have questions regarding nuclear waste storage, export markets, 

export grids, the cost of decommissioning a reactor, and the 

number of public dollars that’ll go into building one, two, or 

even three reactors in this province. Members opposite add to 

the confusion by contradicting each other and themselves at 

every turn. 

 

To the minister: will the Crown Corporations Committee be 

equipped with a panel of experts to answer questions people are 

asking about all of the options? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said in 

this House before, the Crown Corporations Committee will 

have full access to the experts of SaskPower. SaskPower will be 

asked and will be tasked to provide full services to this 

committee and provide as much information as possible. 

 

But not only SaskPower. We again will look through and invite 

companies from outside the province to come in and talk to us 

about their expertise, whether it’s TransAlta or TransCanada or 

any other company. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we don’t have a monopoly on the expertise. What 

we do have is a willingness to look at all options to come up 

with the best possible plan going forward. We welcome the 

information of members opposite. We welcome their 

participation. It is their responsibility as well as ours. Let’s get 

to work, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Let’s get to work. It’d be about time they 

started. Mr. Speaker, the debate around this province’s future 

energy needs and the cost-efficient and environmental friendly 

way of meeting those needs is a discussion that must engage the 

people of Saskatchewan. So a simple question of the minister: 

why does he hide from his responsibility to inform the public? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I made a 

commitment in this House that I’ll participate in those 

committees, that I’ll be there as far as my responsibility as 



2946 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2009 

minister of SaskPower and Minister of Crown Corporations to 

ensure that that committee has all the information necessary. 

 

I’m very surprised by this line of questioning. And I think the 

question in the House today is will the members opposite 

participate in this committee, or will they just go about 

furthering their partisan purposes? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Support for Hog Producers 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s hog industry 

has been devastated over the past 18 months. They’ve been hard 

hit, seeing breeding herds reduced and an overall 25 per cent 

decline in production. And now, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s 

hog producers have to deal with an outbreak of H1N1 influenza. 

To the minister: when will he be announcing his government’s 

plan to help Saskatchewan hog producers through the latest 

influenza crisis that is having a significant impact on our hog 

producers and our hog numbers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I 

appreciate the opportunity to speak about the problems in the 

hog industry right now, but as the member is well aware, we’re 

right in the middle of sending cheques out to hog producers — 

$20 a market hog and $10 per weanlings — right across the 

province, along with the $40 for cows and bred heifers right 

across the province. Those cheques are going out as we speak 

today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When it comes to the H1N1 virus right now that’s in the 

province, Mr. Speaker, the CFIA [Canadian Food Inspection 

Agency] and the Public Health Agency of Canada have taken 

the lead on this file, and I think are doing a good job in that 

respect. 

 

The one thing I would like to say, Mr. Speaker, that is, contrary 

to what some in the province have said, is the H1N1 virus is not 

a food safety concern. And I think this misinformation has got 

out there and is hurting our hog prices and hurting the hog 

industry right across this problem And, Mr. Speaker, pork 

products are safe for consumption. And I think that’s the 

message we have to get across this province, across this 

country, and for that matter, right across North America. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, Canada exports more than half 

of our hog production, and now because of the H1N1 flu strain, 

Canadian exports are down 10 to 15 per cent. Mr. Speaker, 

according to The Globe and Mail, at least 20 countries are 

banning pork exports from Canada because of the H1N1 

influenza, and that has to be affecting our Saskatchewan hog 

producers. 

 

To the minister: will his government be providing additional 

support to hog producers as a result of H1N1 influenza, over 

and above the $20 and $10 payment that’s going out because 

this is having a devastating effect on prices? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 

tell the member opposite, as she has talked about, we have 

support going out for the industry. And myself and my officials 

are monitoring the situation on an hourly basis, working with 

our federal counterparts. And there’s been professionals right 

across this country that have been very helpful in monitoring 

the H1N1 virus. 

 

What is not helpful though, Mr. Speaker — and I want to talk 

about the misinformation that’s out there — and I want to quote 

News Talk radio: “NDP leadership hopeful links flu to intensive 

livestock operations.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, this does more harm to the hog industry than 

anything any government could do to help them through this 

time, when they spread misinformation when it has nothing to 

do with the hog industry in Saskatchewan, in Canada, or in 

North America or in Mexico — anywhere, Mr. Speaker. That 

misinformation is hurting our industry far more than anything I 

could do or this government could do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the minister and I had quite a 

lengthy discussion about the state of the hog industry in our 

province during spending estimates. And I have to say, Mr. 

Speaker, that it appears as though there is very little in the way 

of activity going on with the minister and his ministry when it 

comes to the hog industry in Saskatchewan. And in fact, Mr. 

Speaker, since this government came to office, there’s been a 

dramatic reduction in the number of hogs in our province and 

the number of hog operators. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when BSE [bovine spongiform encephalopathy] 

hit Saskatchewan, the NDP government immediately went to 

work with the federal government to put together a BSE 

recovery plan and also provided the Saskatchewan set-aside 

program. To the minister: is the minister and the Sask Party 

government working with the federal government to provide a 

hog industry recovery program similar to BSE? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 



May 4, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2947 

tell the member, and as she knows, that when we first came into 

power we were asked by the industry for a cattle and hog loan. 

We provided $90 million for a cattle and hog loan. Mr. Speaker, 

she’s well aware of what we have done, with a $71 million hog 

and cattle support right across the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for 16 years they totally ignored rural 

Saskatchewan and paid no attention to these problems, and now 

all of a sudden they ask us to solve a problem for which has 

been a number of days old. We were monitoring day by day, 

hour by hour what’s going on within the hog industry. And as I 

said before, this is not a food safety situation with the hog 

industry, and hog producers right across this province are being 

hurt by that misinformation. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we are working with hog producers. We are 

working with vets right across this province in monitoring just 

what the effects will be on the hog industry in this province, and 

we’ll work very closely with hog producers in this province to 

try and get them through these tough times. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the minister talks about coming 

to government and immediately providing a loan program to the 

hog industry. Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister acknowledged in 

spending estimates that was very little uptake. And in fact the 

minister also acknowledged in spending estimates that about 45 

per cent of the uptake of $15 million had been put into loan loss 

provisions this fiscal year, Mr. Speaker. The industry doesn’t 

need more loans. What the industry needs is a plan to help get 

them — help get them — through this crisis, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Can the minister describe to the producers and to the 

Saskatchewan public how they plan on assisting the hog 

industry that has been devastated in the last 18 months get 

through this crisis that is devastating them even more? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I believe the 

member knows full well that we’ve done more on this side in 

16 months than her government did in 16 years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — But, Mr. Speaker, if that member and 

the opposition on that side want to help producers in this 

province, they should talk to one of their leadership hopefuls. 

And I want to quote. I’d like to quote Yens Pedersen in one of 

his comments, Mr. Speaker, in spreading his misinformation 

across this province. His quote goes on to say “. . . insects breed 

in the massive amounts of hog manure produced by hogs at 

factory farms and are quite possibly [quite possibly, Mr. 

Speaker] responsible for starting the flu scare.” 

 

But then he goes on to say, well this is just an “educated guess.” 

Those kind of comments are not helpful to the hog industry in 

this country — in fact for that matter, a plot to scare everybody 

in this province that hogs are causing the problem when, Mr. 

Speaker, they know full well that they’re not causing the 

problem. They are not a food risk, and pork is safety, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Orders of the day. And I just want to remind 

members or mention to members, while we have written 

questions here, it was a printing error. Written questions aren’t 

due till tomorrow. They’ll be raised at that time. I recognize the 

Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 

allow time for the Standing Committee on Human Services to 

do its work, I move this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that in order to facilitate the work of committees, this House do 

now stand adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. This Assembly stands 

adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 14:24.] 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2937 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2937 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2937 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2937 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2938 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2938 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2938 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2938 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2938 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2938 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2939 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2939 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2939 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2939 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2939 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 May Day 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2939 

 Snowbirds’ Acceptance Show 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2940 

 Saskatoon and District Labour Council Celebrates 100 Years 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2940 

 Job Opportunities for Persons with Cognitive Disabilities 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2940 

 National Mental Health Week 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2941 

 New Democratic Party Memberships 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2941 

 Autism Services Spring Gala 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2941 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Supplementary Health Program Services 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2942 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2942 

 Drinking Water for Duck Lake 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2942 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 2943 

 Drinking Water for Saskatchewan Communities 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2944 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2944 

 Consultation Regarding Energy Sources 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2944 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2944 

 Support for Hog Producers 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2946 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2946 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 


