




















































Hansard: March 19, 2009


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 36A  THURSDAY, MARCH 19, 2009, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2371 

 March 19, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

The Speaker: — Before I call for introduction of guests, I want 

to inform the members that Mr. Olajuwon Ebenezer, legislative 

officer in the Lagos State House of Assembly, will be a guest 

Clerk at the table today. He‟s seated to the right of Mr. Putz. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I would also like to inform the members of 

the presence of the Hon. Peter Milliken, Speaker of the House 

of Commons; Mr. Andrew Scheer, Deputy Speaker of the 

House of Commons; and Mr. Anthony Carricato, events 

coordinator, Office of the Speaker, who have again joined us 

today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to all 

the members of the Assembly, I‟d like to introduce two very 

special people to me. And I could really echo the comments of 

the Minister of Finance yesterday when referring to his wife, 

and I think all members in here could probably refer to their 

spouses in like. My wife Leone, seated in your gallery, and 

along with her my sister-in-law Terri Wiwchar from Saskatoon 

who has come down for the budget yesterday and came to 

watch proceedings today. So I‟d like all members to welcome 

them to this Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture, the 

member from Melville-Saltcoats. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, in your gallery I‟d like to introduce Dave Marit, 

President of SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities]. But I also appreciate the working relationship 

we have with SARM, and Dave has also worked on our water 

program and a number of projects in the province. And we 

really appreciate the work that he does for this province. I‟d ask 

all members to welcome him here today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a pleasure 

today to introduce once again to this Assembly in the west 

gallery my wife, Heather and her very good friend, Gill Churn. 

And the thorn — Lorne, sorry — a good friend of mine from 

Swift Current, a cutting-horse enthusiast, farmer extraordinaire, 

Lorne Carefoot from Swift Current. Thank you. 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition on behalf of senior citizens in Saskatchewan 

who are finding it increasingly difficult to find options for 

suitable housing, and that more affordable housing options 

would significantly help Saskatchewan seniors cope with the 

cost of living, and especially for those living on fixed incomes. 

And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to act quickly as possible to expand 

affordable housing options for Saskatchewan‟s senior 

citizens. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present on behalf of Saskatchewan residents. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 

petition calling for wage equity for CBO [community-based 

organization] workers. We know that on average these folks are 

paid 8 to $10 an hour less than employees performing work of 

equal value in government departments. Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to 

read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the development and 

implementation of a multi-year funding plan to ensure that 

CBO workers achieve wage equity with employees who 

perform work of equal value in government departments. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And these petitioners come from all over the province including 

Southey, Regina, Zenon Park, Carrot River, Kelvington, St. 

Brieux, and Melfort, Saskatchewan. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

a petition in support of a new Saskatchewan Hospital. Mr. 

Speaker, the petitioners note that the existing nearly 

100-year-old structure is in much need of replacement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petitioners ask: 

 

. . . that the Legislative Assembly call upon the 



2372 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2009 

Government of Saskatchewan to immediately recommit 

funds and resources for the continued development and 

construction of a new Saskatchewan Hospital at North 

Battleford and provide the Prairie North Regional Health 

Authority with the authority necessary to complete this 

essential and much-needed project. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petitioners are from the city of North 

Battleford and the town of Battleford. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition in support of fairness for students in 

Saskatchewan through the expansion of the graduate retention 

program. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately expand the graduate retention 

program to include master‟s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are 

students from the University of Saskatchewan as well as 

students from the University of Regina, as well as a number of 

health care professionals who hold graduate degrees. I so 

present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu‟Appelle Valley. 

 

International Day for the Elimination of Racial 

Discrimination 

 

Ms. Ross: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in the House today to 

announce that this Saturday, March 21 is International Day for 

the Elimination of Racial Discrimination. This day was 

proclaimed by the United Nations in 1966. Each year on this 

date, events are held throughout the world drawing attention to 

the harmful impacts of racial discrimination. These events 

encourage people to embrace respect, equality, and diversity 

which contribute to racial harmony. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the International Day for the Elimination of Racial 

Discrimination is also important because it reminds us about the 

destructive nature of racism. Racism prevents individuals and 

groups from achieving their potential. We must work together 

to make our homes, communities, and our province inhospitable 

to racist attitudes. We must build a shared future that is free 

from discrimination and founded on mutual trust and respect. 

 

Saskatchewan is a province on the road to long-term prosperity, 

with a bright future for the current and future generations. Our 

government‟s vision is of a secure and prosperous 

Saskatchewan, leading the country in economic and population 

growth while providing opportunities for a high quality of life 

for all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, racism can only serve to destroy this vision. We 

must remember to celebrate and enjoy the rich cultural tapestry 

that makes this province truly a place to live. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Spring Free From Racism 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, international day for the 

elimination of racism is observed annually on March 21. 

Racism involves aggression, antagonism, and intimidation 

directed toward people perceived to be members of a social 

group on the basis of physical characteristics, notably skin 

colour. 

 

In Regina well over 3,000 people gathered this past Sunday, 

March 15 to attend the 10th annual Spring Free From Racism 

event organized around the theme of eliminating racism. The 

event featured over 40 different performances from various 

cultural performers and groups, cultural displays, and many 

craft booths. In the words of the organizing committee, the 

vibrant and diverse Spring Free From Racism event offers the 

community of Regina a setting to acknowledge our racial past, 

recognize the pervasiveness of racism today, and commit to a 

future in which all people in Saskatchewan are treated equally 

and fairly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I acknowledge the hard work and dedication of 

the Spring Free From Racism Co-Chairs, Barb Dedi and Lucian 

Rosca, and all those who made this event such a great success. 

 

On the occasion of the international day for the elimination of 

racism, New Democrats renew their commitment to build a 

society where dignity and justice replaces the hurt and fear of 

racism. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

2009 International Day of the Francophonie 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Merci, Monsieur le président. Monsieur le 

président, demain, le 20 mars, nous célébrons le jour 

international de la Francophonie. Chaque année, ce jour, les 

personnes à travers le monde célèbrent le lien commun de la 

langue française et de la diversité. 

 

[Translation:] Mr. Speaker, tomorrow, March 20, is 

International Day of the Francophonie. Every year on this day, 

people around the world celebrate the common bond of the 

French language and diversity. 

 

As one of the founding members of the international 

organization of Francophonie in 1970, Canada will join almost 

70 French-speaking states and governments from around the 



March 19, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2373 

world to promote Francophonie. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are not only celebrating the heritage of over 9 

million Canadian francophones, but the current vitality of 

francophone cultures, specifically of that here in Saskatchewan. 

Mr. Speaker, I am proud to come from a province where the 

francophone community contributes to our growth and 

strengthens our province. Through collaboration on programs in 

areas like immigration, employment, economic development, 

and education, the Fransaskois have demonstrated their 

commitment to their community and to Saskatchewan. 

 

J‟encourage chacun à considérer les contributions significatives 

de la Francophonie en Saskatchewan et à célébrer la diversité de 

nos citoyens de la langue française. 

 

[Translation:] I encourage everyone to reflect on the significant 

contributions of the Francophonie in Saskatchewan and help to 

celebrate the diversity of French-speaking citizens. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Shamrock Irish Dancers Perform in Prince Albert 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, in honour of St. Patrick‟s Day, 

the Shamrock Irish Dancers of Prince Albert held their annual 

dance event, An Eve in Ireland. The dancers showed off their 

skills at the A.E. Rawlinson Centre in a two-hour program that 

was filled with skill and lively, fast-moving dance steps. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s believed that the first practitioners of Irish 

dancing were Druids who danced in religious rituals. Dance 

clubs around the world continue to teach and perform this 

traditional dance today. It‟s a very strenuous dance, and new 

dancers must work very hard to get the technique right because 

it‟s a detailed and specific form of dance. Of course St. 

Patrick‟s Day is a special day for Irish dancers. 

 

The special costumes worn by today‟s Irish dancers 

commemorate the clothing of the past. Dancers are modelled on 

the Irish peasant dress worn 200 years ago and are often 

adorned with hand-embroidered Celtic designs. 

 

Each year the Shamrock Irish Dancers of Prince Albert host this 

event as a way of raising funds. These funds are used to send its 

dancers who qualify to the North American championships and 

world championships. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the dancers and their instructors spend many hours 

preparing for the St. Patrick‟s Day event. And I ask that all 

members join with me in congratulating Joanne Brydges, 

coordinator of Eve in Ireland, and to all the dancers of the 

Shamrock Irish Dancers of Prince Albert who every year make 

this event such a successful one. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Growth in Saskatchewan’s Economy 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, telling the positive 

Saskatchewan story continues to pay dividends. United Airlines 

has announced it will soon offer flights from Regina to Denver. 

The major international carrier is already flying that route of out 

Saskatoon. Congratulations to Regina Airport Authority 

president Jim Hunter and his staff for their hard work. They 

refused to take no for an answer and their tenacity paid off. 

 

Mr. Speaker, United‟s decision also follows an opportunity they 

had to speak with Premier Wall in Chicago last month. When 

the Premier spoke in Chicago, several United Airlines 

executives were there, and the story of Saskatchewan‟s growing 

economy left quite an impression on them. Mr. Speaker, our 

Premier has led the charge in spreading the story of 

Saskatchewan‟s strong economy, hard-working residents, and 

resource riches. This decision by United showcases how 

strongly that message resonates with the business community 

around the world. 

 

A recent poll showed that Saskatchewan residents continue to 

have confidence in our province‟s economy. Over 77 per cent 

of respondents said that our economy will be in the same shape 

or better a year from now. Against the negativity that is coming 

out of regions that are facing trying economic times, it is a 

welcome sign that Saskatchewan residents remain confident in 

their province. Our government is taking action to ensure its 

Saskatchewan economy remains strong and steady. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Z99 Radiothon 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, what‟s the radio station that never 

sleeps, even with a zed in its name? Z99 is that station, and CC, 

Lorie, and Buzz are celebrating 22 years of saving babies‟ lives. 

The Z99 radiothon started at 6 a.m. today and runs non-stop to 

6 p.m. Friday, based out of the Cornwall Centre. 

 

The neonatal intensive care unit at the Regina General is 

developing a procedure room to make babies in need diagnostic 

and surgical services immediately available. The Z99 radiothon 

2009 is raising money to buy critically needed equipment for 

the NICU [neonatal intensive care unit] procedure room. 

 

My pal — well okay, everybody‟s pal — CC is enjoying his 

22-year love affair with his raging masses, as he calls us. And 

we the raging masses respond with good feelings, kind 

thoughts, and hard cash. So far we raging masses, including 

again this year my colleagues in the legislature and all other 

donors, have given generously — more than $2 million and 

counting. Thanks Rawlco Radio, Z99, CC, Lorie, and Buzz. 

And mostly, thanks to the raging masses for their generosity. 

 

Friends, the Z99 radiothon is a great event. It‟s fun, it‟s serious, 

it‟s entertaining, and it‟s important. CC, Lorie, and Buzz are 



2374 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2009 

giving of themselves. Let‟s help. Join me in giving to the 

hospitals of Regina Z99 radiothon 2009. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood River. 

 

A Balanced Budget  

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, today is a good day for the people of Saskatchewan. 

Yesterday our government announced what is a rarity in these 

troubled economic times — a balanced budget. 

 

We kept another promise when we announced the largest ever 

education property tax cut in Saskatchewan‟s history. A record 

investment in infrastructure now stands at $2.6 billion. There‟s 

now a long-term solution for municipal revenue sharing. It is 

indeed a very good day for the people of Saskatchewan, but 

with their eyes firmly on the rear-view mirror, members 

opposite have decided not to share in that opinion. They are 

calling our balanced and cautious budget a potential train 

wreck. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, let me tell you about a real train wreck. That 

train wreck happened over 16 years. In that time, thousands of 

people left Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan had the highest 

education property taxes in Canada. The government of the day 

promised to do something about property taxes, then broke that 

promise. That was followed by the largest tax revolt in this 

province‟s history. There were deficit budgets — talk about a 

train wreck. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government is looking to the future. 

Saskatchewan is firmly on track, and we are taking action to 

ensure it remains there. We are keeping Saskatchewan strong 

and steady. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Provincial Debt 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

in the budget that was tabled yesterday, we noted with concern 

the amount of the provincial debt. Can the Minister of Finance 

confirm that the total government debt will increase from $8 

billion in the current fiscal year to $10.9 billion in the year 2013 

— an increase of 36.5 per cent? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s my 

pleasure to rise and have the opportunity to speak about the 

very strong performance of the Saskatchewan economy, and in 

particular to explain to the member opposite the debt situation 

in the province. We provided a historic decrease in General 

Revenue Fund debt from 38 to 40 per cent last year, reducing it 

to $4.2 billion. And that is going to remain steady and sure into 

the future. It will not increase. 

 

What is being increased is debt that is required by the Crowns 

to fix the infrastructure shortfall that was left this government 

by the former government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, we have a growth 

agenda in this government. We want to enjoy the growth of this 

province. We need to support that growth. And companies that 

are coming to our province need power, they need electricity, 

they need energy. They need those things in order to have the 

growth occurring and sustaining in this province. And we‟re 

going to fill that deficit that was left to us by the member‟s 

administration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — I‟m sure we can have fruitful 

discussions, Mr. Speaker, about where debt originated in this 

province and when it originated. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, can the 

minister confirm that in addition to an absolute increase in debt, 

the debt as a percentage of GDP, the gross domestic product, 

will grow from 11.9 per cent this year to 14.6 per cent of GDP 

in the year 2013? In other words, can the Minister of Finance 

confirm that this budget projects debt to grow faster than the 

provincial economy? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, it is always 

interesting to hear the comments of the member opposite who 

occupied the office that I now have. And it would seem that he 

occupied it without understanding the realities of the finances of 

the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, it is 

absolutely a necessary thing that has to happen in terms of 

improving the infrastructure of the Crowns — that we have to 

do capital expansions and that requires capital financing. The 

Crowns as entities are able to liquidate over time and amortize 

their long-term debt, and so they‟re treated differently than 

General Revenue Fund debt. 

 

This government made a very conscious effort, when we had 

windfall revenues last year, to reduce the General Revenue 



March 19, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2375 

Fund debt. And as you can see from the budget estimates, it 

went from $6.8 billion to 4.2 in one year under our 

administration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — We‟re also forecasting that this 

number of 4.2 is going to stay and remain steadfast going 

forward. And as I explained earlier, that is absolutely essential 

to keep the economy going, that we invest in infrastructure. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Crown utility 

customers beware. Speaking of explaining, Mr. Speaker, will 

the Premier be taking out a billboard in the year 2013 to say that 

he has increased the provincial debt by more than 36 per cent? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, there is one thing for 

sure the member opposite is right about, that our current 

Premier will be the premier in 2013. Mr. Speaker, and I am sure 

he will be very prideful to highlight the achievements in the 

economy that have been realized because there‟s been a 

government on this side of the House with a growth agenda. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am interesting in what choices that the member 

opposite would say that we should not do. Should we not fix the 

transmission capacity of SaskPower? Should we have not 

invested in broadband inclusion of all citizens in 

Saskatchewan? What are the things that you wouldn‟t do in 

order to make sure that the Crown revenue, debt remains at its 

current level? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Revenue Projections 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we all like to do all 

kinds of things, but someone has to pay for that. Mr. Speaker, 

this government is choosing to ignore private sector forecasters 

and is predicting dramatically higher GDP growth for the 

province. Private sector forecasters are predicting less than 1 

per cent economic growth, point six three per cent to be 

specific, for the province in 2009. Yet this government is 

forecasting 2.1 per cent growth in the real GDP. 

 

To the Minister of Finance: what is this government‟s 2.1 per 

cent real GDP growth projection based on, and why should 

Saskatchewan people believe the government, as opposed to 

private sector forecasting? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Before I recognize the Minister of Finance, I 

would like to remind the members, I think the public in general 

would like to also hear the response from the Minister of 

Finance. Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, every year the Ministry of Finance prepares and uses 

projections in terms of GDP growth going forward. Every year 

that‟s done using economic models that are very similar to what 

models are used by the public forecasters on a national basis. 

The fundamental difference between those models in the 

province and the national models is there is a great deal more 

input that is available on the local provincial scene, because this 

is exactly what the focus of our modelling is all about. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have a great deal of faith in the professionalism 

and the quality of advice that comes from the Ministry of 

Finance. I find it passing strange that the member opposite 

wouldn‟t have that same degree of confidence in the modelling, 

because it‟s the same methodology that‟s been used for a 

number of years. It‟s the same professionals. Are you calling 

into question the professionalism of Finance officials? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s very rare to see such a 

great difference between what the government is projecting and 

what private sector forecasters are projecting. And, Mr. 

Speaker, it‟s troubling to see that difference at this time of 

economic volatility. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party is projecting potash to 

generate almost $2 billion, one-fifth of the provincial revenue in 

the coming budget. This is an incredibly optimistic projection, 

considering that the Potash Corporation has just announced a 

further $1.5 million tonne cut in production, and market reports 

since the budget was prepared, market reports also point to 

changes in price structure, Mr. Speaker. To the minister: did his 

budget projections take into account the most recent cut in 

production by PotashCorp? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

potash revenues are indeed very important to the province of 

Saskatchewan, and in public statements that the member made 

yesterday he was just flat out wrong. The fact of the matter is, is 

that potash revenues are based on sales, not on production as 

the member said in his statements yesterday. And, Mr. Speaker, 

either the member knew that and told the people of 

Saskatchewan something different or he was too incompetent to 

understand that. And as a former Finance minister, that‟s 

absolutely reprehensible. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, you don‟t have to take it from me, you don‟t 

have to take it from Finance officials, you don‟t have to take it 

from Energy and Resources officials as to the accuracy of that. 



2376 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2009 

I‟ve also got in my possession a couple of emails that I received 

this morning from company officials, potash company officials. 

“On the question of revenue from potash taxes: The provincial 

revenue from potash is almost entirely based on the sales of 

potash not from the production of potash.” That comes from the 

vice-president in charge of finance with Mosaic. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Before I recognize the member from Regina 

Douglas Park, I would also ask members to give the member 

the opportunity to explain his question without interference. I 

recognize the member from Regina Douglas Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, we are accessing public 

information that has come to light since the budget was 

finalized a month ago. In this month the economic situation has 

changed rapidly and it is impacting Saskatchewan. In this 

month private forecasters have ratcheted down the province‟s 

real GDP growth and this is a factor not considered in the 

budget. This raises questions of budget integrity. To the 

minister: why should Saskatchewan people have any confidence 

in the out-of-date economic assumptions in this budget? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

also received from the Agrium CFO [chief financial officer], 

Bruce Waterman, with respect to this potash question: 

 

The current reduction in potash production volumes (due 

to what we consider a current temporary deferral of potash 

purchases) will not have a proportionate effect on 

Saskatchewan government revenues since the primary 

factor determining the levels of potash tax revenue is the 

sales . . . of potash, which is . . . internationally 

determined . . . 

 

That comes from the CFO of Agrium. Mr. Speaker, I think I 

may be willing to give the member opposite a mulligan on this 

one, but I doubt very much the people of Saskatchewan will. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Let me say this again. Private sector 

forecasters have ratcheted down the province‟s real GDP 

growth projections and there‟s lots of concern in the 

marketplace about what is taking place in the potash 

marketplace. I appreciate the fact that the minister and the 

cabinet did not have the opportunity to incorporate these 

changes to economic assumptions in the budget. Yet these 

matters call the budget into question. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there is still sufficient time to make changes to 

the budget before the new fiscal year. We in the opposition are 

prepared to co-operate with the government in facilitating this. 

To the minister: will he put forward amendments to the budget 

so that a more realistic budget can be considered by this 

Assembly? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I certainly appreciate the 

offer of support and help with the budget from the opposition. I 

hope that those members over there are also going to vote in 

favour of the budget when the time comes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[10:30] 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I‟ve learned very 

quickly in this job that if you want to have five economic 

forecasts, ask four economists. And, Mr. Speaker, the reality is 

there‟s a wide range of factors that go into economic forecasting 

and I have a great deal of confidence in the accuracy of the 

numbers that come from the Ministry of Finance and the 

professionals that work in that ministry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in addition to that, we‟ve made sure that we‟ve 

built in a fair bit of caution in all of our assumptions. For 

example, we have oil at 48.75; today it is at $51. We‟ve put 

potash in at $550 a KCl [potassium chloride] US [United 

States] ton and it is trading higher than that currently. Mr. 

Speaker, we‟ve also put in some caution in terms of currency 

exchange rates. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, even if our finance officials are wrong by half 

a percentage point, that is $50 million. Mr. Speaker, our surplus 

vastly exceeds it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Effect of Budget on Education 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, an important test of 

yesterday‟s announced changes in education funding is whether 

students in this province receive a quality education. 

Saskatchewan School Boards Association president, Roy 

Challis, put it best when he said, I quote, “We have to make 

sure the boys and girls of this province are served well by these 

changes.” He also noted that currently school boards have the 

financial flexibility to respond to the needs of their local 

students. 

 

To the minister: will the quality of children‟s education suffer 

because of local school boards no longer having the flexibility 

to respond to local needs? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 



March 19, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2377 

the member opposite was in the same profession as I was; we 

were teachers. And he recognizes the role that teachers play. He 

recognizes the role that school boards play. He recognizes, I‟m 

sure, that there needs to be dollars provided to ensure that 

quality education can take place, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s very evident yesterday‟s budget, when this 

government put 241 million additional dollars to fund 

education, Mr. Speaker, school boards, trustees, teachers, 

students, parents have been looking forward to this, where in 

fact now we recognize actual expenditures — not recognized 

expenditures, actual expenditures. This will allow all of the 29 

school boards to move forward with good education policies to 

ensure that quality education is delivered because, Mr. Speaker, 

it is the government now that will provide that funding to them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — It‟s the school boards, Mr. Speaker, that 

are concerned about the adequacy of that funding. Mr. Challis 

was very clear yesterday. He said that when the Saskatchewan 

School Boards Association met with the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose, they asked — the school boards — to ensure 

that they continue to have access to that property tax base. 

Instead the government decided to strip school boards of their 

power to determine mill rates, a decision which clearly took the 

school boards by surprise. 

 

Don Lloyd, a superintendent with Greater Saskatoon Catholic 

Schools, described the change as “a pretty big shock.” 

 

To the minister: why did the Sask Party not consult with the 

School Boards Association before deciding to strip them of the 

flexibility to respond to the local needs of their students? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there‟s been 

consultation going on for a long time, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, there were reports that that government 

commissioned: the Scharf-Langlois report, which was given to 

them. There was the Ray Boughen report and, Mr. Speaker, I 

have in my hands a research report by the Saskatchewan school 

boards trustees, done by Ernie Dawson, a discussion paper that 

indicated that across Canada, seven provinces, Mr. Speaker, 

have a system that we introduced yesterday or they have a 

system where there‟s 100 per cent funding from the province — 

seven provinces out of ten. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have been at meetings with the School Boards 

Association. I attended meetings with the member from 

Rosetown to indicate to them that we were considering different 

models. And, Mr. Speaker, I made it quite clear that the funding 

for education could be status quo or it could move up to 100 per 

cent. So, Mr. Speaker, it‟s not a surprise. There have been 

consultations with boards of education. There‟s been 

consultation with all of the stakeholders and yesterday, Mr. 

Speaker, this government did something that that government 

would not do. And we took a stand and now we will fund 

education adequately. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Education Property Tax 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, another example of 

legislate first, consult later. Mr. Speaker, another test of the 

government‟s property tax changes is fairness. The Sask Party 

claims to be sharing the benefits of prosperity with all 

Saskatchewan people, but it‟s clear that not all property owners 

are sharing in those benefits equally. Many homeowners, 

particularly those in Saskatoon, will be paying more. 

 

To the minister: is this his definition of fairness? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think we made it 

very clear yesterday when we announced that taxpayers across 

the province — the vast majority of taxpayers across the 

province — will see a saving of $103 million effective January 

1 of this year, and next year they‟re going to see a saving of an 

additional $53 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‟ve already discussed in this Legislative 

Assembly that the short-term rebate program that we introduced 

last year provided $156 million of additional funding to 

individuals. So you add the numbers together, Mr. Speaker — 

that‟s over $300 million of support to property owners. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s interesting that the Finance critic‟s quote 

yesterday from the opposition says this, “Well I think some of 

the government‟s initiatives are good initiatives in terms of 

property tax reduction.” 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the final test of changes to 

property tax is whether they will meet the commitment made in 

the Sask Party election. That commitment was to provide 

homeowners at least $450 a year in property tax relief. But 

many homeowners will not be saving $450 a year. In fact many 

homeowners, particularly those living in Saskatoon, will be 

paying more. I wonder where the member from Saskatoon 

Silver Springs was on this, or all those other Saskatoon 

members over there, as they‟re being handed a tax increase. 

 

To the minister: can the Sask Party justify breaking their own 

promise to Saskatchewan homeowners? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 



2378 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2009 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

we made our promise pretty clear. Our promise was that there 

was going to be an 80 per cent reduction to agricultural 

landowners. We made a promise that there was going to be a 20 

per cent reduction overall to residential owners. Mr. Speaker, 

we have kept those promises. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we were basing our assessment on our projections 

on the 2008 assessment. Mr. Speaker, boards of education have 

applied mill rates for years. Municipalities have taken those 

mill rates and they have applied mill rate factors — not in the 

control of the Ministry of Education. The Assessment 

Management Agency of the province puts forward the 

assessment rolls, Mr. Speaker, for this year, and there have been 

very significant changes to assessment for 2009. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I ask all people in the province of 

Saskatchewan, take a look at your 2008 assessment, apply the 

new mill rate — whether you‟re in residential or whether you‟re 

an agricultural producer — and you will see, Mr. Speaker, that 

they have indeed achieved the promise of the Saskatchewan 

Party. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Cost of Living 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the citizens of Saskatoon will 

be waiting for that $450 property tax cut. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yesterday‟s budget revealed that under a Sask 

Party government, low-income earners are now paying more. 

According to the government‟s own budget documents, a single 

person making $25,000 per year will pay 13 per cent more to 

live under a Sask Party government than they did in 2007. Mr. 

Speaker, according to Stats Canada, the national inflation rate 

rose to 1.4 per cent and Saskatchewan was almost double at 2.6 

per cent. 

 

To the minister: why aren‟t low-income earners benefiting from 

the government‟s creative financing? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, in a very short period of 

time — I believe it‟s been 16 months — we have done a 

number of significant initiatives to address low-income earners 

in this province. The tax cut that was done by this government 

took 80,000 people off of the tax roll. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — In addition, Mr. Speaker, we have the 

low-income tax credit, which is a cheque going to the 

low-income people within our province. 

 

For those that have a low-income job, Mr. Speaker, we 

increased the Saskatchewan employment supplement as well as 

the income level of who qualifies. Mr. Speaker, we addressed 

very quickly, after becoming government, shelter rates and 

rental supplements for the low-income people within our 

province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we over doubled the seniors‟ income plan 

within this province, something that that government never 

even looked at for 16 years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, according to their own 

documents, a single wage earner earning $25,000 in this 

province is paying $1,500 more in expenses under a Sask Party 

government. 

 

But yesterday‟s budget was a reminder with the Sask Party 

government in place that Saskatchewan is becoming less 

affordable. According to the government‟s own documents, in 

2007 Saskatoon was the most affordable city in Canada to live, 

compared to the largest cities in other provinces. In a year and a 

half under a Sask Party government, Saskatoon has slipped and 

is rapidly becoming one of Canada‟s most expensive cities. To 

the minister: why has the Sask Party government allowed the 

affordability of living in Saskatoon to slip so badly? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, we recognized 

immediately upon the election that housing was an issue in 

Saskatoon, and we addressed it immediately. With the shelter 

rate increases and the rental supplement increases that we did as 

soon as we became government, we indexed them, Mr. Speaker. 

And we indexed them to the levels within the community that 

someone lives. So that people qualified, depending on what 

Saskatoon rental prices are, so that they could realize a better 

rebate, which is something that that government never looked at 

for years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have also increased housing within Saskatoon 

to help the pressures. We announced $8 million for the Pleasant 

Hill area within Saskatoon, and we just made a significant 

announcement on student housing in Saskatoon which will help 

the housing market in Saskatoon considerably. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, again according to the 

Sask Party government‟s own budget documents, Saskatoon 

residents can expect to pay 11 per cent more for property tax 

this year than they did in 2007. So if paying more is the Sask 

Party‟s long-term solution for property tax, then they should do 

us all a favour and stop helping. 



March 19, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2379 

To the minister: on top of all of the other increasing costs in our 

province, why is it that the Sask Party with their five MLAs 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly] from Saskatoon are 

forcing Saskatoon people to pay more when it comes to 

property taxes? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, first of all, citizens right across this province, whether 

they live in Saskatoon or Regina or rural parts of the province 

or in the North, are enjoying some basic changes as a result of 

the election 16 months ago. They‟re enjoying the largest 

single-year tax reduction, income tax reduction in the history of 

the province. They‟re enjoying now, they will enjoy now the 

largest in-year property tax reduction in the history of the 

province. They‟re enjoying the fastest growing economy in all 

of Canada right here in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Yesterday the Finance critic talked about dark clouds hanging 

over Saskatchewan. I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that 

the dark clouds hanging over Saskatchewan are limited to the 

opposition benches over there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Because the people of this province, they 

like this new Saskatchewan. They‟re feeling optimistic about 

the economy. They‟re feeling optimistic about the fact that this 

government‟s acting on affordability issues. They‟re feeling 

optimistic about the best job growth rate in all of Canada, and 

they woke up this morning, Mr. Speaker, I think, proud to be in 

the province, optimistic about the fact that there is only one 

province with a balanced budget, and it‟s our Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Gantefoer that the Assembly approves 

in general the budgetary policy of the government.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In our system 

of government, it is the government that gets to spend the 

money in the budget, and it is the government that puts before 

the Legislative Assembly the budget that it wants passed and 

the budget that then provides the basis for spending on 

government programs. And so if we seem to be raising 

questions about the budget and the integrity of that budget, that 

is our job, Mr. Speaker, because although the government gets 

to spend it, the government can‟t spend it unless that 

expenditure is approved by the Legislative Assembly. 

 

So we have our jobs to do. And our job is to question the 

assumptions in the budget to ensure that the budget will in fact 

be a realistic budget that will stand the test of time, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in that vein I want to reiterate concerns 

that we have about economic growth assumptions in the budget. 

 

[10:45] 

 

Why is this a concern? Well, economic growth assumptions — 

the extent to which your economy will grow — will determine 

the revenues that you get. For example if there‟s strong 

economic growth, then we will see more people employed, 

more businesses making money, more people in a position to 

purchase goods. And all of those affect the government revenue 

basis. 

 

So with more people working at higher salaries means more 

income tax. More corporations doing business means more 

activity. More business income means more corporate taxes. 

More people spending means more sales taxes. Conversely if 

the economic growth projections are for little or no economic 

growth, it means that the government has to ratchet down its 

revenue assumptions. 

 

It also might mean that the government has to increase some of 

its projected expenses because, you know, if there‟s fewer 

people working because the economic growth predictions are 

more modest, fewer people working, it might mean more people 

having to access programs such as social assistance, and 

therefore government expenditures will go up. And there might 

be other less readily discernible or less clear links between 

reductions in the economy and social issues that the government 

is also called upon to respond to. 

 

So the question then of what kind of economic growth we see in 

the future in Saskatchewan should be a matter of concern to 

members of the Legislative Assembly, as it should be a matter 

of concern to the public. And the question is, are the growth 

assumptions that the government is putting forward, are they 

realistic assumptions? 

 

Well, one of the ways that we have in the Legislative Assembly 

to check to see, to check to see whether or not the growth 

assumptions are realistic assumptions, is to balance what it is 

that the government is projecting and forms the basis therefore 

of the budget with the average of projections from forecasters in 

the private sector. Who are these forecasters? Almost all of the 

major banks, almost all of the major banks, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

And you know this business of economic growth assumption is 

something the Premier should be listening to. 

 

Mr. Speaker, who provides the private sector forecast? Almost 

all of the banks, the major banks in Canada have very 

significant . . . 

 



2380 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2009 

The Speaker: — Order. I‟m not exactly sure what all the 

business is, but it seems to me that there‟s a lot of conversations 

going on, that it‟s making somewhat difficult to hear the 

member who‟s been given the floor. I recognize the member 

from Regina Douglas Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Speaker, typically when a 

Member of the Legislative Assembly can‟t be heard, it‟s 

because the other members of the House don‟t like the message. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, who are these private sector forecasters? In the 

main, as I said, they‟re private banks. They employ many 

people in research to look at the economies, not just nationally 

in Canada, but also to look at the economies provincially. It is 

on this basis that they make their decisions about what kind of 

lending practices and policies they should be looking at in 

future years, what kind of investment decisions they would 

counsel their clients to make, what kind of investment decisions 

they should be concerned about when they‟re presented those 

by their clients. So they have a great deal of expertise in 

projecting economies into the future. 

 

Typically in Saskatchewan . . . And almost invariably there is a 

great deal of similarity — and I wouldn‟t say exactly the same, 

but there‟s a great deal of similarity — between the consensus 

of what it is that the private sector forecasters are saying about 

growth in the economy and what it is that the government is 

projecting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, you know, in a typical year you might see private sector 

forecasters saying growth will be a certain amount. The 

government might be saying, well we think the growth will in 

fact be a percentage of one point less than that or a small 

percentage of one point more than that. When you track, when 

you track these figures over time, that‟s the conclusion that you 

come to, and that is that there is a great deal of similarity 

between what it is the private sector forecasters and all of the 

resources that they bring to bear on making these predictions, 

and what it is that the provincial government is projecting in 

terms of economic growth. 

 

And that then provides a level of comfort to members of the 

Legislative Assembly, that they can have some confidence in 

what the government is putting forward because it is not 

dissimilar to what others are saying about growth in your 

economy. 

 

I can only remember one year in the last 15 years or so where 

there has been any great disconnect between what private sector 

forecasters are saying and what the government was saying. 

And I think, if I‟m correct, that was a issue of methodology, 

somebody changing their methodology, and therefore the 

reason for the change. 

 

But this year there‟s no suggestion that the government is 

employing a different methodology, a different way of looking 

at things. It‟s looking at things the same way, using the same 

models that we‟ve looked at it for the last number of years. And 

what do we see, Mr. Speaker? That for the first time in a very 

long time, we see an absolute disconnect between what the 

government is projecting and what the private sector forecasters 

are projecting. 

 

Well again, that in and of itself wouldn‟t necessarily be an 

issue, wouldn‟t necessarily be an issue. But taken in the context, 

taken in the context of a global economy that is just so volatile 

— and I don‟t think I have to spend a lot of time explaining to 

people that are watching this about volatility in the economy — 

every day and every headline there is some reference to what is 

taking place in the global marketplace, what is happening 

financial institutions south of the border, what is happening in 

terms of commodity sales in other parts of the world, what is 

taking place in terms of manufacturing in Ontario and other 

parts of the United States. 

 

We all know there‟s a great deal of volatility. And if there‟s that 

kind of volatility, then we have to look at, when is it that 

government made their predictions in terms of what will take 

place in the economy. Well the government‟s process is — and 

I understand this, the government‟s process is — that some 

point in, oh I‟d say probably in January, the government 

received the budget documents from the Ministry of Finance, 

and the Ministry of Finance will have done its work and say, 

these are the economic growth assumptions in our budget. And 

therefore this is the revenue picture that we can present to you, 

based on these economic growth presumptions. Fair enough. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, what‟s happened here is that because of the 

volatility in the world economy, because of the volatility in the 

world economy, we see things changing very, very rapidly, Mr. 

Speaker, and it‟s not to the good. And that is what concerns us, 

that you have a government putting together a budget at a 

certain period of time that the world is changing, and changing 

considerably in that period of time, and the budget simply 

doesn‟t reflect the reality of what is taking place. And that then 

gives us a great deal of concern. 

 

Private sector forecasters, because they tend to put out their 

projections not at the same time the government does, but 

throughout the year we see from private sector forecasters their 

assessment that our projections for economic growth should be 

ratcheted down. So again we have a huge disconnect, a 

disconnect of time between when the government booked in its 

assumptions and when it is that . . . and the projections these 

days from private sector forecasters. 

 

So again when the government is wrong, when the government 

is wrong on this, then we have to question what impact it will 

have on the budget. The minister himself says that, oh well, if 

the forecast projections are off, wrong by say half of 1 per cent, 

it will mean a drop of about $60 million in the budget, in the 

revenues. Well in this particular case, we think that the 

government could be wrong far more than that. 

 

The government is still projecting 2.1 per cent economic 

growth. Private sector is projecting at this point, point six three 

per cent economic growth. And who knows, within a week or 

so the average of that might be down to half a point. And if 

people at home can do the math, but it doesn‟t take long to add 

up that potentially you could be looking at a shortfall of 200 . . . 

[inaudible] . . . dollars in the budget. 

 

And so we have to raise these issues. We have to be 

knowledgeable about these issues. The public has to be made 

aware of these issues in terms of how this informs us in our 

ability to cast a correct vote on the budget, Mr. Speaker. 



March 19, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2381 

So I don‟t want to go on about that, but I do want to raise this 

very considerable concern. And not just a concern that I have, 

but others outside the Legislative Assembly have as well about 

these wildly optimistic economic growth assumptions that the 

government has included in its budget. So enough said about 

that on my part, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to just talk for a minute again about potash projections. 

You know the government can say what they like — that 

production cuts really have no impact. Well at some point they 

do. At some point they do. And it will have an impact, Mr. 

Speaker. But I guess even more significantly, more significantly 

are the kind of market reports that we are seeing that are public 

market reports that have been made available since the budget 

was put to bed a couple of months ago. And again as I 

mentioned earlier, that the world is a volatile place. Many 

changes are taking place very rapidly in terms of the economy. 

And the question is, to what extent are these latest changes 

incorporated in the budget? Is it an up-to-date budget or is it an 

out-of-date budget, Mr. Speaker, I guess is the real question 

here. 

 

Well in the area of potash, the government may well have been 

informed in January by no less than the University of Illinois 

and their department of agriculture and consumer economics 

where they said, “Fertilizer prices likely to decline in 2009.” 

That: 

 

Since September, wholesale prices of fertilizers have 

declined dramatically. 

 

. . . The financial crisis [in the world] limited fertilizer 

applications in South America, as credit for purchasing 

fertilizer was constrained because of non-functioning 

credit markets. In North America, fertilizer manufacturers 

produced large amounts of fertilizer under expectations of 

high farmer use due to high commodity prices. However, 

farmer demands have been reduced because of lower 

commodity prices and higher fertilizer prices. 

 

A little market lesson there — high prices, low demand and “As 

a result, there are large amounts of unsold fertilizer in 

inventory.” 

 

And that may well have helped to inform the provincial 

government in setting its assumption for potash revenue in the 

budget, and that‟s no small thing. The budget, 20 per cent, 20 

per cent of all revenue — 1 in $5 — is projected to come from 

potash royalties and related surcharges. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, where I come from, if you have that great a 

reliance on one single revenue source — to put it in 

metaphorical terms, if you have that many eggs in one basket 

— you should be careful. You should be doubly careful, very 

careful, Mr. Speaker. Because since the budget was put to bed, 

what we get are indications that may not necessarily be 

incorporated in the government‟s assumptions about what is 

taking place in the potash industry and therefore what kind of 

revenues we can expect. 

 

We see for example potash company news, a market report 

which indicates that . . . and this is getting to the heart of how 

the potash industry works, where you have a small number of 

companies in North America that pretty much have agreement 

about production volumes and prices. 

 

[11:00] 

 

We even have Canpotex which is a Canadian firm that markets 

Canadian potash commodities to other parts of the world. I 

wouldn‟t say that the potash producers were a cartel, Mr. 

Speaker, but I think it‟s not a very large industry, and I think 

they speak in and among themselves. 

 

So it comes as a bit of a surprise then, and this is a surprise that 

has been announced since the budget comes out, that a major 

potash producer, in this case the Belarusian Potash Company 

which is an exporter of potash fertilizers, yesterday — and this 

is dated Friday, March 6, since the budget was finalized, Friday 

March 6 — said that, yesterday, they cut the price of potash for 

Brazilian customers for the first time since 2006. 

 

Well cutting prices to Brazilian potash consumers, farmers in 

Brazil, may not seem any major thing because our markets are 

primarily United States and China and, to some extent, India. 

But you know, it‟s a world marketplace. And Chinese 

consumers and Chinese buyers, when they see that Brazilians 

are able to command a lower price for potash because of the 

stock that currently sits in warehouses around the world — and 

I understand China at this point has very large inventories itself 

— it stands to reason that if there‟s a cut one place in the world, 

there will be a cut in prices in other parts of the world if you 

want to continue to sell your products. 

 

So the government can say what it likes about the budget and 

that the budget has integrity. The issue here again is the changes 

that have taken place in the world since this budget was printed. 

Since it was put to bed, there have been a great deal of changes, 

and a very significant change is the decision by the Belarusian 

Potash Company to lower their price at which they sell potash 

fertilizer into the Brazilian market. 

 

Analysts, in this case an analyst by the name of Limor Gruber, 

she says she “. . . believes that other potash producers will be 

forced to lower prices as well.” And it stands to reason; I mean 

it is a marketplace. She also says: 

 

Instead, the price cut is liable to snowball into an 

avalanche of price cuts whose size and scale cannot be 

estimated at this time. 

 

“. . . the price cut for the Brazilian deliveries is liable to 

whet the appetite of the Chinese.” [for lower prices as 

well and] This could definitely have an adverse effect on 

the global potash industry. 

 

Other analysts since that time . . . Here‟s one, March 13, an ad 

that I see or an article who says that, “Many analysts believe 

that the outlook is growing dim for fertilizer companies . . . 

potash prices are rising less than expected.” 

 

Another one indicates: 

 

The potash market will guide business decisions in . . .  

 

Although we believe that long-term potash fundamentals 



2382 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2009 

are solid, we expect the near-term market conditions to 

remain erratic and unpredictable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I guess the point is that, what I‟m getting back to 

is that if you have one single source of revenue in your budget, 

and it‟s just so large — in this case 20 per cent — and you see 

around you these indications of problems with that particular 

revenue source, then I think, to be responsible, a government 

needs to include that kind of latest thinking into its budget so 

that we have a realistic budget. That we don‟t have a budget 

that will be questioned at some point or a budget that, at some 

point, that will be showing a deficit. 

 

And this is the point that we‟re making, Mr. Speaker. A budget, 

yes it‟s great to have lots of spending initiatives. But again it‟s 

not a question of just what we would like. It‟s also a question of 

what we, the people of Saskatchewan, can afford. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, that is why I raised these questions about 

economic assumptions in the budget, revenue assumptions in 

the budget. Because if we don‟t, Mr. Speaker, we will be failing 

in our jobs of scrutinizing the budget to ensure that the budget 

is a realistic budget, a budget that will stand the test time, a 

budget that‟s not going to be changed at the end of the first 

quarter mid-year to reflect a deteriorating situation. 

 

So again I appreciate the government‟s conundrum. Here you 

have to put together a budget earlier than when it‟s presented. 

And you had a period of time between when your officials 

present you with a budget — and all the assumptions and 

consideration of that budget — and finally being put to bed 

probably about a month before we‟re considering it now. And 

again, in a world where the economy is just so volatile, so 

volatile that you‟re not able to include that in the budget, I think 

that the real answer for the government is to put together an 

amendment to the budget so that it updates the budget so that 

we, the members of the Legislative Assembly, can deal with a 

more realistic budget, Mr. Speaker, as opposed to the budget we 

have before us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‟re all aware — at least those of us in urban 

Saskatchewan — and certainly those in Regina, and I was also 

in Saskatoon and saw the same thing. And I don‟t where all the 

billboards are in Saskatchewan, but for those of us that drive 

around the major urban centres, we see lots of billboards. And 

one of the things that we‟ve been seeing on billboards of late is 

a billboard featuring the Premier. And the Premier saying that 

we‟ve cut the provincial debt by 40 per cent. Well just to be 

clear on that, it‟s not quite 40 per cent; I think the actual figure 

is 38.8 per cent. 

 

But it‟s not unlike the Premier to pick the higher number to 

round it off to. He‟s known for — in the past anyway, in 

opposition — for selectively using quotes to present one picture 

when in fact it wasn‟t the picture that was presented. So we 

understand the Premier embellishing this accomplishment 

because of very, very high oil prices, extraordinary revenues 

coming in, and the government lowering the debt. And I think 

that is a responsible and the right thing to do — very 

responsible thing to do. 

 

And I can tell you, as a former Finance minister — and my 

colleagues don‟t always want to hear this — that my first 

instinct is that when I have additional funds available, it‟s to 

lower debt because I understand what this means down the 

road. And especially for those that are concerned about social 

programs, I understand that lower debt means that you‟ll have 

greater flexibility to support what it is that you want to do down 

the road. So lowering debt is a good thing. And the Premier 

made sure that he was letting everybody in Saskatchewan know 

that he lowered the debt 40 per cent. 

 

I think there were radio ads that were also featured at that point. 

In fact one of the voices on the radio ad said, one announcer 

said, and the debt being cut by 40 per cent. And the other voice 

said, well that‟s a welcome change — implying that there hasn‟t 

been any debt reduction. 

 

In fact I encourage people to look at the financial history of 

Saskatchewan. They‟ll see that the NDP [New Democratic 

Party] in government with far less in the way of resources, also 

lowered debt, chipping away at it year over year but, you know, 

it might not be dramatic. But we made those changes as well, 

again having much less to work with than the government did in 

this last or, I guess, still the current fiscal year, but the 

2008-2009 fiscal year. 

 

So having seen that and given all the attention that‟s been 

focused on that, we then are very concerned to see that the total 

debt of the province is projected to increase again, and to 

increase dramatically. In fact by the year 2013, the total debt of 

Saskatchewan will have increased about 36 per cent from this 

year and, you know, that is something that should concern the 

people of Saskatchewan when we see this debt situation going 

the other way. 

 

Now the government says that, well not to worry; this is debt by 

the Crown corporations. The Crown corporations need to get 

caught up on their infrastructure. I don‟t quite understand why it 

would be escalating to such a great extent, why it would be 

escalating into the extent of 2-plus billion dollars. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will have to very carefully examine these 

activities by the Crowns because that party, that party in the 

1980s had this little habit, you know, this little habit of burying 

in the Crowns expenditures that should have been rightfully 

stated as an expenditure of the government, but burying in the 

Crown in an attempt to hide what was taking place to 

accomplish their agenda in ways that can‟t be accepted by those 

who put forward our financial statements and those who review 

our financial statements. So we have that concern. 

 

The other concern that this raises, that this . . . And you know, 

the budget document states that this massive increase in debt in 

the Crowns, this rapid escalation of debt in the Crowns will be 

paid for by the utility customers of the Crowns. And so there‟s a 

question here: are the good times that we‟re experiencing in 

terms of property tax cuts and the like, is this something that‟s 

going to be clawed back on your utility bills, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Because when I see this kind of rapid and substantial increase in 

debt . . . And debt has to be paid for. We all know that. There is 

no debt that, you know, that you can avoid, that you can escape. 

Someone has to pay for that debt, and this debt is proposed to 

be paid for by the utility customers — those who buy from 

SaskPower, those who buy from SaskEnergy, those who get 



March 19, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2383 

their telephone services from SaskTel. These are the people that 

will be paying for this debt. And so the question again remains 

that if you have a 36 per cent increase in the debt, Mr. Speaker, 

does it follow that there will be a 36 per cent increase in the 

services from those companies? That power rates and energy 

rates over time will be going up by that amount if not more. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that is a concern that we have and this is an 

issue that will bear some close scrutiny as we go forward as to 

exactly what it is the government is looking at. 

 

Mr. Speaker, speaking of scrutiny, there‟s another little issue 

that concerns me and this is the issue of spending. And I know 

the government say, you favour spending and this and that, and 

you support property tax cuts. Well we all support a new, you 

know, initiative. Might not do it in the same way. Might not 

blow up the school boards like the way that they‟re doing, but 

still would want to support property taxes. Might say that, you 

know, the economic assumptions just don‟t exactly support the 

expenditures that you have in your budget, so maybe you do 

things over a slightly longer period of time to reduce the cost 

going forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Those are options that the government has, but it‟s not an 

option that‟s being considered by this government. Because the 

expenses, or the expense in this budget, the spending in this 

budget is up 12.4 per cent — 12.4 per cent; did I underline that? 

— 12.4 per cent over the previous year. And last year‟s, that 

particular budget, the spending was up 10 per cent over the year 

before that. So in two years — two Saskatchewan Party budgets 

— spending in Saskatchewan has gone up by 22.4 per cent. And 

someone‟s trying to tell me, well there‟s a compounding effect 

so it‟s actually more than that. I‟m not sure I quite understand 

that and I‟d have to get out a calculator to figure that out, that it 

might actually be more than 22.4 per cent. 

 

But let‟s just take those figures and say spending has gone up 

by 22.4 per cent — 22.4 per cent in two budgets by this 

government. Can they explain, can they explain to the members 

of the Legislative Assembly, can they explain to the people of 

Saskatchewan how that kind of an increase in spending is 

sustainable? Can they explain that? They‟ve not made any 

effort to explain it here in this Assembly. When we ask 

questions about these things, you get blown away by, you 

know, your own priorities and . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the member 

from Regina Douglas Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So again can 

this, spending increases, be explained? I can tell you that some 

of their core supporters will be rolling over and wondering 

about where their party is headed. This is a party of course, Mr. 

Speaker, that campaigned in the last election of having 

spending increases during this term of government, roughly 3 

per cent a year. And then I went and looked at it again to make 

sure I didn‟t misunderstand it. Were they saying 3 per cent per 

quarter or 12 per cent per year? Maybe I misread it. But you 

know, I went back and no, I didn‟t misread it. 

 

[11:15] 

 

Maybe there‟s some fine print there that didn‟t come through on 

the photocopier, because the Premier is notorious for having 

fine-print qualifications on the things that he said. But no, I 

checked and there‟s no fine-print qualifications. And so you 

know, this is a political party that, a couple of years or so it 

said, don‟t worry, spending will only go up with us about 

maybe 3 per cent per year on average. Don‟t worry; we‟re going 

to be very responsible that way. 

 

People said, that‟s great. We get what we want, all your 

promises that you made, and spending is only going to go up by 

3 per cent a year. Well you know, when I looked at that I said, 

you know, it‟s kind of like a miracle. I‟m tempted to vote for 

that myself. But I know, of course, enough about budgets to 

know that, you know, something‟s got to give. And either 

you‟re not going to follow through on those commitments or 

you‟re not going to be able to stick to your commitments. 

 

And what we know now, of course, is the government hasn‟t 

been able to stick to this promise of an average of 3 per cent 

spending increase over the course of its term annually. Not 

unless they‟re planning to actually ratchet back the next two 

budgets. But I don‟t see any appetite or any indication from this 

budget that they will be doing that. So, Mr. Speaker, this is an 

area of great concern. 

 

The minister himself, the Minister of Finance himself, last year 

was asked about this and said, well we think actually that in the 

coming fiscal year — that‟s the budget we‟re now considering 

— we‟ll be able to keep the expenditure increases down to 5 per 

cent. Well I don‟t think so. It‟s actually 12.4 per cent. So 

something is not quite adding up here, Mr. Speaker, in what 

seems to be a sense from the Finance minister that the 

expenditure increases should be less, but we see this budget 

with these massive increases in spending. 

 

So when we talk about runaway spending, we mean that once 

you‟re on a track to increase expenditures in that fashion, how 

will you be able to reduce that? How will you be able to cut that 

back? 

 

I know that, you know, one of the columnists today has his own 

theories on how that can be done simply. But then he‟s not been 

in the cabinet and he‟s not sat around the Treasury Board. And 

so, when you‟re looking at it from the outside, a lot of things 

are simple. You just cut back on infrastructure and so on to 

bring the budget into line. Well, I don‟t think it‟s quite that 

simple, Mr. Speaker. It‟s not quite that simple. 

 

So the question we have, given that this is one budget that‟s part 

of a financial plan going forward, how is this sustainable? How 

is this spending going to be sustained next year? What realistic 

increase in spending will we see next year? And if it‟s much 

less than what we have today, how will that be accomplished? 

What will be cut? What will be eliminated? What misery will 

be inflicted on Saskatchewan people because all of a sudden the 

government‟s decided, whoa, we‟ve got a spending problem 

here and we‟ve got to cut back. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we are very concerned by what we see in this 

budget with respect to spending, Mr. Speaker — very, very 

concerned. And having said that, Mr. Speaker, we will continue 

to advocate for the priorities that we think the government 

should be considering. We will have our own ideas as to what 



2384 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2009 

we think is important versus what they think is important. We 

will continue to advocate the priorities we think important. We 

will continue to advocate for those people in our society that are 

being left out of the government‟s gravy train, because there are 

people that are being left out — people that they don‟t really 

seem to care very much about. Oh, they say all the right words 

and so on, but they don‟t seem to care very much, Mr. Speaker. 

And so we will continue to advocate for those that really have 

no voice to advocate for themselves. And we will continue to 

advocate for different priorities for this government, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, so again, spending, spending, spending is out of 

control. It is simply not sustainable and we, as responsible 

members of the Legislative Assembly, have to concern 

ourselves about the increases in spending that we see. Because 

I‟ve seen this before. I‟ve seen this before where you‟ve had a 

government with runaway spending, spending out of control, 

then a huge contraction and all kinds of misery being created 

for a short period of time, and then right back on the spending 

train again. And that was in the 1980s and, Mr. Speaker, that is 

a legacy that we‟re still dealing with in this province. We had 

bad government, making bad decisions, not able to control the 

spending in this province, Mr. Speaker. So that is a source of 

concern throughout. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to conclude my remarks to just address one 

particular issue that is in this budget, and that is the decision by 

the government to effectively eliminate the ability of school 

boards in Saskatchewan to set local priorities to reflect local 

needs in terms of developing budgets for their school boards. 

What the government has done is that they‟ve set the school 

boards . . . As opposed to you having the ability to set your mill 

rates and collect the taxes you think you need to run your 

operations, we‟re going to take that away. We‟re going to take 

that away and we‟re going to set provincial mill rates. 

 

And so I make this prediction that, having taken away the 

ability of school boards to raise their own revenues — and that 

the school board, essentially their only job will be to take the 

money that is provided by the provincial government and then 

to allocate that in terms of, you know, schools and teachers and 

programs in their own areas, simply have one revenue source — 

it just doesn‟t follow that you will continue to have elected 

boards. I predict that within six years that we will no longer see 

elected school boards in Saskatchewan. 

 

The government will take the position, why would we have 

elected school boards? All they ever do is complain to us. All 

they ever do is complain to us about the money that we‟re not 

getting from the provincial government. Well because they have 

no other revenue source. You know, typically school boards 

have to marry concerns about funding from the provincial 

government with what it is that they want to fund and they can 

get from the local revenue source. 

 

So there‟s some element here of responsibility that you have 

when you have to answer to your local taxpayers about the 

programs you‟re putting forward and what it is you‟re funding 

and why it‟s important, but now don‟t have that. 

 

And I expect that similarly, as was the case with health boards, 

where the previous government set up health boards, had people 

elected to those health boards . . . And I took the position at that 

point — wasn‟t a member of the government, wasn‟t a member 

of the caucus — that wouldn‟t work. It just doesn‟t work. You 

don‟t elect people to provide services, and those people then 

have a revenue base that they have no control over. It doesn‟t 

work to then have elected people. And I expect that within six 

years or so that school boards will become appointees of the 

provincial government to manage things on a regional basis that 

would no longer have elected boards. 

 

And that is a question, that is a question I think that requires 

more significant debate in Saskatchewan given that we have a 

history of working with people on the local level, respecting 

local autonomy in terms of local people being able to elect 

people to make decisions for themselves as to what priorities 

they want to see, that we‟re now headed towards no more local 

accountability and — again as I indicated — no more elected 

local boards, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I think that given our history of 100-plus years of doing 

things in a certain way, that the government went through the 

back door in the budget, blow up the boards. And essentially 

that‟s what‟s going to be happening, that the government would 

do that as opposed to having a debate in Saskatchewan about 

whether or not elected boards are desirable and whether we 

should continue with a tradition that we‟ve had for 100-plus 

years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan, it has been said, has more local 

governments than any jurisdiction in Christendom. And you 

know, when you look at the pattern of settlement in 

Saskatchewan versus, say, Manitoba — the amount of area 

that‟s given over to agriculture, the development of 

communities in our history — we understand why we would 

have more communities and more local governments in all of 

Saskatchewan than many jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And this has always been an issue that has chafed at people. 

And especially some people at the University of Saskatchewan 

will always come forward with ideas about, you know, 

amalgamating communities, doing things in a certain way, 

having fewer local governments. And I‟ve never been of that 

opinion. I take the opinion that the more people you have at the 

local level that are elected by their citizens to take control of the 

things that affect them, that are accountable to the people in a 

local community, the better it is. 

 

And that‟s not to say that we won‟t have problems. That‟s not 

to say that we won‟t have conflicts. That‟s not to say that, you 

know, changes won‟t happen in demographics in Saskatchewan 

that call into question sometimes the viability of certain local 

government units and the like. And it called into question the 

viability of school boards in the past. But to say, as the 

government has done, that, well we don‟t like the conflict that 

we‟re seeing from school boards in this last year, we don‟t like 

the conflict in presenting us with school closures, so our answer 

is to blow up the school boards. 

 

Well I don‟t support that approach, because I fear then where 

that might extend to in terms of other local governments. I think 

that if we leave local governments to work among themselves, 

look for opportunities to work together, provide them with 

assistance if there are extraordinary challenges in terms of 



March 19, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2385 

looking at specific issues where we can provide a framework 

for them to work together, we will get better government for the 

people of Saskatchewan. We will get better service for the 

people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And I tell you that this 

direction by the government is completely headed in the wrong 

direction as far as I‟m concerned and what I believe. 

 

My background in government, before I came to the Legislative 

Assembly, was on council of the city of Regina. I have a strong 

belief that local people — if given any opportunity to make 

decisions about their own priorities, to elect themselves, and to 

be accountable to themselves — will do the right thing in the 

fullness of time, Mr. Speaker. And I fear that this government, 

given its intolerance of any discord, at some future time would 

take even more dramatic action with respect to local 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I want to leave my remarks with that particular concern. 

That is a concern that I have. And again that may not be a 

concern that‟s shared by members of the government. That may 

not even be a concern shared by all members on this side. But 

that is a concern that I have because of the experiences that 

have formed my public life and experiences that I‟ve always 

taken as being important to me, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I‟ve said enough. My colleagues are anxious 

to make their own contributions to debate, and therefore, Mr. 

Speaker, having looked at the budget, having looked at the 

budget and taking into account what I‟ve said about the 

economic growth assumptions and the revenue assumptions in 

the budget, and again the concern that we have about debt 

increasing, Mr. Speaker, I would move: 

 

That all of the words after “that the Assembly” be deleted 

and the following be added: 

 

condemn this government for the return to poor fiscal 

management in the budget process and increasing the debt 

of the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so move, seconded by the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the member 

from Regina Douglas Park, seconded by the member from 

Regina Coronation Park: 

 

That all the words after “that the Assembly” be deleted 

and the following be added: 

 

condemn this government for the return to poor fiscal 

management in the budget process and increasing the debt 

of the province. 

 

I recognize the member from Regina Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

My first words are words of pride — pride in my friend, pride 

in my colleague, pride in my seatmate, the hon. member for 

Regina Douglas Park, who just so well belled the cat, so well 

outlined some of the concerns that we have with this budget. 

The member for Douglas Park has had many, many stellar 

moments in this legislature, and this one is right up with some 

of the very, very finest of his contributions to Saskatchewan and 

to the legislature and to all of us so I‟m . . . Now I seldom do 

this but I‟m now on the record being very proud of my friend 

and my colleague. 

 

[11:30] 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we live in a great province — 

Saskatchewan. It is arguably the best province in the best 

country in the world. And very few of us in this Chamber, on 

either side of the House, feel any differently than that‟s just the 

way it is. That‟s the truth about Saskatchewan. 

 

Saskatchewan people are just amongst the very finest people in 

the world. They‟re great people and they deserve and can take 

the unvarnished truth. Just tell us what the real situation is and 

Saskatchewan people will respond. We always have and always 

will. We‟re products of hard times. There‟s just no question 

about it, whether it‟s our harsh weather, being the extreme heat 

in the summer or the extreme cold in the winter or the 

mosquitoes that are the size of buzzards — at times it feels that 

way — but we know hardship when it‟s farming and there‟s no 

moisture. And I‟ve seen that. Maybe it‟s having a bumper crop 

coming and you see that crop disappear to hail, just in a matter 

of moments. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the budget 2009-10 has some concerns that 

we have in it. I look at the growth assumptions and it causes me 

a great deal of consternation. When you have RBC [Royal Bank 

of Canada] that at one time was projecting the growth rate of 

2.8 per cent annual growth this year, having just reduced it 

earlier this week to point nine, that‟s less than one-third of what 

its projection was before, and at point nine, RBC is fairly rosy. 

 

Scotiabank, which had been at point six per cent growth 

forecast for Saskatchewan, now is forecasting neither economic 

growth nor deflation in Saskatchewan. They‟re projecting zero. 

And you can put as many zeros on that as you want, either way, 

and it doesn‟t much matter where you put the decimal point. 

 

The fact is they‟re saying our economy will neither grow nor 

shrink. Despite that we have, in the budget document tabled 

yesterday, we have the province of Saskatchewan, Minister of 

Finance saying that Saskatchewan is going to enjoy economic 

GDP — gross domestic product — growth of 2.1 per cent, 

wildly, wildly beyond anything that any of the private 

forecasters have put together, including the private forecasters 

that the government, the Minister of Finance, put in his own 

document. And so we‟re quite concerned that the growth 

assumption is unrealistically high. 

 

And we have some reason to fear the unrealistic growth 

projections, Mr. Deputy Speaker, not the least of which is an 

article on St. Patrick‟s Day in the business page of the 

Leader-Post, the headline of which is, “PotashCorp lays off 

940, more production to be cut.” More production to be cut. 

And earlier in question period we heard the hon. minister, the 

member for Kindersley, saying, well production is disconnected 

from sales. 

 

Well intuitively there isn‟t a soul in the world that really 



2386 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2009 

believes that you would have no production and yet have great 

sales. Every operation I have ever, ever seen in my life, the 

better the sales are, they ramp up production. When sales are 

tanking, they cut production. And this is the second. This time 

it‟s one and a half million tonnes per year — the production cut 

on the heels of an earlier 2 million tonne production out of an 

industry that produces not much more than 10 million tonnes in 

an entire year. So I mean I leave the math to you, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and to anyone else, but the potash projections are even 

rosier than the colour of the potash, which is pink. There is no 

way that, with credibility, that a Minister of Finance can say 

certainly that the sales are going to be there. 

 

The news report I saw a couple nights ago showed railcars at 

the potash mine, potash Allan mine, and the report said that 

those railcars of potash had been there all year. Now admittedly 

all year is January, February, and now we‟re into the second 

half of March, so it‟s just over two and half months. But this is 

a time when potash should be moving. So there‟s just no 

question that on the volume, there‟s real concerns. 

 

And then we keep hearing about sales pressure downward. My 

colleague pointed out that in Brazil they‟ve lowered the price of 

potash sales in the country of Brazil, and it‟s the first time 

they‟d lowered it — if I heard him right — since 2006. In 2005, 

in 2006, and 2007, potash was selling on the market for within 

10 per cent of $300 a tonne in all three of those years. And this 

budget is projecting potash at, I believe, about 550 million 

tonnes. 

 

And we know that the production is being cut by PCS [Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan Inc.] in an effort to force prices 

up, but we also know that it doesn‟t much matter what the price 

of potash is if there‟s no sales. So those projections are clearly, 

clearly suspect and they‟re $2 out of every 10 in this year‟s 

budget — 20 per cent, or $2 billion out of a $10 billion budget, 

$2 billion comes from potash. It‟s by far the most we‟ve ever, 

ever budgeted to receive from potash. 

 

And I‟ve seen this picture before, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I have 

seen projections that are just whatever it takes to make a 

balanced budget. We saw that in the ‟80s and I‟m fearful, Mr. 

Speaker, because we were the ones that picked up the mess, I‟m 

fearful that the Saskatchewan people will be stuck with a mess 

at some point in the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m going to flip from potash and the rosy 

economic projections in this budget that was presented 

yesterday to talk about the flip side of a budget because really 

what a government does is they bring in money based on a 

whole host of things, and on the flip side they make 

expenditures, presumably of money that they brought in from 

potash, from personal income tax, from gas tax, and from all of 

the other assorted and sundry methods of bringing in income. 

 

But in the spending side, Mr. Deputy Speaker, last year this 

government increased, ratcheted up its spending by more than 

10 per cent from the year before, more than 10 per cent increase 

last year. In this budget, it makes last year‟s look small. This 

year it‟s going up 12.4 per cent — 22.4 per cent increase in 

expenditures of government, of tax dollars, 22.4 year increase 

in a two-year cycle. And you need phenomenal economic 

growth to sustain that. That‟s one point I want to make. 

And I just want to say I heard from the Minister of Finance 

earlier today, in question period, when he said one half of one 

per cent of economic growth equals about $50 million in this 

budget. So if we had huge growth, huge growth, you know, it 

just doesn‟t make a twenty-two and a half per cent increase in 

expenditures in a two-year period sustainable. Or put it another 

way: 11.2 per cent per year, double-digit increases in 

government spending each year. It‟s just not sustainable. And 

nobody with credibility would ever argue that it is, and indeed 

that‟s not what the Sask Party campaigned on. 

 

So I‟m really, really concerned. The budget has some nice 

things in it. There‟s some welcome things in it, but how do you 

pay for it and how do you pay for it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the 

long, in the ongoing? How sustainable is this budget? And mark 

my words, members across the way are going to say, it‟s 

sustainable because of economic growth, because they‟re going 

to lead us into economic growth. Well members are clapping. I 

tell you, members, you cannot have it both ways. You cannot 

have it both ways, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Minister of Finance earlier today says one half of one per 

cent equals about $50 million in revenue to the province of 

Saskatchewan. That doesn‟t sustain double-digit, 11.2 per cent 

growth in spending year after year after year. It doesn‟t work. It 

just doesn‟t add up. It doesn‟t. 

 

We‟ve seen this picture before. The Premier was part of the 

Grant Devine administration. He was an adviser at that time. He 

should know better. Members opposite should know that 

governing is about making choices. That‟s what governance is 

all about, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I‟m not at all convinced 

that this government has learned anything about making choices 

yet. It‟s always nice to be Santa Claus with somebody else‟s 

money, but that somebody else is the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan, and they‟re the ones left holding the empty toy 

sack when you people are done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the debt is clearly increasing in this budget. And, 

you know, you can mount an argument, well they came into 

more than $2 billion in extra revenue last year that was 

unbudgeted for, and it was put to debt. And that was a good 

thing. Much of that was put to debt, and that was a good thing 

that the government did last year. 

 

Now the debt is turning around and they‟re driving it up. The 

biggest jump this year, and you know what, you can mount an 

argument, well we chunked down lots of debt last year so we‟re 

going to put that back into the debt file this year. We‟re going 

to borrow and it just balances out. 

 

You can mount that argument and I might even, with a great 

deal of trepidation and nervousness, I might even accept that 

argument, Mr. Deputy Speaker, except, except for the following 

year when the debt again increases according to this budget 

projection, and the following year when the debt again 

increases, and the following year when in this the debt again 

increases. And it‟s not just in terms of dollars. It‟s the debt is 

going to increase as a percentage of the gross domestic product. 

 

As my colleague pointed out, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the debt is 

going to increase. According to the Minister of Finance and the 

government members opposite, the debt of Saskatchewan, 



March 19, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2387 

supported by taxpayers, is going to increase faster than our 

ability to pay for it, faster than the Saskatchewan gross 

domestic product is going to increase. 

 

You can do that in a rare occasion one year. He said, well we 

have this crisis. You know our major hospital burnt down, we 

have to rebuild it, or . . . Bad crisis, perhaps. But in a crisis 

situation, in a one year, you might find yourself overextended, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

When you are projecting that you are overextending four years 

in a row, and when this year‟s budget is projecting expenditures 

to grow at a much faster rate than their own budget last year 

projected, because they did a four-year cycle, and if you look at 

the out years, the expenditures of the province of Saskatchewan 

in this budget are now projected to be $2 billion more in the 

final year than they were projecting them to be last year. $2 

billion is not chump change. That‟s a lot of tax dollars. That‟s a 

lot of money going out the door. That‟s a lot of debt that is 

potentially being built up on behalf of taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And what are they saying about the debt increase? Well they‟re 

saying, oh but it‟s all in the Crowns. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

I‟ve seen that picture before, too. Many of us were around — 

and I‟ve mentioned the Premier was around; others were around 

too — many of us were around through the 1980s, certainly 

living in Saskatchewan through the 1980s when the Grant 

Devine right wing government stripped the Crowns of their 

assets, took that money into the General Revenue Fund and 

spent it willy-nilly. 

 

We used to say, and I said it many times in the legislature then, 

that the Grant Devine government was spending money like 

drunken sailors. And I apologize to every drunken sailor I might 

have offended when I said that. And we‟re seeing the 

beginnings, potential beginnings, of the same cycle: 

overinflated revenues. And that‟s what the Grant Devine 

government did then — overinflated the estimate of income and 

underestimated the expenditures to the point that the year I got 

here, in 1986, the budget was $1.2 billion that year alone in 

deficit, out of a roughly $4 billion annual budget at that time. It 

was unbelievable. 

 

[11:45] 

 

Well you know, Mr. Speaker, we‟ve seen that entire picture, 

and I was part of the Romanow administration that turned that 

around. And it was tough times, and it was tough times on 

Saskatchewan people, but we did what governments have an 

obligation to do. We did what governments have an obligation 

to do, and we made darn sure that every one of the bills got 

paid. 

 

We cut the frills and paid the bills at a time when borrowing 

money was incredibly difficult. The New York money market, 

even though it was buoyant at the time, had dried up because at 

the end of the Grant Devine era, our credit rating was BBB — 

BBB — junk bond credit rating, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We 

couldn‟t borrow money. 

 

And the member opposite is chirping, how much debt was it? It 

was so darn much debt that we were BBB by the bond raters. It 

was twelve and a half billion dollars, the debt. And, Mr. 

Speaker, it is bizarre. And the debt did grow in the first two 

years of our administration until we could catch up to a 

balanced budget with a surplus and start paying it down. But 

enough of that history. 

 

You learn from history to try and prevent us from repeating it, 

Mr. Speaker. And this budget . . . I refer people to page 60 of 

the budget document where it shows the total debt as a 

percentage of GDP. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟ve outlined my concerns around the 

overinflation of revenue projections. I‟ve outlined some of the 

concerns of overspending. I‟ve sort of keyed in a little bit that 

the Crowns are in danger of being stripped. We see that that‟s 

something that right wing governments seem to want to do, and 

I remember us having to put taxpayer money into the Crowns in 

1992 just so they could continue to operate and provide services 

to the people of Saskatchewan. That‟s some of the history that I 

know. 

 

And I know that any member that says economic growth is 

going to take care of the shortfall is just, they‟re following the 

Bob Andrew school of economics. Bob Andrew was the first 

minister of Finance of Grant Devine. Bob Andrew was a decent 

enough fellow, but he said . . . There‟s one quote I remember in 

his first budget, and he said, Saskatchewan‟s introduced the first 

intelligent budget in Canada — intelligent because the 

economic growth is going to take care of the shortfall. 

 

And I tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that first budget that he 

introduced in 1982 for ‟82-83, that very first budget he 

introduced that had a, I believe it was $227 million deficit 

projection, that was the closest that that right wing government 

ever got to a balanced budget in 11 going on 28 years — long 

years. They were eleven and a half real long years for the 

people of Saskatchewan. And that was the closest they ever 

came to a balanced budget. 

 

I also note as I‟m going through the budget documents that the 

total indebtedness of the province is going to go up $25 million. 

It‟s a small amount. It‟s a very small amount, but the total 

indebtedness is going up. And that tells me that projections of 

balance may be lacking. 

 

So this year the GRF, General Revenue Fund, expense forecast 

for — I‟m going to go to the out year again just to be crystal 

clear — 2012-13. Last year the budget document said the 

expense forecasts were going to be $10.3 billion. This year it‟s 

now $12 billion. That‟s an increase of nearly $2 billion. 

Because the government got it so wrong last year, they‟re 

telling us they haven‟t changed anything, but they got it wrong 

last year. And I totally lack confidence in the economic 

projections that this government has of growth and what it‟s 

projecting it‟s going to grow in revenue for the province. 

 

I am fundamentally at odds with the government respecting 

Crown corporations, which should have a great and honourable 

future serving all of the people of Saskatchewan in a great way. 

But all we‟ve seen so far is the highest natural gas rates this 

winter heating season, the highest natural gas rates in all of 

Canada for residences, and now we‟re seeing a 13 per cent 

asked-for increase in SaskPower rates. 



2388 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2009 

And I want to point out, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that SaskEnergy 

and SaskPower enjoyed very good earnings in the past year and 

in the year before and in the year before that. So it‟s not that 

either . . . that in any way you can cry poverty. What you can 

say is the government has a real need for cash, and they‟re 

going to strip a bunch of that cash from those Crowns. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was reflecting on the budget. And yesterday 

right after it was given, and I thought, you know, when I was 

18, I overestimated what my income was going to be, and I had 

no idea what my expenses were going to be. And of course if I 

budgeted them at all, I lowballed the expenses very, very, very 

much. I can tell you that‟s what I see happening in this budget. 

And I can tell you that when I was 18, my budget didn‟t work 

out all that great. And I hope this one works out better for the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think I‟ve outlined what I needed to. I hope I did 

in my allotted time. I know that other members . . . I‟m looking 

forward to other members, particularly on this side of the 

House, but I‟m looking forward to members on the opposite 

side as they might try and justify how it is that you can have 

double-digit growth in government spending year after year 

after year. How is it you can ratchet up spending like that and 

not have a deficit? How is it that this could happen? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I lack confidence in the budget. But what I 

do lack confidence in is the opposition. And I want to say that I 

will be supporting the amendment which is: 

 

That all the words after “That the Assembly” be deleted 

and the following added [so it becomes]: 

 

That the Assembly condemn this government for the 

return to poor fiscal management in the budget process 

and increasing the debt of the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the amendment and not 

supporting the budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Rosetown-Elrose. 

 

Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Thank you, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. It brings me great pleasure to rise and 

speak to the 2009-10 budget of our government. This is a 

budget about keeping our promises, ensuring a steady path 

through this economic uncertainty, and about getting 

Saskatchewan ready for a strong future. Finally, after years of 

inaction by the NDP, we‟re seeing real action taken on property 

tax relief and on municipal revenue sharing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Reiter: — We are seeing a children‟s hospital in Saskatoon 

and increased infrastructure spending. And we‟re seeing it all 

within a balanced budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, during the last election, 

we campaigned on a series of promises. We went door to door 

and told voters that our campaign platform would be a blueprint 

for what we would do because we would be a government that 

would keep our promises. 

 

Well this budget caps off an amazing 16 months where we have 

been able to already fulfill almost all of those promises. In 

Saskatchewan we‟re not immune from the current economic 

turmoil. But while others are experiencing decline, we‟re 

experiencing growth. While others are losing jobs, we‟re 

fortunate to be creating jobs. We are not immune to the 

challenges of today, but we are well positioned to meet those 

challenges, and this budget ensures that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Reiter: — Even before this budget, our government was 

taking action. We cut taxes. We invested in infrastructure. We 

provided a plan to get shovel-ready projects going once the 

ground thaws. In my constituency of Rosetown-Elrose, we saw 

the announcement of the replacement of a long-term care 

facility in Rosetown. We will also be doing renovations to the 

Elrose Composite School. There are projects happening all over 

this great province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The tax measures introduced last fall are benefiting 

Saskatchewan people. We‟ve also taken firm action on debt 

paydown by cutting the debt by $2.6 billion, nearly 40 per cent. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, our government has 

managed to deliver a balanced budget, quite possibly the only 

one in Canada this year. 

 

But that‟s not all. We‟re also delivering on some major 

commitments that we made to the people of Saskatchewan 

during the last election. We said we would introduce a new 

revenue-sharing deal that would provide municipalities with 

funding tied to own-source revenues. We have now kept that 

promise. 

 

The new municipal operating grant program will provide 

funding equal to 90 per cent of one point of the PST [provincial 

sales tax] this year, and it will be a full point next year. This 

will provide a reliable and predictable revenue stream for 

municipalities which will help them plan for the future. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know from my past municipal 

experience that this is something that municipalities and their 

organizations, SARM and SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association], have wanted for a long, long time. 

This will mean nearly $170 million in operating grants this year 

— a 24 per cent increase over last. A promise made, a promise 

kept. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Reiter: — We have already put one and a half billion 

dollars into infrastructure between our first budget and the 

booster shot. This budget will dedicate a further $1 billion to 

fixing our province‟s infrastructure deficit. It will fix schools, 

improve health care facilities, create child care spaces, and fix 



March 19, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2389 

highways. This money is not just about fixing the deficits of the 

past though, but also about preparing for the future. Our 

province will be in a better position to capitalize on the global 

economic recovery while keeping life affordable for all 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

This budget works towards stronger and safer communities by 

hiring more police officers and funding the Western Canadian 

gang database. We will see 1,000 new child care spaces, the 

active families benefit, and a children‟s hospital so that our 

children are given the best start possible. Twenty-three million 

dollars will go towards limiting tuition increases at our 

universities. We will increase funding for the graduate retention 

program by six and a half million dollars. It will do more to 

recruit nurses and physicians to our province while increasing 

apprenticeship training seats. 

 

We‟re supporting our producers with over 100 million new 

dollars to fulfill our promise and fully fund our share of 

AgriStability and AgriInvest. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Reiter: — Another $25 million will go towards improving 

crop insurance for farmers — farmers who were neglected for 

so long under the previous government. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, for me the most significant item in the 

budget was changes to property tax. This has been a significant 

issue in this province for decades. Taxpayers have had a 

disproportionately high share of education costs for far, far too 

long. 

 

During the 2007 campaign, our Premier promised a long-term 

solution to this problem and I was honoured to be appointed 

Legislative Secretary to the Minister of Education and our 

Deputy Premier with responsibility for the property tax 

initiative. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[12:00] 

 

Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I need to mention what a 

tremendous experience it has been for me to learn from our 

Deputy Premier. He has a tremendous work ethic and a 

wonderful grasp of complex issues. I have so much respect for 

him. He has been so supportive of me and I want to publicly 

thank him. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, what did the previous 

government do? Did they take action? In 2003 the current 

Leader of the Opposition, who was then premier, announced at 

the SARM convention that the status quo is not on. I was there, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. We were excited, and we were waiting to 

see what the NDP would do to meet their promise and fix this 

long-standing problem. And then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what 

did they do? They did nothing for a year until, until, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, the 2004 SARM annual convention at which time — 

what did they do, Mr. Deputy Speaker? — they again 

announced that the status quo was not on. Go figure. 

More recently, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what did the member from 

Regina Rosemont have to say? He said that our government is 

likely not going to be making movement on this file. Was he 

right, Mr. Deputy Speaker? No. And what did the member from 

The Battlefords have to say? He said that no one in government 

is expecting this provincial budget to signal any significant 

property tax relief. Was he right, Mr. Deputy Speaker? No. 

What else did the member from Regina Rosemont say? He said, 

and I quote, that we‟re “. . . postponing this tough decision for 

another year.” Was he right, Mr. Deputy Speaker? No. 

 

Speaking of the member for Regina Rosemont, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, recently, the last couple, three months, he‟s got a great 

deal of press talking about property tax. I‟m glad to know that 

he is learning about the issue. And I noticed that he constantly 

referred to me as the member from Biggar. Now as you know, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I believe everyone on this side of the 

House knows, I‟m from Rosetown-Elrose. I certainly don‟t 

mind being referred to as the member from Biggar. The 

member from Biggar is an outstanding MLA. He‟s a very 

intelligent person, and he‟s a good friend of mine. I consider 

that flattery and a compliment, but I think this sort of underlines 

a basic problem here that the member from Regina Rosemont 

has. Not just that he doesn‟t know the difference between the 

two wonderful communities of Rosetown and Biggar or where 

they are. This really isn‟t his fault, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

because if you‟ve never left the boundaries of Regina, you can‟t 

expect to know where the other great communities in the 

province are. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, both communities — Biggar, 

Rosetown, all the communities in that part of the province all 

across rural Saskatchewan — are very hospitable, and I would 

welcome and invite the member from Regina Rosemont to 

certainly attend, come to the community. And I‟ll tell you what, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. The members of those communities are so 

hospitable they would even welcome an NDP. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to read a quote to you. This is a 

quote, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 

 

We are pledged to do away with the education tax as soon 

as we get the new sources of revenue to take the place of 

the revenue now realized from that tax. 

 

This is a quote, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 

 

When we develop new sources of revenue sufficient to 

supplant the revenue now raised from the tax . . . 

 

And I know you‟re getting curious about who said this, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and I‟m coming to that. 

 

. . . now raised from the tax, we shall do away with the tax 

because we consider it regressive legislation. 

 

Now I know everybody‟s guessing who said that. Some think 

the member from Regina Rosemont. But no, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that quote was from August 31, 1944 and was from 

none other than then premier, Tommy Douglas. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, after years of inaction by the NDP, our 

government has taken action. 



2390 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2009 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Reiter: — Under our new system, education mill rates will 

be cut and capped for the three major property classes of 

residential, commercial, and agriculture. Property owners will 

save $103 million in 2009, the largest education property tax 

cut in a single year in Saskatchewan‟s history. While doing that, 

our government is increasing funding to school divisions by 

over $240 million to ensure the best education for our students. 

 

With this budget, our government is now funding 63 per cent of 

the operating costs of pre-K to 12 [pre-kindergarten to grade 

12] up from 51 per cent last year. Next year we will go even 

further and save taxpayers a further $53 million, bringing up the 

total to 66 per cent funding — two-thirds of the cost of 

education. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Reiter: — This budget provides savings to the majority of 

property owners while also ensuring fairness across the 

province. Businesses can now invest with confidence in 

Saskatchewan knowing that mill rates are now capped, adding 

certainty to our investment climate. 

 

What is everybody else thinking about the budget, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker? We know what the opposition‟s thinking, but I‟d like 

to share what some other people are saying, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. This is from the SUMA press release, and this is 

quoting the president of SUMA, Allan Earle: 

 

“This announcement brings relief to out property tax 

payers, who until now have covered the vast majority of 

education costs,” said the SUMA President. Earle went on 

to say that the reduction in education tax will improve the 

competitiveness of Saskatchewan‟s municipalities. “With 

these . . . cuts, our cities, towns and villages become more 

attractive to new businesses and families.” 

 

That‟s from the president of SUMA, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I also received a phone call yesterday, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

from the president of the Saskatchewan Stock Growers, Ed 

Bothner. He was in Ottawa, couldn‟t attend the budget, but he 

phoned me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, thanked me, and asked me to 

extend his appreciation to our Deputy Premier and the Premier 

and all our caucus for the immense tax relief that was delivered. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Reiter: — And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, probably my 

favourite quote of all from leaders across our province is from 

my good friend, Dave Marit the president of SARM. Mr. Marit 

said, and I quote: This . . . He‟s referring to the municipal 

operating grant and the tax relief. And his quote was, “This 

increase, along with the school tax relief, makes this the best 

budget for rural Saskatchewan in history,” Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, our Finance minister has 

done an amazing job. I hold him in very high esteem and was 

honoured to be given the opportunity to second the original 

motion. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will not be supporting the 

amendment. I am proud and extremely honoured to second the 

original motion for the Saskatchewan provincial budget for 

2009-10. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Wood River. 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I‟m 

extremely pleased to join in this budget debate. I think we all 

attest to the fact that yesterday‟s budget was a very historic 

budget — very, very good for the people of this great province 

of ours. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we looked at balance in the budget, 

balance with spending and into new initiatives. And I think this 

budget just shows the people of Saskatchewan how we in the 

Saskatchewan Party keep our promises in trying to move this 

province forward with a plan of growth and stability. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it‟s interesting to note some of the 

comments from across the way. Now we have to look at this 

budget, and I‟ll be going through some comments also from 

third party people, but I would venture to say that there‟s only 

20 people in this province that do not like the budget, and they 

all happen to be sitting on that side of the House. They‟re 

looking in the rear-view mirror. It‟s a situation where they want 

to perpetuate doom and gloom and you just can‟t make them 

happy with anything. This is such a great budget and they‟re 

looking backwards. 

 

We hear the member from Douglas Park. I don‟t know how 

many times he‟s got up and he‟s talked about the ‟80s. Well, 

you know, when I looked at the calendar this morning we‟re 

now in 2009 and he‟s still living in the ‟80s. No wonder they‟ve 

got doom and gloom over there when they start thinking that far 

back. But during my talk, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am also going 

to go back a little bit, but it won‟t be quite that far. It will 

probably be to back to the ‟90s and we‟ll have a few comments 

to say about that. 

 

Another thing that is very interesting to see right now. We hear 

members opposite in their member statements and it‟s very 

interesting to see, when member statements and petitions . . . 

There‟s a petition this morning on CBO wages. How many 

years did we endure an NDP government that totally ignored 

CBO wages? Sixteen years. Now all of a sudden, a little bit of 

the holier-than-thou attitude coming from across the way. Well 

when are you guys going to do something about it? Well they 

did nothing for 16 years. And in 16 months we have done more 

than they did in 16 years, and we‟ve put wages up for CBOs. 

 

And is it not just a little bit hypocritical when we hear the 

member from The Battlefords talk about a hospital? It seems to 

me, was he not the Minister of Health at one time? And what 

did he do about the hospital in The Battlefords at that time? 

Nothing. Nothing. Absolutely nothing. And now, and now in 16 

months he wants us to build a hospital in Battleford. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Order. Order. I 

recognize the member from Wood River. 



March 19, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2391 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Well I 

think that touched a nerve, I would suggest. But I would say 

that the member from The Battlefords, he was the Health 

minister, and absolutely nothing done. That is absolutely a 

shame. Now wanting us to fix their problems within 16 months, 

it‟s kind of hypocritical. 

 

Another petition this morning was fairness for tuition. Well we 

know that the NDP froze tuition rates. We know that. Now 

when we start looking at other jurisdictions that had tuition 

freezes in the past, they say, you know what, they just don‟t 

work, because at some point it‟s going to catch up with you. 

Now we have this morning again talking about tuition freezes. 

 

Well I have a question for members opposite. How long would 

they keep tuition freezes in place, and what would it cost? And 

they‟ve never sat to even think that far beyond. Mind you, 

looking in the rear-view mirror you don‟t see far ahead anyway. 

But if they wanted to keep tuition freezes for out years, what is 

the cost going to be? So they have not looked forward at all. We 

know that. All they do is look in the past. 

 

Now we‟ve got so many good things in this budget, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. But I do want to touch on a number of things that my 

friend and colleague from Rosetown-Elrose — and not from 

Biggar — had commented on. 

 

[12:15] 

 

But one of them is the property tax cut. Now I find it passing 

strange from members opposite that they say, well you know, 

we were going to do that. But it‟s unfortunate that, for them, 

they just didn‟t get around to it. Now we‟re going to have to 

build these round tuits for those people because there‟s so many 

things they want to take credit for now — we were going to do 

it — but they just didn‟t get around to it. 

 

But the historic property tax cuts and what it means for people 

in my constituency . . . We look at the education property tax on 

agricultural land. And right in my home area, I believe we have 

the highest mill rate for education property tax in the province, 

and it‟s in the north side of 20 mills. 

 

Now as of this year, as of January 1 of this year, that mill rate 

on ag land is going to 7.08 mills. That‟s a significant reduction 

in education property tax for our ag land in my area, well across 

the province. And not only that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but next 

year it‟s going down to 3.91 mills. This is huge saving for our 

agricultural sector. 

 

Now I know members opposite, they were going to get around 

to it, but they just didn‟t. And my colleague from 

Rosetown-Elrose had read the statement from Tommy and 

talked about it. And so from 1944 until this year, really nothing 

has been done about education property tax. Nothing. But they 

were going to do it. They just needed another hundred years or 

so, I guess. 

 

Now on residential properties also, the mill rates this year will 

be at 10.08 mills, and next year at 9.51 — another substantial 

saving. And on commercial property the mill rates will be 15.42 

mills this year and 15.10 next year. No wonder the people of 

this great province are happy with our budget. This is a huge, 

huge change in the way of doing business in education, and the 

people of this province will greatly benefit by this move this 

government has made. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, another one. And we hear from 

members opposite also, the children‟s hospital. They were 

going to do it but they just didn‟t get around to it. Well we 

have. We have put $200 million in the next two years into a 

children‟s hospital in Saskatoon. Our Health budget is very 

significant; it‟s over $4 billion. 

 

Now we look at health as a very valuable instrument in our 

society. And it‟s a little different than the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview, her comment that she made — oh three or 

four years ago, if members would remember it — where one of 

their cures for the health system was to die quicker. Well we 

don‟t necessarily agree with that. And so we are putting money 

into the health care system so the people of this great province 

can benefit from our undertakings. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can‟t help but think about the member from 

Douglas Park when he gets up in his doom and gloom speech 

about, oh the spending, the spending is out of control; it‟s a 

train wreck. Well we know the train wreck — I commented on 

that in my member‟s statement — the train wreck happened 

over the last 16 years. But here we have the member from 

Douglas Park talking about a 2.1 per cent GDP growth, and 

how that was out of line with some of his private forecasters. 

Well he was the former Finance minister and so he should know 

how the forecasting is done. 

 

But unfortunately he hasn‟t looked back in his own rear-view 

mirror far enough because, if you remember the 2003 budget, 

what was the economic forecast for 2003? I wonder if members 

would remember 2003 and the NDP forecast was 6.8 per cent 

— 6.8 per cent. And that was in an economic depressed time. 

 

And what the members opposite would do, they wanted to have 

a balanced budget so they‟d just crank up, as our friend from, at 

that time Rosthern would say, he‟d get up and he‟d just . . . 

They‟d just crank up the percentage of GDP so they could get a 

balanced budget. But 6.8 per cent. And now he has the gall to 

talk about a 2.1 per cent GDP increase and how it‟s not feasible. 

I think the member needs to do a little bit more of his 

homework. 

 

And I think there‟s probably something where the opposition 

gets a little upset too when we talk about spending. You know, 

Mr. Speaker, they wanted to put $100 million into the lumber 

industry, the P.A. [Prince Albert] plant — $100 million. Well 

you don‟t see that in our budget. They wanted to put it into a 

losing venture and they were happy with that. 

 

But they should have been happy with that, because $100 

million that they would have lost was far less than the $800 

million they lost in the Meadow Lake pulp mill. Now I know 

we had members opposite say, oh that was a Grant Devine 

initiative. Well here we go again, and I‟ve used this analogy 

before. Somebody buys a racehorse and you bet on it and lose 

money, so you bet on it again and lose money. And that‟s the 

NDP mentality — they kept putting money into a losing venture 

and blamed the buyer of the racehorse because that did come 

under the Grant Devine days. But they are the ones that kept 



2392 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2009 

losing money at it to the tune of about $800 million. 

 

Now there was an analysis that was done, and I think if they 

figured it out correctly that they could have paid every 

employee over $200,000 and bought them a home, and the 

taxpayers of this province would have been better off. But you 

don‟t see that in our budget; ours is a go-forward budget, not 

behind. 

 

The other thing that the NDP were very noted for back in the 

‟90s is their business failures. Well we‟re looking forward to 

business growth. But they had a propensity of business failures 

and I just can‟t help but come to mind SPUDCO [Saskatchewan 

Potato Utility Development Company]. 

 

Now we‟ve had the member from Regina Coronation Park get 

up and talk about, he‟s talk about taking the ability of the 

Crowns and outsourcing and snapping off pieces and . . . I mean 

he‟s really out of tune with it. But one has to keep in mind what 

they did. Was SPUDCO outsourced, or was that just a venture 

from SaskWater? 

 

But anyway, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they lost money to the tune 

of $35 million — 35 million. And their business failures just go 

on and on and on to the tune, I might add, of over $1 billion. 

Now, now when members opposite say, we were going to do 

that; we just didn‟t get around to it. But then they‟ll come back 

in the next breath and say, well you guys have the money now 

where we didn‟t have the money. 

 

Well I‟m suggesting to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if they 

wouldn‟t have been out in all of these business failures, they 

would have had the money to do a lot of these programs. A lot 

of money. A billion dollars is a lot of bucks when you want to 

put it into a children‟s hospital or some highways, and it‟s 

worthwhile noting some of the ventures that they lost money 

on. 

 

And I can‟t help but think that here the NDP government was 

going to take over bingo in this province. Can you imagine? 

They lost $8 million on trying to take over a bingo operation — 

$8 million. And again, the dot.coms, they just added up. And 

now they‟re talking about outsourcing and snapping off, and yet 

what did they do? They had all of this money going to various 

parts of North America, and at great losses to the Canadian, or 

Saskatchewan taxpayer. 

 

Now Navigata, and Navigata ended up at a $70 million loss. 

But then they rolled it into SaskTel where you couldn‟t actually 

get out the exact amount that was lost on the venture. But 

anyway, all of the money lost. 

 

They could‟ve done so much with that money — from 

highways, as I mentioned; the children‟s hospital, to put it into 

hospital. How about some radical thing like reducing the 

education portion of property tax? With $1 billion, they 

could‟ve done quite a bit of reducing the education portion of 

property tax. What did they do? No, didn‟t do that. They went 

into more business failures. 

 

Also it‟s interesting to note in the critic‟s remarks, you know, 

he talks about spending, talks about out-of-control spending. 

Well when asked, when asked yesterday, the NDP Finance 

critic, he was asked, well what would you cut? And what was 

the answer he gave? He was quiet. He didn‟t have an answer. 

He didn‟t have an answer. Because what would he cut from this 

budget? Would he cut the children‟s hospital? Would he cut 

infrastructure spending? And we know, we know the 

infrastructure deficit of this province from 16 years of neglect is 

so huge, it‟s going to take years and years to come out of this 

neglect created by the NDP over the 16 years. So would he 

suggest we cut infrastructure spending? I don‟t know. It‟s an 

interesting question. I wonder what really he would cut out of 

the budget. 

 

And you know what? You know what is also interesting? Our 

financial growth and stability fund, there‟s a key function in 

there — it‟s called growth. That‟s what it‟s for. It‟s an 

insurance policy, but it‟s also there for growth. Now we have 

members opposite that are saying, well you drained the fund. 

You know, I‟d like my bank account be drained down to $1.2 

billion. I don‟t really call that being drained. 

 

But here we have the Finance critic from the NDP saying, you 

drained the fund. Last year they were saying, you had too much 

money in the fund. Well we have Mr. Flip and Mr. Flop again. 

We have, no, you should spend that money down. And this 

year, no, no, no, you should keep it in there; you said $2 billion. 

But here it is — it‟s a growth fund also and we‟re putting 

money into growth in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — That is something members opposite just 

don‟t get. They are dead wrong. 

 

An Hon. Member: — They weren‟t even going to get around 

to it. 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Yes, on that one, on that one, they 

weren‟t even going to get around to it. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would be remiss if I didn‟t talk 

about agriculture, being from a very agrarian area. And here we 

have the Minister of Agriculture‟s budget will provide $4.83 

million, an increase of $177 million or 58 per cent over 

2008-2009. 

 

And I want to just talk a little bit about that, because we have 

seen over the last 16 years what the NDP government did to 

agriculture. They gutted agriculture programs. They forgot, they 

forgot that there was a rural component to this province. They 

totally ignored, ignored the ag sector. And this year, and this 

year, we‟re putting our money upfront. 

 

For an example, additional money will fund risk management 

programs such as crop insurance, AgriStability, and AgriInvest. 

We went for years, we went for years where the NDP would 

say, well we don‟t have the money to do that yet so we can‟t 

fund it upfront. And they will say now that, oh they funded it 

fully at the end of the year. But how do you program that? It‟s 

typical of a socialist government — we want to hang on to 

everything and dole it out a little bit at a time. 

 

We‟re upfront and honest with the people of Saskatchewan. 

We‟re putting the money upfront where farmers and ranchers 



March 19, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2393 

will benefit from this knowing that our commitment is there. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, municipalities. I have to talk about 

municipalities because from this historic initiative of revenue 

sharing . . . Promise made, promise kept — revenue sharing. 

 

Now we even hear from members opposite that, oh we were 

going to do that; we were going to get into the revenue sharing. 

It‟s just that we didn‟t get around to it. They need a whole 

bunch of round tuits over there. Then they could all say they got 

around to it, finally. 

 

[12:30] 

 

The revenue-sharing program, the municipalities think it‟s just 

absolutely great — urban and rural. Lots of comments from the 

heads of the municipalities already, because now they‟ve got 

predictable funding. What did they have in the past? What did 

they have in the past 16 years? Predictability was, I guess we 

can go and talk to them, see if we can get a few more bucks. 

Probably didn‟t get it. No predictability. How do you plan 

ahead? Of course they never did plan ahead, did they. How do 

you plan ahead if there‟s no predictability in your funding? 

That‟s kind of the way that the NDP wanted it, kind of keep 

people under thumb. 

 

But now, now municipalities have a predictable, a predictable 

source of income at point nine per cent of one point of the PST, 

and next year it will be at one point of the PST. Very, very 

predictable, very forward thinking, very doable, and another 

promise made, promise kept. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know there‟s an awful lot of comments 

that . . . made by people over this budget and, again, we‟re 

going to hear the negative side from members opposite, but I 

think people of this province should hear some of the good, the 

good comments that people have made. 

 

There‟s a couple here that I would just like to put into the 

record, and I know a couple have been made already, but here‟s 

one from an accountant at Meyers Norris Penny: “Generally 

speaking I like it. I‟m going to give it an overall rating of 9 out 

of 10. There‟s something for everyone and I believe that it‟s a 

fiscally responsible budget. Finally we are seeing some real 

progress here in the K to 12 funding assessment.” 

 

Very, very positive. And, of course, we like Murray Mandryk‟s 

little call here. He says that “. . . Sask Party government has 

now addressed so many long-standing concerns that one really 

wonders if the NDP has anything legitimately left to criticize.” 

I‟m going to suggest they‟ll try and find something. They‟ll dig 

something out someplace, but realistically they are just doing it 

to fill time talking because really there is nothing for them to 

criticize. They‟ll make some fictitious comments or some 

fictitious statements. They‟ll find, they‟ll find some little rock 

that is not growing grass under it or something and they‟ll have 

that in as part of their complaints. 

 

How about the children‟s hospital, and this is from Brynn 

Boback-Lane, president and CEO [chief executive officer] of 

the children‟s hospital: “Really today is about and dedicated to 

the children that have been challenged and lost and the children 

that are challenged and winning. Their fight with illness or 

injury, this day is for them.” 

 

To get the hospital announcement . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Absolutely fantastic for the young 

children of this province and it‟s interesting to note that, I think, 

there‟s only one other jurisdiction in the nation that does not 

have a children‟s hospital and I believe it‟s Prince Edward 

Island. And again we‟ve heard this talked about for some time 

but again they didn‟t get around to it. 

 

Mayor of Saskatoon has a comment here I‟d like to read and 

quote: 

 

. . . this has been a huge step, truly monumental in the 

sense of provincial government acknowledging what cities 

have been asking for and so this has been very, very good 

news for us. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — And that‟s on the revenue sharing. Well, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do know that there‟s an awful lot of 

other people that really want to speak to this historic budget, 

and so I will just end my comments by saying that I‟m very, 

very proud of our budget. I‟m very proud of the women and 

men on this side of the House that worked to put this budget 

together. I‟m very proud of the Premier putting this team 

together. I‟m very proud of the Minister of Finance who 

presented this historic budget in the House yesterday. And I am 

very, very proud to support the motion of the budget, and I‟m 

very definitely not going to support the amendment to the 

motion. So I would be happy to support the motion of the 

budget, and with that I‟d end my comments. Thank you, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I‟m 

pleased to have the opportunity to speak to this budget today, 

and I want to join my colleague from Wood River who made 

the comment that he was very proud to be part of this budget 

coming forward. Well I also want to echo those comments. I‟m 

really pleased to have the opportunity to be Minister of 

Agriculture for the Saskatchewan Party and for this province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this probably, without a doubt, is one of 

the best budgets ever presented for rural Saskatchewan and, Mr. 

Speaker . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — I‟ve been in this legislature for about 

12, going on 13 years, Mr. Speaker, and I have never been more 

happy with a budget that‟s come out and actually paid attention 

to rural Saskatchewan and rural Saskatchewan‟s needs. 

 



2394 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2009 

Mr. Speaker, when we come to the agriculture budget that the 

Finance minister made part of his speech yesterday, we‟re 

talking about a budget of $483 million. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

have to tell you that is the highest amount in any budget day 

announced in the history of Saskatchewan for agriculture, and I 

think every member on this side of the House deserves credit. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am very pleased my colleagues saw fit to 

support us on this and the need for dollars into agriculture in 

this province, because they are still one of the main drivers of 

the economy in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to acknowledge my colleague from 

Canora-Pelly for what he has done for agriculture and rural 

Saskatchewan in this budget — in fact for all of Saskatchewan, 

but especially farmers and ranchers right across this province. 

SARM, farmers, ranchers, everyone from rural Saskatchewan 

has asked for many, many years — in fact for the 16 years 

especially that the NDP were in power — for someone to 

actually come forward and address the problem with education 

tax on property and, in this case especially, farm land. My 

colleague from Canora-Pelly saw fit to go out and consult, 

come back with a plan, along with the member for Rosetown, 

and actually finally address the issue of education tax on 

property, and I thank him for that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don‟t think we 

can explain here today the effect of what that does for rural 

producers out . . . as the member, the Deputy Speaker knows, 

the effect that‟s going to have to the bottom line of many 

producers out there. And next year, Mr. Speaker, it‟s actually 

even going to get better. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to talk for a minute about the cost 

of our business risk management programs. And this is 

something that the members opposite, every year when the 

budget came out, would not come to the table and fully fund. 

And what happened by not fully funding it? We got left with a 

program that doesn‟t meet the needs of Saskatchewan 

producers, and it can mainly rest on the members opposite. 

 

Well we‟re going to fully fund the programs even though the 

cost has gone up dramatically. AgriStability, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, alone has climbed to $161 million for the province of 

Saskatchewan. We‟re going to fund that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

AgriInvest, the new program that the federal government came 

out with last year, that‟s climbed to $39 million provincially. 

We‟re going to fund that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Crop insurance. 

We went around the province and asked farmers, what changes 

would you like to see with crop insurance? And about 1,000 

producers came out and a number of organizations came out 

and said, we want these changes incorporated into the program. 

And we did that. We put 12 of the 16 recommendations in this 

year, and we‟re going to spend, the province of Saskatchewan, 

$155 million on a crop insurance program. And that is a record 

amount for the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, we‟ve talked 

and talked on a number of occasions about expanding regional 

services — a little bit different than the members opposite about 

six, seven years ago when we closed 22 rural service centres. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we‟re not going to open them all up, but we 

are going to open up three new regional service centres out 

there, and actually expand extension services across the 

province. We‟re not going to compete with the private sector, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, but we‟re going to provide those services 

that we feel that should‟ve been provided all along for farmers 

and ranchers across the province. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we‟ve got a pest control program. We‟re 

going to put $4 million in, part of that being probably mainly 

for the Southwest where the gopher problem is so bad. We‟re 

going to pick up half of the cost of bait, strychnine and other 

baits out there, because producers are spending thousands upon 

thousands of dollars that they probably really can‟t afford, when 

they‟ve had drought for about four years. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, earlier today we heard that negativity and 

pessimism come forward, the member for Regina Victoria. 

Doom got up and spoke to it and then gloom followed and that 

pessimism, pessimism right across that side. But, Mr. Speaker, 

the province of Saskatchewan is changing, because when I go 

out to rural Saskatchewan or go downtown Regina or 

Saskatoon, I‟m coming to the conclusion that there‟s about 20 

people left in this province that are pessimistic about 

everything, and that‟s the 20 members opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, you can‟t go in a 

restaurant, you can‟t go to a fast food store, you can‟t anywhere 

in this province right now where people aren‟t optimistic about 

Saskatchewan. And why wouldn‟t they be? We‟re almost an 

island unto ourselves here when you look. You watch the late 

news at night and you see what‟s happening in North America, 

around the world, across Canada, and even now we‟re starting 

. . . CNN [Cable News Network] is paying attention to 

Saskatchewan because we‟re one of the bright lights right now. 

 

Now we hope for everybody else‟s sake that the markets start to 

straighten out, the rest of the country‟s economy picks up, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, but it‟s really nice to be able to say, I‟m from 

Saskatchewan; I‟m a resident of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to also talk a little bit about our 

Crown land sale program, that we‟re going to try and move land 

out there that‟s leased by producers under the ownership of 

producers, something I feel should‟ve be done a long time ago. 

Back in the ‟70s it was the trend of the NDP at that time for the 

government to own everything. 

 

Remember, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they took over the potash 

mines. And a government a little bit later on saw fit to put that 

back in the hands of the private sector. And what do we see 

today? Potash is providing almost 20 per cent of the revenue of 

this province. Was that a good move? You bet it was, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

And that compares to what we‟re trying to do to some degree 

with the Crown land out there that we have leased to people 

across this province. We want to put it back in their hands. Let 

them look after that land because they are, without a doubt, the 

best stewards of the land in this province. 



March 19, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2395 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, earlier today we 

introduced Dave Marit up there, the president of SARM. And I 

want to talk and thank my colleague, the minister of Municipal 

Government for the new revenue-sharing deal. Also that 

change, I think, has been long overdue, and I thank him for 

bringing that forward. 

 

But I don‟t think, we can‟t even come close to saying how 

much effect that has on to RMs [rural municipality] and rural 

municipalities across Saskatchewan, where they actually know 

what their funding is going to be. And the better the province 

does, the better their funding goes. And they‟ve been asking for 

that for years, Mr. Speaker, and I think they‟re very happy to 

see that in yesterday‟s budget. 

 

In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know they are happy about that. 

And even though my colleague from Rosetown quoted Dave 

Marit from SARM, I also think it‟s worth saying again that 

Dave Marit says this is „“. . . the best budget for rural 

Saskatchewan in history . . . With this budget, Saskatchewan is 

truly open for business.”‟ 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, I don‟t believe Dave 

Marit said that lightly because if there‟s things he disagrees 

with us, I‟m sure he‟ll be vocal on. But he knows how 

important what happened yesterday in some of the 

announcements made are to the people that he represents right 

across this province. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, another quote that I saw from yesterday is 

from Greg Marshall the president of APAS [Agricultural 

Producers Association of Saskatchewan]. He said, „“I thought it 

was a very positive budget for rural Saskatchewan . . . The 

government did a „great job of listening.‟”  

 

Now isn‟t that contrary to what the members opposite keep 

saying, that this government doesn‟t consult with people out 

there? Well my colleague from Canora-Pelly, the member for 

Rosetown certainly did consult, and that‟s why they‟re getting 

such a favourable response to addressing the education tax 

issue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to read a quote too into the record 

today from Ed Bothner, president of the Stock Growers, 

represents a big part of our livestock industry in this province. 

And Ed says: 

 

We are pleased to see that agriculture is back on the 

provincial government‟s radar. It‟s been decades since our 

industry has received this level of attention and support 

from the provincial government. 

 

We applaud Premier Wall, Agriculture Minister 

Bjornerud, Education Minister Ken Krawetz and their 

government for recognizing that agriculture continues to 

be a backbone industry for the province that offers 

incredible potential over the long term. 

 

And I thank Mr. Bothner for those comments. 

Mark Elford, vice-president of the Stock Growers, this budget 

„“. . . puts agriculture back on the list . . . I‟m delighted, this is 

the best we‟ve seen for a long time.”‟ 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[12:45] 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I also want to 

quote Marilyn Braun-Pollon, Canadian Federation of 

Independent Business on the 58 per cent increase to the Ag 

budget. And she says, „“This is money now invested in 

sustainable programs for the future.”‟  

 

So, Mr. Speaker, all of these people that we‟ve quoted here 

today, I think, realize that what we‟re doing here is building an 

economy in this province that‟s sustainable but is for everyone 

in Saskatchewan and for their benefit. There‟s good times here. 

We‟re not pessimistic about it like members opposite. And I 

think the people of Saskatchewan can also see the benefit of 

what‟s happening right now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to take a minute, too, and mention 

something that really doesn‟t pertain to agriculture, but it 

certainly affects people of rural Saskatchewan. And that‟s the 

new children‟s hospital we announced yesterday in the city of 

Saskatoon. And I have to mention all my colleagues from the 

city up there who worked so hard to make this happen. But 

there‟s a lot of families out there, whether it‟s farm families, 

livestock producers — it doesn‟t matter what part of the sector 

that they work in — that have children that have the need at 

time to time for something like a children‟s hospital in 

Saskatoon. And I think that will be applauded right across rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, isn‟t this different from 1991 

when a new government came to power and they saw fit to deal 

with their problems they said they had, and they closed 52 

hospitals across rural Saskatchewan. Let‟s not ever forget what 

happened out there in rural Saskatchewan because now what we 

see — and the Minister of Health is addressing that issue right 

now today and ongoing — we chased nurses out of this 

province, we chased doctors out of this province, and we cut 

health care for all of rural Saskatchewan.  

 

Well those days are over, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The Minister of 

Health is addressing that issue. He‟s working to retain and keep 

nurses in this province but also bring them — more nurses and 

doctors — back in here. And again, for rural Saskatchewan this 

is just a win-win, Mr. Speaker. And I‟d like to thank my 

colleague the Minister of Health for that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about the new Growing 

Forward program which is another $5 million program that we 

included in the budget yesterday. What we‟re working on in this 

part of the new Growing Forward program is expanding the 

water program that we had for the Southwest. My colleagues 

from the Southwest helped design a program out there. 

 

And Dave Marit, once again, Doug Steele, and Larry Grant 

worked very hard to put a program together for the Southwest 

because of the drought. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we‟re 

working with the federal government, and very shortly I‟m 



2396 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2009 

hoping to be signed on to this agreement where we can 

announce the province-wide water program for every producer 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

We‟re also going to work with environmental farm planning 

under the Growing Forward program. Innovation and research, 

something that we put in excess of $14 million for this year, 

Mr. Speaker, and that was an increase last year of $2 million for 

research. And I believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is so 

important for the producers in Saskatchewan. Research is going 

to play a tremendous part in the future of this province. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I also want to talk a bit about extension 

services. I touched on it a bit before. But much to my 

amazement, when we went around the province seeing what we 

were providing for extension services, we actually found where 

one office even had the door locked because they weren‟t really 

allowed to provide extension services. There was another office 

that didn‟t even have a sign on. I believe it was the one in 

Moose Jaw that didn‟t have a sign on that was welcoming 

producers in to take advantage of what they have there. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we‟ve certainly changed that out 

there. We‟ll be having signs on every office in this province. 

We‟ll be welcoming producers from every part of this province 

back into the program where we can provide service for these 

producers right across the province. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

appreciate the opportunity to be able to provide that service 

through our government for the producers across there. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I‟d like to go on and on. There‟s so 

many good things, I think, happening in this province. But I 

think, especially in agriculture, there‟s been a lot of changes 

made in the last 16 months. I think there‟s been a lot of needs 

addressed out there that rural Saskatchewan has been asking 

for. Is there more we can do? You bet there is, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. But we made a big dint in that yesterday. And I‟m 

really proud to be part of a Saskatchewan Party government that 

pays attention to rural Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

Deputy House Leader. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Considering the hour, I move this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Carried. This House 

now adjourns until 1:30 on Monday. 

 

We‟re going to back up for a moment. I recognize the Minister 

of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I know a 

number of my colleagues would like me to start over, but at this 

point I probably will just say I‟d like to adjourn debate. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

Deputy House Leader. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Considering the hour, I do now move that the House do now 

adjourn. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — And does the House 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Carried. This House 

do now adjourn. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 12:52.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2371 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2371 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2371 

  Chisholm .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2371 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2371 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2371 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2371 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2372 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2372 

 Spring Free From Racism 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2372 

 2009 International Day of the Francophonie 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2372 

 Shamrock Irish Dancers Perform in Prince Albert 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2373 

 Growth in Saskatchewan’s Economy 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2373 

 Z99 Radiothon 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2373 

 A Balanced Budget  

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2374 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Provincial Debt 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2374 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2374 

 Revenue Projections 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2375 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2375 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2375 

 Effect of Budget on Education 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2376 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2376 

 Education Property Tax 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2377 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2377 

 Cost of Living 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2378 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2378 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2379 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2379 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2385 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2388 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2390 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2393 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 


