




















































Hansard: May 11, 2009


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 61A  MONDAY, MAY 11, 2009, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3009 

 May 11, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — Before I recognize other members I would 

like to ask the Assembly to join me in welcoming to our 

Assembly today Mr. Kevin Fenwick, our Provincial 

Ombudsman. He’s seated in the Speaker’s gallery. 

 

Joining Mr. Fenwick are his parents, Don and Peg Fenwick; his 

brother, Shawn Fenwick, and partner, Pat Fahlman; nephews, 

Dylan Fahlman and Jed Fenwick; and the Regina office staff, 

Janet Mirwaldt, Leila Dueck, Arlene Harris, Sherry Davis, 

Jaime Carlson, Deb Zick, Azteca Landry; and Saskatoon office 

staff, Joni Sereda. 

 

And from the Children’s Advocate staff, Bernie Rodier and 

Laura Beard. 

 

I would ask members to join me in welcoming these individuals 

to our Chamber today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to all members of the Assembly, it’s my pleasure today to 

introduce in your gallery, the west gallery, Mr. Speaker, Mr. 

Jeff Perry who is a teacher from Thom Collegiate, along with 

14 of his grade 12 social studies group. 

 

Mr. Perry brought the 14 brightest ones. I know this because 

I’ve already met with them and we had a good little discussion 

period earlier on, but he brought the brightest ones to the 

legislature today. I’m not sure what the other half of his class is 

doing but I ask all members to join me, Mr. Speaker, in 

welcoming this grade 12 class from Thom Collegiate. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — I seek leave for extended introduction of 

guests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave for an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — To all members of this Assembly, in 

your gallery, I would like to welcome a delegation on behalf of 

Ehrlo’s Outdoor Hockey League. This league operates in 

Regina’s inner city. It removes the financial barriers to play 

Canada’s game by loaning equipment to players, playing 

outdoors, and by the fact that it’s coached and organized by 

volunteers. The league operates under a philosophy of 

community empowerment and development. In its 16 years of 

operation this innovative program has provided huge benefit to 

our communities, Mr. Speaker, and it’s been recognized 

nationally as well. 

 

Today it’s my pleasure to introduce some of the leaders that 

ensure the OHL’s [Outdoor Hockey League] success, and I ask 

each of them to stand and wave when recognized. First off, Ms. 

Kim Langston, manager of Ehrlo Sport Venture and OHL 

league director. Kim is exceptional in her ability to motivate 

volunteers, to nurture sponsorship, and in supporting players’ 

families and players themselves. 

 

Secondly, Ms. Susan Lytle, who epitomizes the volunteer spirit 

of the Outdoor Hockey League, has certainly been the lifeblood 

of the Cathedral rink for many, many years, and regularly 

warms that shack with sandwiches and with hot chocolate, and 

certainly the hearts of those players. And I’d be remiss in 

mentioning Susan, not to mention Mr. Bruce Lytle, her 

husband, who’s recently passed, who has been a long, long-time 

support for the league. 

 

I’d like to highlight Mr. Rob Nixon, a youth corrections worker 

here in Regina that has volunteered in this league since its 

development, and he’s strong and adamant about the 

importance of community development and recreation for youth 

at risk; Mr. Josiah Jordan, who moved to Saskatchewan more 

than three years ago to take a job as an engineer and volunteer 

as a goaltender coach in Regina Rosemont; and Mr. Caleb 

Taylor, a manager with Co-operators and a coach within the 

league. And this year Caleb was honoured for his volunteer 

work with the OHL, being selected as RBC’s [Royal Bank of 

Canada] first Olympic torchbearer for the 2010 Olympic torch 

relay. So I ask all members in joining with me in extending a 

warm welcoming to these individuals that provide but a sample 

of the many, many individuals that make this league such a 

success. I ask all members to join with me in this. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would also like to 

extend a welcome to our Outdoor Hockey League guests here 

today. The Ehrlo Society’s community services Sport Venture 

program provides a great service to Regina with its Outdoor 

Hockey League. They give young people who might not 

otherwise have the resources a chance to experience some 

wholesome fun and fellowship while playing on a hockey team. 

 

I know that the OHL has been a tremendous success, Mr. 

Speaker, and so has another well-known program that they 

initiated, and that is Dress a Champion program which has been 

donating hockey gear to young players for 16 years now. The 

volunteer coaches who give their time are positive role models 

for all these young players. One of the coaches here, and I’m 



3010 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2009 

going to make special mention also of Caleb Taylor, the first 

RBC torchbearer that was chosen for the 2010 Winter Olympic 

Games. 

 

Thanks to the Ehrlo staff and the coaches, volunteers, and the 

donors for all that you do to bring opportunity and fun into the 

lives of our young people. Their lives, our city, are so much 

better because of your generosity. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, Mr. Speaker, and to all members of this Assembly, 

seated in the east gallery I’m privileged to have a group of 

grade 4 students from Ruth M. Buck School from within my 

constituency. And they’re here today with their teacher, Mrs. 

Sheila Acton, and with parent, Mr. Jim Fowler. 

 

It’s my pleasure to have these students in the Assembly. I look 

forward to sitting down with them following these proceedings 

and hopefully being able to answer any questions they may 

have of what they witness in here today. And I ask all members 

of this Assembly to join with me in welcoming this bright, 

energetic group of young people. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like 

to introduce to you and through you folks that are seated up in 

your gallery. Liz Quarshie is the deputy minister for the 

Ministry of Environment; Kim Graybiel is the director of 

corporate policy and planning with the ministry; and Ed Dean is 

the manager of our climate change section. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to publicly thank these folks for all 

the hard work that they do. They have been working tirelessly, 

and I must say enthusiastically, on our greenhouse gas 

reduction plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we as ministers do not stand here alone. We are 

surrounded and backed by an amazing team, and I am so very 

proud of the people that I have working in the Ministry of 

Environment for their dedication to their jobs, to the ministry, 

to the environment, and to their province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I would ask all members in the legislature to join me in 

recognizing their tremendous hard work and thanking them and 

welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all members of the Assembly, seated in your 

gallery is Rev. Leonard Bachiu. Len, if you could give us a 

wave. Rev. Bachiu, I got to meet him a couple of months back. 

He did a Walk Through the Old Testament seminar in Yorkton. 

And he’s from the Canadian Bible Society, and what they’re 

doing is translating the Bible into all languages around the 

world. Currently they’re working on translating the modern 

Bible to Cree. 

 

He’s in the Assembly today as a guest of mine. As well, he has 

brought gifts for all 58 members of the Assembly — The 

Poverty and Justice Bible that the CBS [Canadian Bible 

Society] has put together. He’s met with the Premier earlier 

today, presented the Premier with a Bible. We delivered the 

members on this side. This afternoon he’ll be meeting with the 

Leader of the Opposition and they’ll be distributing Bibles on 

that side of the House as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I ask all members to welcome him to his Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to the rest of the Assembly, 

seated in the west gallery I would like to introduce a gentleman 

that’s been shadowing me for the day. His name is Alika 

Lafontaine. Alika is currently attending university in Saskatoon. 

Actually he’s a resident — third year resident anesthetist, Mr. 

Speaker. He was able to be the MC [master of ceremonies] on 

Thursday when we announced our government’s physician 

recruitment strategy that was really met with quite a lot of 

optimism. And, Mr. Speaker, he did a great job in emceeing 

that. 

 

I guess he’s no stranger to public emceeing and that type of 

thing because Alika also won the CBC [Canadian Broadcasting 

Corporation] contest as Canada’s next great prime minister, so 

I’d like to congratulate him on that. 

 

But I will say from our perspective, it’s not that we don’t need 

maybe another great prime minister, but we’re dearly short of 

anesthetists in this province, Mr. Speaker. So I’d like all 

members to welcome him here today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to the 

Assembly, sitting in your gallery is a friend of mine. He is the 

CEO [chief executive officer] of the Canadian family action. 

They are embarked on a new strategy and movement this year 

to provide Canada as a child safe nation. 

 

As you’re aware, Mr. Speaker, at the age of eight I was 

incarcerated in Canada’s most violent and brutal training 

school, St. John’s Training School, that had the notoriety of 

raping and abusing children. And I went on in my life to spend, 

at the age of 12, to be a street child. 

 

So the work that they do in providing our nation as a place for 

children to be safe, not to be exploited on the Internet or to be 

drawn into child prostitution or to be exploited in any of our 



May 11, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3011 

systems, I think is a work that everyone should applaud. 

 

Mr. Brian Rushfeldt is now making his way across Canada to 

speak to legislators, to look at the federal legislation, to provide 

some safety with the sentencing to make sure that it is 

coordinated and fair to the children that are being exploited and 

abused across this nation. I would like everyone in this 

Assembly to applaud Mr. Brian Rushfeldt and the work that he 

is doing for our children in Canada. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for First 

Nations and Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you I’d like to introduce two women in the 

west gallery that are very important to me and to my 

constituents. I’m going to ask my colleagues to help me 

welcome Linda Griffith, my constituent assistant — she has 

been with me since I was elected in 1995 — and my second 

assistant, Rhonda Fuluche, who started working for me in 

March of this year. 

 

And I have to tell you, they do such a wonderful job. This is 

Rhonda’s very first visit to the legislature so I’d like to 

welcome her here. These women help me in a very professional 

manner do the job that I was elected to do, and I can’t thank 

them enough. I ask all my colleagues to help me welcome them 

to their legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Canora, the 

Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’d like to join you in introducing a guest in your gallery that 

you have already introduced. A young lady is seated up there; 

she is part of the Ombudsman staff. And in a previous lifetime I 

used to be a schoolteacher, and I can tell you that Sherry Davis 

used to be . . . Her maiden name was Sherry Eskra . . . a family 

of seven. I did teach all seven children in my short 11 years. 

And Sherry was just an absolute pleasure to have in all my 

classes, from grade 7 to grade 12, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I want to congratulate her on her continued work in the 

Ombudsman office. And I ask all members to join me in 

welcoming a former student, Sherry Davis, to the Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition that speaks to the need of the Government of 

Saskatchewan to recognize the essential role of all health care 

providers as valued members of the health care team, and that 

the government must realize the utilization and value of the full 

range of professional skills offered by health care providers and 

make sure that it’s promoted through the address of retention 

and recruitment issues and by ensuring the safe staffing levels 

are maintained. And this can only be achieved through adequate 

funding and the installation of good faith in the provincial 

collective bargaining process. 

 

And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to maintaining quality health care 

services and job security for all public health care 

providers. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by members of SEIU 

[Service Employees International Union] West from Biggar, 

Rosetown, Herschel, Swift Current, Saskatoon, and Moose Jaw. 

I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for wage equity for CBO 

[community-based organization] workers. And we know that 

research demonstrate that those people who are working in the 

community-based organizations, that sector, are paid on average 

8 to $10 per hour less than employees performing work of equal 

value in government departments. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read 

the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the development and 

implementation of a multi-year funding plan to ensure that 

CBO workers achieve wage equity with employees who 

perform work of equal value in government departments. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And these folks come from Moosomin, Pilot Butte, and Regina, 

Saskatchewan. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present a petition on behalf of rural residents of 

Saskatchewan who question why the Sask Party government is 

leaving them behind with respect to providing safe and 

affordable water. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to financially assist the town of Duck Lake 

residents for the good of their health and safety due to the 

exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 



3012 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2009 

government agency, and that this government fulfills its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good 

residents of Duck Lake and Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

to repair Highway No. 102, north of La Ronge. This road is 

unsafe and needs repair. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the Sask 

Party government to commit to providing the repairs to 

Highway 102 that runs northeast of Saskatchewan, as 

needed. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Signed by the good people of Sucker River, La Ronge, Air 

Ronge. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

National Nursing Week and International Nurses Day 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. May 11 to 17, being 

National Nursing Week, I’d like to acknowledge the tireless 

contributions made to the residents of Saskatchewan by our 

nurses. 

 

National Nursing Week is an opportunity to recognize the 

outstanding contribution of the nursing profession and the 

individuals in it — the NPs [nurse practitioner], the RNs 

[registered nurse], the RPNs [registered psychiatric nurse], the 

LPNs [licensed practical nurse] — the whole nursing team. It is 

also an opportunity to show our appreciation for the vital and 

invaluable role that nursing plays in the health system and in the 

life of every Canadian. 

 

This year’s theme is Nursing: You Can’t Live Without It! Mr. 

Speaker, Nursing: You Can’t Live Without It! is more than a 

theme — it’s a reality. Nurses are the backbone of the health 

care system. Ensuring an adequate supply of nurses is critical to 

that system’s smooth functioning. The nursing shortage being 

experienced across Canada continues to be a reality here in 

Saskatchewan. As we look to find innovative ways to deliver 

better health care, we look to nurses to continue their various 

roles in developing a strong and vibrant health care system. 

 

Also taking place during this week is International Nurses Day. 

International Nurses Day is celebrated around the world on May 

12 of each year. May 12 is the anniversary of the birth of 

Florence Nightingale who is widely considered the founder of 

modern nursing. Similar to National Nursing Week, 

International Nurses Day is celebrated to remember all of the 

valuable contributions nurses make to society. Delivering 

Quality, Serving Communities: Nurses Leading Care 

Innovations is this year’s theme for International Nurses Day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to express my gratitude for the many 

contributions each and every nurse makes on a daily basis. I 

invite the public and all members of the Assembly to join me in 

recognizing and celebrating National Nursing Week and 

International Nurses Day. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Saskatchewan nurses work tirelessly hard to provide patients 

with high-quality care. They are highly skilled health 

professionals who are dedicated and devoted to the people of 

Saskatchewan. For this reason, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 

recognize May 11 to 17 as National Nursing Week and May 12 

as International Nurses Day. This week provides us with time to 

honour the vital role nurses play in our health care system and 

in our communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in February 2008 our government signed a 

partnership agreement with Saskatchewan Union of Nurses 

looking for more ways to recruit and retain nurses, and we 

committed 60 million to support it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since we signed this partnership there are 159 

more nurses working in Saskatchewan and there are 50 fewer 

nursing vacancies since last year. Mr. Speaker, our government 

would like to extend a heartfelt welcome to nurses coming to 

Saskatchewan, as well as the new Saskatchewan nursing grads. 

At the same time, our government offers appreciation to all 

nurses currently working in Saskatchewan’s health care system 

for their hard work, commitment, and dedication. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in thanking the 

thousands of nurses for their ongoing contribution to the health 

care system and wishing them the best in their week. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

World Lupus Day 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday, May 10, 

was World Lupus Day. This is the sixth annual global 

observance of World Lupus Day. Over 5 million people 

worldwide struggle with this debilitating disease. 

 

Lupus causes one’s immune system to attack the body’s healthy 

tissue. Every single part of the body including heart, lungs, 

kidneys, the skin, and the brain can be adversely affected by 

lupus. 

 



May 11, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3013 

Persons with lupus face a higher probability of strokes, heart 

attacks, severe and disabling pain and fatigue, disfiguring skin 

rashes, and many other serious health problems and illnesses. It 

often goes undetected because its symptoms — skin rashes, 

fevers, fatigue, pain at the joints — are often diagnosed as other 

illnesses. 

 

Lupus targets mostly young women, principally between the 

ages of 15 and 44, exactly at the time when women would be 

normally studying for their careers, entering and contributing to 

the workforce, and starting families. At present lupus has no 

cure and it can be fatal. There has been no new medication for 

lupus for over 40 years. There is a dire need for more research 

into both its cause and its cure. World Lupus Day on May 10 

serves to remind all of us that there’s much more work to be 

done. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Thunder Creek. 

 

Tugaske Celebrates 100th Anniversary 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

offer congratulations to the village of Tugaske which will be 

celebrating its 100th anniversary this year. Tugaske — good 

land, good water, good people. 

 

The village of Tugaske has had many boom times and many 

declines, like so many other communities, but throughout its 

history, several surrounding communities have worked together 

to keep the village viable. Today Tugaske is unique in its 

population. Several of the residents are professional artists and 

many others creative craftspeople. 

 

Tugaske is home of the Prairie Dog Players theatre group. And 

in 2008 a registered non-profit group of artists was formed — 

the Tugaske Regional Arts Association. It has 26 members, Mr. 

Speaker, who are artists, musicians, painters, sculptors, writers, 

and so on. It’s quite amazing when you think that focused 

around this little village, one-third of the people are practising 

artists. 

 

The school is closed and the elevators are gone, but the Tugaske 

weather station, first established in 1922, continues to report 

weather observations for Environment Canada, and Tugaske 

continues to be a very busy place, with people working to serve 

the village and surrounding communities. 

 

My congratulations to Tugaske and its residents for your 

dedication and perseverance. You truly deserve to be proud of 

your village and all of your achievements. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Ehrlo Outdoor Hockey League 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the 16th 

season of the Ehrlo Outdoor Hockey League, children and 

volunteer coaches alike battled a bitterly cold winter at seven 

inner-city rinks this season in order to learn and play hockey 

without the financial barriers of registration or equipment. 

 

Over 200 children and youth participated. The season included 

weekly practices, intersquad games, and a year-end tournament. 

Sponsors this season include the True Sport Community Fund, 

Conexus, the NHLPA [National Hockey League Players’ 

Association], the Optimist Clubs of Regina, Wilcox 

Hockeyville, Coca-Cola, the Elks, and SaskEnergy. 

 

This year, the league was expanded to my constituency. The 

new site at Rosemont was a resounding success, with a very 

dedicated group of outstanding players. 

 

I would like to thank Jared Kleisinger, Darryl Snyder, Clinton 

Kleisinger, Kris Parker, Meagan Lefebvre, Josiah Jordan, and 

Ryan Howard, who joined me as fellow coaches at Rosemont’s 

rink. I have coached for many years within this fine league, and 

I must say that it was a pleasure to work with these dedicated, 

talented, and caring coaches, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would like to specifically recognize league manager Kim 

Langston and Ehrlo Services for their dedicated organization of 

this league that has had such a profound positive impact on so 

many children, their families, and our communities. 

 

I ask all members of this Assembly to join with me in extending 

our gratitude to players, volunteers, supporters, and organizers 

of the Ehrlo Outdoor Hockey League. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Weyburn. 

 

Leadership Campaign Controversy 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, not long ago Dwain Lingenfelter 

thought he had the NDP [New Democratic Party] leadership in 

the bag. Turns out it was a bag of 10’s and 20’s, and it sure isn’t 

buying him much love these days. Everyone, including his own 

party, is now asking some very tough questions about the 

Lingenfelter phony membership scandal. 

 

Last Thursday the NDP confirmed that many of the fake 

membership applications had false signatures, something that 

Yens Pedersen suggests may be illegal. And the NDP also 

confirmed the phony memberships were paid for in cash, 

mostly 10’s and 20’s. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this really calls into question Dwain 

Lingenfelter’s story about an overexuberant volunteer. It’s 

pretty doubtful that this mystery volunteer was able to get 

$11,000 in 10’s and 20’s on his own. Someone with financial 

authority in the campaign must have gotten him this money. 

And if the Lingenfelter campaign was truly paying for these 

1,100 memberships due to financial hardship, why didn’t they 

just write a cheque? Why did they go out and get $11,000 cash 

in small bills? 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re not the only ones asking these questions. 

Ryan Meili is wondering whether it was an attempt to hide the 

fact that Lingenfelter campaign purchased the memberships. 

The member from Wakamow suggests someone was trying to 



3014 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2009 

contravene the checks and balances in the membership process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Dwain Lingenfelter’s story doesn’t pass the smell 

test. This is the worst kind of old-style politics from a party and 

a candidate that is clearly stuck in the past. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Northern Athlete and Student Recognized 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This year Alwyn 

Piche, a 22-year-old from La Loche, was named college’s 

Volleyball Player of the Year and the Academic All-Canadian 

Athlete by the Canadian College Athletic Association. 

 

At 17 Alwyn played with Team Canada’s under-19 division and 

attended the world championships in Algiers. At 16 Alwyn 

played with Team Saskatchewan, helping win the national 

volleyball championship and being named the most valuable 

player. 

 

To attain success has always been challenges for Alwyn. In 

high school, Alwyn travelled each week some six hours to 

compete beyond northern Saskatchewan. To enter Fort 

McMurray’s Keyano College, Alwyn had to master English, as 

his first language is Dene. 

 

Throughout, Alwyn’s community and family have supported 

him. As a result, Alwyn is a proud northerner, thanking the 

community of La Loche for his success. Alwyn always gives 

back as a member of Canada’s Aboriginal role model program 

and speaks to youth about the importance of sports and 

academics. 

 

Alwyn loves volleyball and respects it. He’s well known across 

Canada and is recognized as one of Canada’s top players at any 

level. He’s scouted as a future professional. Alwyn is also 

succeeding in college, a place beyond the reach of many 

northern youth. 

 

Alwyn’s dad, Greg, a school principal and coach, believes our 

northern youth — like Alwyn — can succeed. They just need 

our support. 

 

Thank you, Alwyn Piche, the Hatch and Piche family. You have 

brought much respect to the North, and I’m very proud of your 

accomplishments. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Pre-Kindergarten Education Programs and Child Care 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s 

pre-kindergarten programs lay the foundation for success in 

school and lifelong learning, particularly for three- and 

four-year-old children at risk of failing in school, and 

community schools ensure that children have access to the 

supports and services they need so that they’re able to 

concentrate on and connect to learning, improving achievement 

and outcomes. To the minister: does the minister agree that 

pre-kindergarten programs and community schools play a vital 

role in helping all children succeed in school? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the question was asked 

during estimates, and I answered the question regarding the 

amount of dollars that was made available to address some 

priorities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last year when we became government, the very 

first thing we did was to introduce 38 new pre-kindergarten 

programs across the entire province. That has increased the 

number to 193 programs. So we made significant progress in 

addressing the pre-kindergarten needs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this year we’re doing a stand pat situation where 

we’re looking at the 38 spots and to ensure that those programs 

are all operating at their peak efficiency, Mr. Speaker. And as 

the economy of this province continues to grow, as we look at 

additional funds that may become available in the course of 

next year’s budget, Mr. Speaker, of course pre-kindergarten 

programs are very important. That is why we added 38 to make 

the total now 193 — far more than the NDP did over their 16 

years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the minister claims to 

believe that these programs are important, but he’s not putting 

the money where his mouth is. The last provincial budget didn’t 

create a single pre-kindergarten program or designate a single 

new community school. This is at a time where government 

spending is at record levels, the population is growing, and 

more and more families are having a difficult time to make ends 

meet, placing more children at risk of failing in school. 

 

To the minister: why is Saskatchewan standing still on 

pre-kindergarten spaces and community schools? Why is the 

Sask Party failing to invest in the future of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud of the 

record of our government, the fact that we have added $240 

million to the pre-K [pre-kindergarten] to grade 12 education 

program, Mr. Speaker — $240 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member opposite asked the question about 

investing in people in the province of Saskatchewan. I want to 

tell the member what I was doing this morning, Mr. Speaker. I 



May 11, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3015 

travelled to the city of Moose Jaw. I travelled to the city of 

Moose Jaw where we’ve been working with some individuals 

from the YMCA [Young Men’s Christian Association] to 

address child care needs, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 

morning I had the pleasure of announcing that the city of Moose 

Jaw, working with the YMCA, we have announced 120 new 

spots for the city of Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, that’s a significant amount 

of dollars. That’s a significant recognition of the need in the 

city of Moose Jaw. Mr. Speaker, we allocated 1,000 spaces, and 

we announced 120 of those today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — On the child care file, Mr. Speaker, that 

minister’s going backwards. He can make all the 

announcements he wants, but if he’s losing spaces in the 

community, he’s going backwards; he’s failing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan families are under increasing 

pressure. As a result, more and more children are at risk of 

failing in school. The need for supports like pre-kindergarten 

programs in community schools is growing, but Saskatchewan 

is standing still, and local school boards are constrained to 

respond by these needs now that the minister controls the purse 

strings. 

 

Investing in child care is another way to encourage early 

childhood education, but we are 662 spaces short of the 

minister’s announcement of 500 new spaces last year from last 

year’s budget. They’re losing more than they’re gaining, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s a shame. To the minister: where are the 

government’s priorities? Why is the Sask Party failing to invest 

in the supports that Saskatchewan students need to succeed in 

school and succeed in life? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

our priority is for child care spaces based on what we inherited 

from the former government, was the fact that we needed to 

address the worst situation in all of Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that the members opposite — I believe, in 

fun — criticize me for raising my voice. But, Mr. Speaker, you 

can tell by the chatter opposite, and I’ll call it chatter because it 

really doesn’t make much sense, Mr. Speaker, when in fact 

we’ve just announced 120 new child care spaces for Moose 

Jaw. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I indicated to the member in estimates, we have 

over 2,000 applications to the ministry right now for child care 

spaces. We recognize that. And for the member not to 

remember the list of the fact that child care spaces that were 

announced before are going into McLean, Esterhazy, Birch 

Hills, Kipling, Gravelbourg, Montmartre, Regina, Foam Lake, 

Frontier, Yorkton, Saskatoon Fairhaven and Saskatoon Lester 

B. Pearson and Saskatoon Mount Royal and Saskatoon E.D. 

Feehan, I guess, Mr. Speaker, I’ll just have to keep repeating 

the list for his enjoyment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Contract Negotiations 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, one of the first things 

this government did was to introduce draconian legislation that 

effectively took away the right to strike. At the end of April, 

contract negotiations broke down between the Health Sciences 

Association of Saskatchewan and SAHO [Saskatchewan 

Association of Health Organizations] because of the language 

in SAHO’s bargaining package that allows SAHO to amend, 

remove, or add any proposal during the contract negotiations. 

Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister: when does this new 

SAHO language cross the line into bargaining in bad faith and 

become a labour relations violation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I remember roughly 

about a year ago having to answer questions from that member, 

that critic, when she was questioning the negotiations that were 

being conducted between SAHO and the Saskatchewan Union 

of Nurses. And at that time I said, just be patient. They have to 

get back to the table and negotiations will get back to the table. 

They’ll work out an agreement. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s 

exactly what happened in that instance — an agreement was 

struck, a four-year agreement, Mr. Speaker, never seen in the 

province before. An agreement was struck. 

 

Now I’d say the same to that critic. I don’t think she’s asking 

me to interfere in the negotiations. I certainly hope she isn’t 

because I will tell you that SAHO and the representative unions 

will get back to the table, and they will strike an agreement that 

will be good for this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, obviously the union, which is no 

stranger to the bargaining process, feels this is something new 

and unacceptable. To the minister: what is he saying to SAHO? 

What message is this sending to the other health sector unions 

who are all stalled at their bargaining tables? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 



3016 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2009 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said in other 

negotiations that have been conducted in the province with 

SAHO involved or any other employer, there are peaks and 

there are valleys. There are times where they’re at the table, and 

they’re negotiating well. There’s times when those negotiations 

will break off and, Mr. Speaker, that may be the time right now 

where the two sides aren’t speaking. But what I would do and I 

have done always in the past is I would encourage both sides — 

whether it’s the employer or the employee — to get back to the 

table, work out language that they can both agree on, work out a 

contract that they can both agree on because, Mr. Speaker, that 

is what the province needs. We need constant delivery in our 

health care system. That’s what the public expects. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, the minister says he doesn’t inject 

himself into contract negotiations, but he certainly had no 

problem getting himself into the middle of the nurses’ contract 

negotiations. In fact he took credit for the contract. Mr. 

Speaker, the minister clearly believed that nurses deserved 

parity with their Alberta counterparts. Does he believe that the 

nurses’ contract is the template for the rest of the health sector 

negotiations? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I bring to that member’s 

attention, there is a difference between the contract negotiation 

and signing a historic partnership agreement. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, an historic partnership 

agreement that has never seen the two sides work together 

better than what they’re working together right now. Mr. 

Speaker, for 16 years Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, even 

under her leadership, said they’d never had the ear of the former 

government. They could never get the ear of the former 

government. In fact they were absolutely ignored. That hasn’t 

been the case over the last 18 months. We’ve signed a 

partnership agreement. We’ve funded a partnership agreement, 

and the health care system is better for it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I am sure the minister hears what 

he wants to hear. The health service providers have been 

negotiating a new contract — all the health service providers — 

for over a year. And negotiations, as I’ve said, have stalled. 

 

Mr. Speaker, doctors are currently negotiating a new contract, 

and they’re seeking wage parity with their Alberta neighbours. 

Mr. Speaker, when will this government get serious and work 

with health providers from SEIU, CUPE [Canadian Union of 

Public Employees], SGEU [Saskatchewan Government and 

General Employees’ Union], and health sciences to put a fair 

agreement in place as soon as possible? And is this government 

committed to wage parity for Saskatchewan doctors with 

Alberta doctors? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know how much 

clearer I could be for that member. She should realize that it’s 

not the government that negotiates with the different service 

providers. It is Saskatchewan Association of Health 

Organizations, SAHO, Mr. Speaker. So SAHO and the provider 

unions need to get back to the table and work out an agreement, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

She’s correct in saying that the doctor’s contract is up. And yes, 

Mr. Speaker, we realize that doctors are in need as well as all 

health care providers are in need and wanted throughout the 

country. That’s why we have been very fair in the negotiations 

in the past for example with the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, 

Mr. Speaker. I would ask that . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Well the member from Nutana, does she disagree with the 

contract? I would ask her to stand in her seat and disagree with 

the contract with the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses. That’s 

exactly why there is no peace under that government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. I recognize the member from 

Cumberland. 

 

Highway 102 and Northern Highway 

Infrastructure Planning 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, Highway 102 is just not safe 

for truckers, for the tourists, for the residents of northern 

communities. A bridge 40 kilometres south of La Ronge is 

caving in. To the north of La Ronge, the highway is so bad that 

drivers with wide load trailers are dodging the holes in the 

highway to prevent damage to their trucks and becoming a 

traffic hazard themselves. To the minister: what is the Sask 

Party going to do about this threat to the public safety? When 

are they going to fix both the highway and the bridge? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, I’m grateful for the 

question today. As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, I’ve been 

waiting a long time to have this discussion. We have broached 

this subject in estimates, as has been the case with many other 

issues over the last little while, and I can tell the member and 

the party he represents that this government will keep its 

commitment to infrastructure development in the North. 

 

We created a five-year rolling plan. We took a full year to 

evaluate roads in southern Saskatchewan. We’re undertaking 

the same process in northern Saskatchewan. When that plan is 

complete, we will identify the priority projects for infrastructure 



May 11, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3017 

development. And I don’t think that it’ll be seen as a waste of 

time because the more effective, more efficiently we can use 

those dollars, the better infrastructure we can provide for the 

social and economic development of northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Highway 102 just isn’t 

safe. In fact there already has been a large gas spill recently 

along the highway, and there are other effects on public safety. 

Ambulance drivers are concerned about the effects on their 

patients when driving over such roads. Both ambulance and 

RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] are concerned about 

response times. This situation is reaching a crisis point. To the 

minister: what will it take for the Sask Party to act? Does 

someone have to be killed or seriously injured for this highway 

and bridge to be fixed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the 

member for that question because I want to assure him that the 

Highways ministry takes safety as its highest priority. And if 

there’s issues regarding safety that need to be attended to today, 

we will do that. We will look after that. But if it’s a question of 

rebuilding the road entirely, that’s a different story. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the five-year rolling plan that we introduced for 

southern Saskatchewan was so well received that even the critic 

for the opposition said that that was a good idea. I’m sure that 

the wealth of expertise that went into developing that plan in 

southern Saskatchewan will be welcomed in the development of 

a plan for northern Saskatchewan. We are going to undertake 

that exercise. We’re going to do it properly. We’re going to 

provide roads and infrastructure development that will benefit 

the people of the North, the economy of the North, and the 

societies and all those individuals who are going to be impacted 

by increased infrastructure commitments up there. We’re going 

to do it in the most effective and efficient manner possible, 

given the money and the resources that we have available to us. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party has had 

18 months to do something about this, and what have they 

done? And all that the minister can do is talk about the previous 

government — which doesn’t help one northerner, one tourist, 

one trucker who needs a safe road to travel on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the long weekend is coming. Many tourists will be 

heading north. But how many will want to visit the North if 

they travel on unsafe highways? If the public safety won’t 

convince the minister, maybe the impact on our economy will. 

To the minister: will he protect the tourism industry in the 

North? And will he take steps to fix Highway 102 now? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as I just reassured the 

member, if it’s a safety issue that we can address right now, we 

will. If he’s asking for the road to be rebuilt, the answer is no. 

We’re going to be evaluating that particular stretch of road in 

competition with all the other roads in the North that need 

fixing. 

 

The Far North is the home of our economic future. It’s going to 

require a well-developed infrastructure. We need to be strategic 

about where and how we build that infrastructure and the 

benefits that that infrastructure can bring, not just to the 

southern part of Saskatchewan but most particularly the 

northern part of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am reminded of the years I spent in opposition 

presenting a petition every day, year after year — maybe as 

long as eight years, Mr. Speaker — without ever having that 

previous group of men and women address our highway issues. 

In 18 months, we’ve done more for infrastructure in this 

province than they did in rural Saskatchewan for the previous 

20 years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, the trucks that drive Highway 

102 are mining trucks, an industry that generates a lot of wealth 

for the Saskatchewan government, and the northerners deserve 

to benefit from wealth we create. Certainly we have the same 

right to travel safe roads as people elsewhere in this province. 

To the minister: given that the North contributes much to the 

provincial economy, will he commit here today to investing part 

of that wealth back into roads and bridges like Highway 102? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Well, Mr. Speaker, perhaps the member 

wasn’t listening to my response. I think I already addressed 

that. We firmly believe that a lot of Saskatchewan’s economic 

future is located in the North and that to develop the North 

properly and appropriately, to get the infrastructure in place to 

help that development, to get the infrastructure in place to 

underpin the societal needs of the communities in the North, we 

need to invest in infrastructure. 

 

The question is how many hundreds of millions of dollars will 

that take? And how soon can we generate that kind of money? 

Without the resources available to us to do all of the work 

immediately — which is what the member seems to be 

suggesting — we’re going to take a very strategic approach to 

the development of infrastructure in the North. And, Mr. 

Speaker, in the long-run that will pay big dividends for the 

province as a whole, but most specifically for the communities 

in the North. I think they want their tax money spent as wisely 

as anybody else does. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



3018 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2009 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Greenhouse Gas Emissions 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the Sask 

Party has now admitted that they have broken one of the key 

promises they made in the election campaign. They promised to 

live up to the NDP plan for government to reduce targets by 32 

per cent. Now the minister says that can’t possibly be done. To 

the minister: why was a 32 per cent reduction achievable during 

the election campaign, but now it is not? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP stand in this 

House day after day and give us advice and ask us to implement 

their plans and their ideas. Well, Mr. Speaker, the NDP 

Environment critic speaking on behalf of her party on May 22, 

2008, said, and I quote, “I would say the federal targets are 

something they should clearly be adopting.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are doing exactly what the NDP asked us to 

do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, this question has been asked of the 

Environment minister numerous times, and she still doesn’t 

have an answer besides the political rhetoric that she can throw 

across the way. Mr. Speaker, when the minister was asked 

about this on April 30, here was her response . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — When she was asked about this on April 30, 

here was her response: “I would like to state yet again that the 

$320 million was nothing more than a press release. It wasn’t 

anywhere except in the GRF.” Imagine that, Mr. Speaker; this 

money was no where to be found, except in the GRF, the 

General Revenue Fund. We had a plan to meet our targets, Mr. 

Speaker, and we had money set aside to make that plan work. 

 

So again to the minister: when exactly did she decide to break 

her promise to meet a 32 per cent reduction in emissions? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP do not have a 

plan. They had a glossy brochure that had some nice words in 

it, things that they are contradicting every day when they stand 

in the House now. Mr. Speaker, there was no implementation 

plan. They had absolutely no legislation and no regulation. A 

glossy brochure does not get us to our targets. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — For the minister’s benefit, here is the NDP’s 

non-plan: $320 million Green Future Fund; 100 million on 

conservation and efficiency; 125 million on carbon capture and 

storage in the oil and gas and industry sectors; 75 million to 

increase the use of renewable energy; and 20 million to reduce 

methane and other emissions from the oil and gas agricultural 

centres. That was the NDP’s non-plan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, our government undertook many 

programs and . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. She may place a question. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, our government undertook many 

programs and regulations to reduce emissions. It was our 

government that brought wind power to this province, and the 

Sask Party hasn’t spent a dime on it. It was our government that 

spent 500 million to make sure that 30 per cent of electricity 

was generated from renewable resources by 2020. Our 

government announced over 100 specific actions to reduce 

greenhouse gas emissions. The 32 per cent target . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. First of all, I would like to 

remind the members who are calling for the question, the 

members have roughly 50 seconds to place the question. The 

ministers are given roughly a minute. The member is just 

arriving at that point. I ask the member to place her question. 

 

Ms. Morin: — The 32 per cent target was real and it was 

achievable. To the Premier: did he ever have any intention of 

keeping our targets, or was it just another cheap, political 

gimmick to get elected? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I think the members 

opposite would have a little bit more credibility on this file if 

they could keep their stories straight. 

 

The NDP Environment critic claims that we scraped all their 

green programs, and then she later admitted that we kept them. 

The critic says that carbon capture and storage is not a solution 

for our province, yet in her little plan says it’s a relatively 

low-cost alternative for our province. The NDP had their own 

targets and then changed them to the federal targets. The NDP 

Environment critic said that the climate change secretary was in 

fact established and then said no, it wasn’t; there was just a plan 

to establish it. She says that carbon capture is too expensive, 

then says it’s cost-effective. They’re for clean coal. They’re 



May 11, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3019 

against clean coal. They said that they wanted the Office of 

Energy Conservation, Mr. Speaker, and then in 1996 shut the 

whole office down. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Clearly, Mr. Speaker, we can see that a broken 

promise by the Sask Party will cause the minister to say 

absolutely anything whether it’s true or not. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party made three key promises about 

greenhouse gas emissions, and I’ll quote from . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — And I’ll quote from page 3 of the Sask Party 

platform. The Sask Party will “Stabilize greenhouse gas 

emissions by 2010.” The Sask Party will “Reduce greenhouse 

gases by 32 per cent from current levels by 2020.” And the Sask 

Party will “Reduce greenhouse gases by 80 per cent from 

current levels by 2050.” 

 

We know that they broke one promise. They will no longer 

meet the target of 32 per cent reduction by 2020. To the 

minister: will they keep the other promises of their platform? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that in the last 

18 months, the Saskatchewan Party government has kept a 

minimum of 105 of our campaign promises. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Something that the NDP could not say 

that they did. Mr. Speaker, NDP leadership candidate Yens 

Pedersen said, and I quote, “We came out of a government for 

the past 16 years and we hadn’t reduced carbon emissions . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The Minister Responsible for 

the Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yens 

Pedersen said, and I quote: 

 

We came out of a government for the past 16 years and 

we hadn’t reduced carbon emissions or reduced poverty 

and we’re the socialist party. That’s supposed to be our 

priority and instead emissions and poverty increased. 

 

That’s their legacy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 95 — The Management and Reduction of 

Greenhouse Gases Act 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

Bill No. 95, The Management and Reduction of Greenhouse 

Gases Act be introduced and read a first time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of the Environment has moved 

first reading of Bill No. 95, The Management and Reduction of 

Greenhouse Gases Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — The next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Committee of the 

Human Services. 

 

Standing Committee on Human Services 

 

Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 89, The 

Education Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 3) with amendments. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? 

 

I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

request leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole 

on this Bill, and that the Bill and its amendments be now read 

the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has asked for leave. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the amendments be read a first 

time? I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 



3020 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2009 

Bill No. 89 — The Education Amendment Act, 2009 

(No. 3)/Loi n
o
 3 de 2009 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur 

l’éducation 
 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

move that the amendments be now read a first and second time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Education that the amendments be now read a first and second 

time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 

reading of the amendments. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 89 — The Education Amendment Act, 2009 

(No. 3)/Loi n
o
 3 de 2009 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur 

l’éducation 
 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

move that this Bill be now read the third time and passed under 

its title. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Education has moved that 

Bill No. 89, The Education Amendment Act, 2009 with 

amendment be now read the third time and passed under its 

title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Human Services 

Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Human Services 

 

Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 90, The 

Miscellaneous Statutes (Education Property Tax) Repeal and 

Amendment Act, 2009 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

request leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole 

on this Bill and that the Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 90 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Education 

Property Tax) Repeal and Amendment Act, 2009 
 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

move that this Bill be now read the third time and passed under 

its title. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Education has moved that 

Bill No. 90, The Miscellaneous Statutes (Education Property 

Tax) Repeal and Amendment Act, 2009 without amendment be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 

Services. 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I ask for 

leave to move a motion regarding the reappointment of the 

Provincial Ombudsman. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has asked for leave. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Minister 

Responsible for Government Services. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Reappointment of Provincial Ombudsman 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

honour today to speak on behalf of the government and the 

Board of Internal Economy about the reappointment of Kevin 



May 11, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3021 

Fenwick as the Provincial Ombudsman. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the freedom and independence of the 

Ombudsman’s office is critical to a healthy, well-functioning 

democratic system. Over the last five years, Mr. Fenwick has 

demonstrated immense competence and served the people of 

Saskatchewan well by rigorously protecting the office’s 

autonomy. 

 

Prior to his appointment in 2004, Mr. Fenwick served 13 years 

working with the dispute resolution and mediation services 

branch of Saskatchewan Justice. His wealth of experience 

facilitating fairness and conciliation has clearly been put to 

good use investigating and resolving public complaints against 

the government. 

 

I know that Mr. Fenwick has spent a tremendous amount of 

time developing fair practice training for government offices. 

Also, he has worked hard to ensure our Ombudsman’s office 

better serves isolated northern communities. And these are just 

a couple of the areas that I have time to highlight. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Fenwick is judicious, fair-minded, and 

meticulously independent. The extension of his term as 

Ombudsman is a testament to how well he has served this 

province and the confidence the people of Saskatchewan have 

in him and his office in continuing to do so fairly, justly, and 

equitably. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move: 

 

That a humble Address be presented to His Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor. 

 

To His Honour the Honourable Gordon L. Barnhart, 

Lieutenant Governor of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Recommending that the Lieutenant Governor in Council 

reappoint Mr. Kevin Fenwick, Q.C., of the Lorlie district 

in the province of Saskatchewan, as Ombudsman pursuant 

to section 3 of The Ombudsman and Children’s Advocate 

Act. 

 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Government 

Services has moved: 

 

That a humble Address be presented to His Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor. 

 

To His Honour the Honourable Gordon L. Barnhart, 

Lieutenant Governor of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Recommending that the Lieutenant Governor in Council 

reappoint Mr. Kevin Fenwick, Q.C., of the Lorlie district 

in the province of Saskatchewan, as Ombudsman pursuant 

to section 3 of The Ombudsman and Children’s Advocate 

Act. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 

allow time for the Standing Committee on Human Services and 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to do their work, I move 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — Before I place the question of adjournment, I 

would like to extend an invitation to the members to join with 

Mr. Fenwick and his staff in the Speaker’s office for a tea 

following adjournment of the Chamber this afternoon. 

 

The Government House Leader has moved adjournment in 

order to facilitate the work of committees. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. This Assembly stands 

adjourned until tomorrow afternoon at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 14:32.] 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3009 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3009 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3009 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3009 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3010 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3010 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3010 

  LeClerc .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3010 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3011 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 3011 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3011 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3011 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3011 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3012 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 National Nursing Week and International Nurses Day 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3012 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3012 

 World Lupus Day 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3012 

 Tugaske Celebrates 100th Anniversary 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3013 

 Ehrlo Outdoor Hockey League 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3013 

 Leadership Campaign Controversy 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3013 

 Northern Athlete and Student Recognized 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3014 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Pre-Kindergarten Education Programs and Child Care 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3014 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 3014 

 Contract Negotiations 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3015 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3015 

 Highway 102 and Northern Highway Infrastructure Planning 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3016 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3016 

 Greenhouse Gas Emissions 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3018 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3018 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 95 — The Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases Act 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3019 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Human Services 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3019 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 Bill No. 89 — The Education Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 3) 

 Loi n
o
 3 de 2009 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 3020 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 89 — The Education Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 3) 

 Loi n
o
 3 de 2009 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 3020 

 Bill No. 90 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Education Property Tax) Repeal and Amendment Act, 2009 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 3020 

MOTIONS 

 Reappointment of Provincial Ombudsman 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3020 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 


