




















































Hansard: November 10, 2009


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 12A  TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 10, 2009, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3519 

 November 10, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu‟Appelle Valley. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I would like to introduce to you and through you and to all 

members of the House, seated in the west gallery, my son 

Jonathon Ross, his wife Allison, my grandson Simon, and my 

granddaughter Holly. I wish all members to welcome them to 

the Legislative Assembly. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it‟s my 

pleasure to rise on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan here to 

present a petition on their concern over the condition of 

Highway 123. And Highway 123 is the important link but it‟s 

also the only link into the community of Cumberland House 

and towns surrounding. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the petition goes on to say that this highway 

has many potholes in it and requires considerable manoeuvring 

so not to get stuck in the mud. And, Mr. Speaker, it‟s obvious 

that this highway certainly is in the clear need of upgrading and 

some repairs. So, Mr. Speaker, I‟ll read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to commit to maintaining and repairing 

this highway. 

 

And in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 

Cumberland House. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in support of 

long-term care beds, to present a petition in support of 

long-term care beds in La Ronge. There‟s a growing wait-list 

for long-term care beds in La Ronge, in and around, and there‟s 

an increase in the aging population in the Mamawetan Churchill 

Health Region. The petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately invest in the planning and 

construction of new long-term care beds in La Ronge. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

The petition is signed by people from La Ronge and area. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition for wage equity for CBO 

[community-based organization] workers. And we know the 

workers in community-based organizations in Saskatchewan 

have traditionally been underpaid and many continue to earn 

poverty-level wages. I‟d like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

development and implementation of a multi-year funding 

plan to ensure that CBO workers achieve wage equity with 

employees who perform work of equal value in 

government departments. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these folks come from the good city of 

Regina. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition in support of fairness for students here in 

Saskatchewan through the necessary expansion of the graduate 

retention program. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately expand the graduate 

retention program to include master‟s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are from 

the good city of Prince Albert. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today and present a 

petition in support of maintaining quality health care services. 

Mr. Speaker, we all hope that the Government of Saskatchewan 

realizes that, in order to address the issue of retention and 

recruitment and safe staffing levels, that they have to have a 

commitment to adequate funding and the installation of good 

faith in the collective bargaining process. And the prayer reads 

as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to commit to maintaining quality health 

care services and job security for all public health care 

providers. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 



3520 Saskatchewan Hansard November 10, 2009 

The petitions are signed by the good folks of Lafleche, 

Assiniboia, Middle Lake, LeRoy, St. Brieux, Martensville, and 

Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m pleased today to 

rise and present a petition in support of affordable rents and 

housing in The Battlefords. The residents of course note some 

have received an increase of almost 40 per cent in rent, and 

there‟s very little accommodation in The Battlefords for renters, 

Mr. Speaker. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to call 

upon the Government of Saskatchewan to develop an 

affordable housing program that will result in a greater 

number of quality and affordable rental units to be made 

available to a greater number of people throughout The 

Battlefords and that will implement a process of rent 

review or rent control to better protect tenants in a 

non-competitive housing environment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures on the petition are all from residents 

of the city of North Battleford. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m honoured 

to rise and present petitions on behalf of concerned citizens of 

Saskatchewan as it relates to the unprecedented 

mismanagement of their finances, Mr. Speaker. The prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to start managing our 

provincial finances responsibly and prudently to ensure 

that it does not continue its trend of massive budgetary 

shortfalls, runaway and unsustainable spending, equity 

stripping from our Crowns, and irresponsible revenue 

setting. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These concerned citizens and petitions are from residents of 

Melfort, Buchanan, and LeRoy. I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Remembrance Day 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the days leading 

up to Remembrance Day, little red flowers bloom on lapels and 

collars across Canada and around the world. To understand the 

significance of the poppy, I turned to the words of a Canadian 

doctor and soldier, John McCrae, who committed the following 

words to paper in May of 1915, the day after witnessing the 

death of a dear friend: 

In Flanders Fields the poppies blow 

Between the crosses, row on row, 

That mark our place; and in the sky 

The larks, still bravely singing, fly 

Scarce heard amid the guns below. 

 

We are the Dead. Short days ago 

We lived, felt dawn, saw sunset glow, 

Loved, and were loved, and now we lie 

In Flanders Fields. 

 

Take up our quarrel with the foe: 

To you from failing hands we throw 

The torch; be yours to hold it high. 

If ye break faith with us who die 

We shall not sleep, though poppies grow 

In Flanders Fields. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, November 11th marks 

Remembrance Day, offering us a chance every year to reflect 

upon the sacrifices that our Armed Forces and civilians have 

made in the world wars and a number of other conflicts and 

peacekeeping missions since. 

 

For many of today‟s children, the struggles, hardships and 

sacrifices that veterans endured can seem foreign and distant. 

Learning “In Flanders Fields” may seem a mere literary 

exercise or a reflection upon times long gone. To many these 

reflections apply to other countries or other times, but this is not 

so. Today my son is speaking to a school in Saskatoon about his 

experiences as a veteran in Afghanistan. And we continue to 

mourn the recent death of Lieutenant Boyes. 

 

More than one and a half million Canadians have served in our 

Armed Forces in times of war. More than 120,000 have died in 

battle. Let us all use this day to remember to honour the 

memory of those who have served and to acknowledge that 

now, for far too many, those memories are fresh and painful. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with great humility 

that I rise in this House and speak of the sacrifices made by 

those who gave all to protect our freedoms. The brave Canadian 

men and women answered the call to protect our country. We 

watched with overwhelming pride as they left their homeland 

for an unknown world. 

 

Many of us cannot imagine the horrors that these courageous 

Canadians endured. We have heard about the battles, the 

fighting, the bombing, and the bloodshed, but we truly do not 

know. 

 

For many, life ended on the battlefield with honour and selfless 

sacrifice. Others survived and returned home to the open arms 

of their loved ones, grateful and forever changed by their 

experiences. Those men and women who risked their lives, we 



November 10, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3521 

remember and honour you. Your spirits are alive in our hearts 

today as they are every day. Let us not forget. Our country will 

truly not be the same without you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave to ask 

for extra time for member‟s statement. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave to allow for 

extra time as he would read the names. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with a great 

deal of pride that I stand in the Assembly today on the eve of 

this very special day to pay tribute to our veterans. 

 

My own family has a proud military tradition. My father, Leon 

Joseph Belanger, was a proud veteran. My older brother, 

Warrant Officer Wallace K. Belanger, retired after 27 years as a 

flight engineer with the air force. My older brother, Gerald 

Wayne Belanger, was turned back because of weight problems. 

And my older sister, Donna Belanger, served several years. My 

younger brother, John Franklin Belanger, recently retired as a 

master warrant officer after 26 years of service. My youngest 

daughter, Ordinary Seaman Taylor Belanger, graduated from 

the navy Raven program as the top female cadet at the 

Esquimalt Forces Base in BC [British Columbia], and is still 

considering a full career with the navy program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am very proud of my brothers, my sister, and my 

daughter, as their service is not only a tribute to our father, but 

to all the veterans who have served their country. It is a tribute 

made all the more powerful by a number of young people 

returning home in caskets. 

 

One final note, Mr. Speaker. All of these veterans, they were 

proud that they served their country. Whether it is my brother 

John‟s tours in Bosnia, my brother Wally‟s NATO [North 

Atlantic Treaty Organization] duties in North Africa, or my 

father‟s landing in Normandy, all of them spoke of the good life 

we have here in Canada. None of them ever politicized their 

service, not once. 

 

If we truly respect both the veterans and those who serve today, 

Mr. Speaker, we all have to simply bow our heads and pay 

tribute to their sacrifice. And I read the list of names in my 

home community that we honour each and every year, and 

which we plan on doing tomorrow: 

 

Victor Laliberte Alex Laliberte 

Magloire Laliberte Alex Malboeuf 

Joe Malboeuf J.B. Maurice 

Thomas Daigneault Alphonse Kenny 

Vital Morin Gilbert McCallum 

Leo J. Belanger James Natomagan 

George Raymond Pete Raymond 

George Belanger James Durocher 

F.X. Burnouf Joe Caisse 

Jack Favel Fred Kennedy 

Gaspar Kenny Jonas Favel 

Alex Roy Ambrose Durocher 

Cyprien Corrigal Wallace Belanger 

Felix Merasty Allan J. Morin 

John Durocher Prosper Lariviere 

Louis Roy Tony Corrigal 

Louis Durocher John Fiddler 

 

Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pride to say thank you to the 

veterans, those that have served and those that have perished 

and those that have returned and have since passed on, those 

that have retired and those that continue to serve. I thank you 

from the bottom of my heart. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 

 

[10:15] 

 

Mr. D‟Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There are a 

few memorable events people look at as defining moments in 

Canadian history: 1867, the beginning of Confederation; the 

enactment of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 

 

But for many Canadians, the defining moment was the Battle of 

Vimy Ridge in World War I. From April 9th to April 12th, 

1917, Canadians fought to take this position from the Germans. 

This was the first offensive in which all four divisions of the 

Canadian Armed Forces participated in battle together. This 

battle is where Canada came of age as a nation. It gave birth to 

Canada‟s identity. 

 

All of the attributes Canadians continue to be known for were 

shown on that bloody soil in France — valour, hard work, 

determination, and commitment. Canadians are still known for 

those to this very day. 

 

I would like to express my deepest appreciation for the 

sacrifices of the men and women that served in the past, and 

acknowledge the dedication and bravery of current soldiers 

stationed in places like Afghanistan and elsewhere around the 

world. 

 

I would like to offer my sincerest gratitude to all soldiers — 

including my Uncle Louis who died in Holland in 1945 — that 

paid the ultimate price for freedom, and to give respects to their 

families. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Aboriginal Woman of Distinction from Prince Albert 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, on October 10th, Isabelle Impey 

from Prince Albert received the Aboriginal Woman of 

Distinction award at the 10th annual National Aboriginal 

Women in Leadership Training Conference in Ottawa. 

 

This award is presented each year to Aboriginal women in 

recognition of their contributions as leaders in their 

communities, in addition to acknowledging the role they play as 

models and mentors, especially to other women. 

 

Isabelle Impey is an advocate for people who are on assistance 



3522 Saskatchewan Hansard November 10, 2009 

and were affected by the child welfare and justice systems. 

She‟s worked at the Prince Albert Indian Residential School as 

a dorm mother and as a superintendent of student services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Ms. Impey was also instrumental in the creation of 

the Aboriginal post-secondary institutes and programs in 

Saskatchewan. Many First Nations and Métis students have 

furthered their education because of her hard work. 

 

Isabelle was born and raised in Cumberland House, and her 

family taught her at a very young age the importance of 

education. In the Dorion household, they had a unique way of 

teaching their children the importance of education. Mr. 

Speaker, I quote from the New Breed Magazine of July 2002: 

 

One time Isabelle had decided that she was going to quit 

school telling her mother that she had . . . [had] enough 

already. The very next morning, her uncles showed up and 

took Isabelle with them on the trap line, since she was not 

in school anymore. That time she skinned muskrats for her 

great uncle and his two companions. When they got home, 

Isabelle went back to school. She never spoke with her 

mother about quitting school, never got the lecture on the 

importance of education, but she did get the lesson that 

made all the difference. Isabelle has never left school 

since. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that you and all members join with me in 

congratulating Isabelle Impey on being named an Aboriginal 

Woman of Distinction. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Thunder Creek. 

 

Remembrance Day 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. “We will remember 

them.” That line is from the “Ode of Remembrance” which, like 

“In Flanders Fields,” was written during World War I. 

 

It‟s a tribute to the British war dead and was published in the 

London Times in 1914. That‟s a long time ago, Mr. Speaker. 

But the relevance of the line resounds to the present day. Today 

there‟s only one Canadian World War I veteran still alive. With 

each passing, there are fewer and fewer veterans of World War 

II and the Korean War. These men and women paid the highest 

price to secure our freedom and their sacrifices should never be 

forgotten. 

 

They are part of a band of brothers and sisters that stretches to 

the current day in the hills and deserts of Afghanistan and Iraq 

where their modern-day counterparts stand guard over our 

freedom just as they did in decades long past. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would invite members on both sides of the 

House to join me as we pay tribute to the men and women who 

fought and still fight for our freedom by saying, we will 

remember them. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Members, given the sombre reflections to the 

members‟ statements, would the members be agreeable in just 

taking a moment of silence? Would you stand with me and 

we‟ll do a moment of silence. 

 

[The Assembly observed a moment of silence.] 

 

The Speaker: — Thank you, members. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Management of Provincial Economy 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 

Minister of Finance. A few months ago when the government 

announced their budget here in the Assembly, they were 

predicting relative strong growth in the GDP [gross domestic 

product] numbers for the province. In fact eight months ago the 

minister predicted that the growth would occur, the boom 

would continue. And today we know that eight of the private 

sector forecasters that the government uses not only predict that 

there will be a contraction, but they say that the GDP of the 

province will not grow by 2.1 per cent, but in fact will contract 

by point five per cent. 

 

My question to the minister: can he indicate to us today what 

families in the province can expect in terms of less dollars in 

their pocket as the result of this fundamental mistake in the 

budget process? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it is true that the forecast for GDP growth is going to 

diminish as a result of the significant change in potash revenues 

that are occurring. And sales have still not been completed in 

potash. That is true, and it is having a significant effect on our 

budget. That is also true. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the things that we‟ve said all along is the 

long-term benefits that this government has put in place for the 

people of Saskatchewan like income tax relief, like property tax 

relief, those are remaining in place. And we are coping with the 

downfall in revenues by adjusting our ability to use the Growth 

and Financial Security Fund by using some funds from the 

Crown sector. And so, Mr. Speaker, we have no choice but to 

react to those changing revenue realities, and we are doing so. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, question to the Minister of 

Finance. Everyone in the province understands that the 

government, the Sask Party government, found the coffers full 

when they came to power, $2.3 billion. And we understand that 

the first year, 2008, was very good while money was being 

spent and there was money for the party. Many people didn‟t 

feel they were invited to the party — many seniors and many 

people who work for 10 and $12 an hour. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we find that the minister is saying, well 

we‟re running out of money. And yesterday in his scrum I 

found it interesting that the minister said, we have sold little or 

no potash. My question to the minister: in the explanation of the 

big mistake, the $1.3 billion mistake that the government has 

now admitted to in their budget, if we are selling little or no 

potash, are we now saying also that the mistake is much larger 



November 10, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3523 

than the $1.3 billion that has been explained to date? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we will 

have our mid-year forecast next week, and we will certainly 

update the members of the Assembly and the province with the 

latest numbers. I have said and I continue to say that potash is 

not selling in large measure. And I think it‟s fair to say that the 

revenue projections at first quarter will be diminished in 

mid-year. The sales are still not occurring, and so therefore 

revenue is expected to drop off further from the first quarter 

numbers. That will be released in detail next week, but it is safe 

to assume those numbers will be less. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are coping with that in a balanced way. We‟re 

making sure that Saskatchewan people continue to benefit from 

the initiatives that we introduced in the previous two years. We 

are protecting the people that are most vulnerable. But what we 

are doing is making sure that we also are doing the changes that 

we have to do as a result of the dramatic decreases in revenue in 

a very responsible way. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the minister admits now 

that the mistake is going to be larger than the $1.3 billion that 

he talked about when he talked about potash sales being down. 

 

What many people don‟t understand, while this government in 

March announced that potash sales would be at record levels 

and the revenue would be at record levels, most people, most 

economists knew that the economies of China and India were 

well into a downturn. Ships were lined up with goods, resources 

from many parts of the world, not unloading in Shanghai and 

other Chinese ports. 

 

My question to the minister is, in light of that and in light of the 

fact that your spending has increased by 32 per cent in the first 

two years of this government, how in the world are we ever 

going to make up for the revenue downfall that you‟re now 

admitting to today, while in 2008 we were spending like 

drunken sailors on all sorts of things and continue to do that, 

while at the same time we cut major social programs for 

working people in the province of Saskatchewan? How are we 

going to balance the books in the coming year? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I would be 

happy to stand in the House and pridefully explain to the 

members opposite what this government has accomplished. 

First and foremost, we paid down 40 per cent of the general 

revenue prime debt in this province. And I doubt if members 

opposite would not agree that that was a good thing to do, an 

important thing to do to ensure the fiscal stability of our 

province. Decreasing our debt is a good and solid program to 

initiate. 

 

We also had the largest income tax cut in the history of 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, we also were able to initiate a 

program of the largest educational property tax in 

Saskatchewan. 

Mr. Speaker, the Opposition Leader is right in terms of saying, 

well we had money. We did spend money. And we didn‟t spend 

money . . . We spent money on important initiatives like I‟ve 

outlined. We‟ve also spent money on historic increased 

spending in infrastructure that was so badly eroded. Mr. 

Speaker, I wonder if the Leader of the Opposition would agree 

that we shouldn‟t have funded Avastin for example to help 

people facing colorectal cancer. Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I just want to remind 

members of the guidelines we‟ve been following in regards to 

time, to place the question in time to response. And while we‟ll 

be getting to the two House leaders as to how we worked over 

the last couple of weeks, I think it‟s a reminder just to inform 

members that we need . . . I‟d ask members to comply with the 

guidelines we‟ve set. I recognize the . . . [inaudible]. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the 

Minister of Finance. We understand that the government found 

the coffers full and enjoyed spending the $2.3 billion which he 

just went through. I understand how spending money that you 

find in a bank account is interesting, and for them may have 

been fun. 

 

But the question is, now that your revenue is down by a full 20 

per cent — revenue is down by 20 per cent — spending is fixed 

at a 32 per cent increase, how in the world does this minister 

and this government plan to balance the books next year and in 

coming years? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, we certainly are aware 

of the challenges for this current year because of the potash 

industry. Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I‟m sure the member is 

aware that we have never, since 1972, had lower volume sales 

of potash in almost the history of this province. Going back to 

1972, we haven‟t faced these kinds of numbers. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, for the opposition to imply that somehow 

they had a magic golden ball, crystal ball, that they could look 

into the future, I doubt that they would have predicted that we 

would be in the situation we are in either. And so the challenge, 

Mr. Speaker, is to deal with those realities in a responsible way 

to ensure that we make the adjustments that we need to. We‟re 

just in the beginning processes of the preparation of next year‟s 

budget. We‟re going to be mindful of what numbers we have 

available. And we are going to make those adjustments as 

appropriate. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Government Contracts 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of 

Finance just said that when they had money, they spent money. 

And I have a couple of questions about how they spent the 

money. 

 

There‟s a company known as Security Resource Group that‟s 

been contracted by the Information Technology Office to do 

computer security work. This company was hired after an RFP 



3524 Saskatchewan Hansard November 10, 2009 

[request for proposal] in 2000 — the last year of an NDP 

government. In 2000, 2008 they were paid $550,000 to do this 

job. In 2008-2009, they were paid $889,000 to do the same job. 

To the minister responsible for ITO [Information Technology 

Office]: why did this company receive a $339,000 increase? 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, our government works with 

ITO, and to ensure that we have the best possible system for our 

government, we hire outside contractors to do work, and we 

provide services to ministries and agencies in the most 

cost-effective manner. When it‟s determined that there‟s more 

work that can be done and needed to be done, we look at the 

people outside of our ministry to see if they can be doing 

additional work. That is the work that we‟re looking at right 

now, and I can give further details when I have an opportunity 

to look at that contract. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, the chairman and CEO [chief 

executive officer] of Security Resource Group is one Doug 

Emsley. Mr. Emsley was also Chair of the Saskatchewan Party 

transition team. He was also a Devine insider. It‟s back to the 

‟80s, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To the minister: was Mr. Emsley involved in the decision to 

increase payment to his own company by $339,000? Did he 

declare any sort of conflict of interest when he was serving on 

the transition team? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I know that the members 

opposite are aware that this firm was used by their government 

when they were in . . . [inaudible] . . . I know that they had 

complete confidence that the people in the company were doing 

their job right, and I‟m sure that they also know that the 

minister doesn‟t work with individual contracts. So I‟m sure 

that we will have an opportunity to look at this work. And I 

know that our government works with contractors who are 

going to get the best service for the people of this province. We 

work on that every day. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, the notion that a government 

contract would increase by 62 per cent in one year is a bit 

strange. It would certainly seem strange to health workers in 

this province, Mr. Speaker. Simple question to the minister 

responsible for ITO: what changed from 2007 to 2009 that 

warrants a 62 per cent increase for a government contract? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m sure that when I have 

an opportunity to review this contract, I will give the 

information to the members opposite. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps I can help 

the minister. A number of written questions were asked of the 

minister by the NDP opposition and answered, so she has had 

the opportunity to review and had provided answers. And I 

would like to go through some of those, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This company received a 62 per cent increase worth over 

$330,000. We asked the minister about the following issues. 

We asked what duties changed, in written questions. The 

answer was none. We asked if the terms of the contract had 

changed, in written questions to the minister. The answer from 

the minister was no. We asked if the services provided by the 

company had changed, in written questions to the minister. The 

answer from the minister was no. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister: if the terms of the 

contract did not change, the duties performed did not change, 

and the services provided did not change, then why did this firm 

receive a 62 per cent increase between 2007-08 and 2008-09? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Ministry Responsible for 

Crown Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m very aware that the 

members opposite are interested in the work that we‟re doing 

within government. They‟re interested in seeing us going 

forward, and they‟re interested in getting the correct answer. 

And I‟ve already told the members opposite that when I get the 

exact information, I will give it to him. And I will. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well we did want 

the exact information, Mr. Speaker, and we didn‟t want to take 

the minister by surprise. So we asked her, Mr. Speaker, what 

duties had changed between the year in which they were paid 

$550,000, and the year in which they were paid 330,000 — 

more than $330,000 more than that — what duties had 

changed? The answer from the minister was none. We asked the 

minister, in written questions, what terms of the contract had 

changed? The minister said none. We asked what services 

provided by the company had changed over the two years? The 

answer from the minister was none. 

 

Now we are asking, Mr. Speaker, from the minister, not the 

answers to these questions that she‟s already provided, but why 

— given no change in the contract, no change in the duties, no 

change in the services — why the 62 per cent increase to Mr. 

Emsley? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s very obvious that the 

members opposite don‟t have another question today. I have 



November 10, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3525 

already answered, told them that I would give them the answer 

to this question when I receive it. And I will provide that 

answer as soon as I have the information. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Skills Training and Employment Issues 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Friday, 

Statistics Canada released information indicating that there are 

now 6,500 more unemployed people in Saskatchewan than one 

year ago. While the Premier and members opposite would like 

us to simply close our eyes, believe harder, and somehow 

through more cheering everything will be okay, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The reality is the economic situation facing real Saskatchewan 

families is a serious one, and one that deserves attention, Mr. 

Speaker. Unfortunately, at a time with a record number of 

people who are unemployed, the Sask Party government has 

chosen to axe support for unemployed workers. 

 

My question to the Minister of Employment: why at a time of 

record job losses was $8.7 million cut from skills training 

programs? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, thanks very much for the 

opportunity to address that question. First and foremost, it‟s 

with great empathy that we address those that have been laid 

off, Mr. Speaker. That being said, the picture‟s more complex 

than the member opposite acknowledges. 

 

So what we see is a number of supports in place from this 

government, ranging from rapid response teams, Mr. Speaker, 

to employment and career services centres. We have job sharing 

programs. More than 1,000 people have been helped, Mr. 

Speaker. And we have the skills training benefit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we can see that there‟s more to do. What there is, 

Mr. Speaker, there are some other areas of evidence where we 

can see — for example in agriculture, in health care, in 

transportation, and information — where year over year jobs are 

increasing. And in fact, month over month, we can look at 

sectors like manufacturing, or we can look at the resource 

industries where in fact numbers are increasing, employment‟s 

going up. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there‟s more to do. But, Mr. Speaker, we are 

working on behalf of the government, the people of this 

province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, 6,500 more unemployed workers 

since one year ago at this time, Mr. Speaker. We need to 

remember these are real people facing real challenges. 

 

We‟re told that JobStart/Future Skills administrators have been 

instructed to tell applicants that “all of the money is 

committed.” But of course, it hasn‟t been all committed. The 

$8.7 million was ripped right out of the program, just like the 

funding was taken from the children‟s hospital, just like the 

funding was taken from the surgical care centres, just like the 

funding was taken from the academic health sciences building. 

 

One of the employers affected is Angel Entertainment, a 

Saskatoon-based production company. Angel had arranged for a 

$1 million feature film to be shot in Saskatchewan with the help 

of BC-based investors. Angel Entertainment has used 

JobStart/Future Skills in the past and were counting on this 

funding. They told us, “This was a huge shock to us, as we had 

no indication this would happen.” 

 

To the minister opposite, Mr. Speaker: at a time when 

Saskatchewan workers are facing many problems with layoffs, 

Mr. Speaker, why is it that the workers and employers in this 

province have to pay the cost for the Sask Party‟s bungling of 

the budget? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Again thank you very much for the 

opportunity, Mr. Speaker. I‟m not certain where the member 

opposite gets his information, Mr. Speaker. He‟s made 

reference to $8 million from a specific program, Mr. Speaker. 

That program has a budget of $5.32 million. He obviously, Mr. 

Speaker, ought to go through and read the detailed budget in 

more detail. 

 

That being said, Mr. Speaker, I can speak to the $2.82 million 

that has been approved through the JobStart/Future Skills, Mr. 

Speaker. We know that that‟s supporting 222 projects, and it‟s 

helping 530 individuals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there have been dollars in the past that have not 

been committed, Mr. Speaker, and obviously we are looking at 

ways to ensure that we‟re maximizing that. That being said, the 

dollars that have rolled out — those that have been committed 

— have not been impacted. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the cancellation of this funding 

has also sent a negative message to out-of-province investors 

like BC-based Opiate Pictures and Goonworks Films. Karen 

Lam of Opiate Pictures wrote to the minister last week saying, 

“Among the key incentives for moving the . . . [program] to 

Saskatchewan (rather than Manitoba) was the Job Start-Future 

Skills program.” She goes on to say, “This film is only one of a 

number of projects that I had hoped to co-produce in your 

province, but am now concerned that the commitments of the 

Saskatchewan government are less stable than anticipated.” 

 

First, Eacom Timber is threatening to move the Big River mill 

out of the province. Now BC film producers are looking at 

other places, Mr. Speaker, to do work. 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Employment: the 

Sask Party loves the pompoms, loves the spin, and loves 

picking one or two positive indicators and wrapping a whole lot 



3526 Saskatchewan Hansard November 10, 2009 

of spin around that, Mr. Speaker. But at a time of record job 

losses, Mr. Speaker, why is the members opposite making cuts 

to skills training programs? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Once again, Mr. Speaker, I think the 

member opposite needs to understand that it‟s far more 

complex. The picture is far more complex. Obviously what 

we‟re seeing is that the Saskatchewan economy, we know we‟re 

not immune from what‟s going on around us. We know . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, we know that we‟re not 

immune from what‟s going on around us, and at the same time 

we continue to have the lowest unemployment rate in the 

country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, regarding the JobStart/Future Skills, what we 

know, Mr. Speaker, is that we have helped 530 individuals 

already this year and 222 projects. Mr. Speaker, $2.82 million 

has already rolled out. Mr. Speaker, those dollars that have been 

committed aren‟t going to be affected. What we‟ve done, Mr. 

Speaker, has said this has not been utilized to its maximum 

potential in the past. And, Mr. Speaker, what we‟re looking at is 

ways of ensuring that the methods and mechanisms that we 

have to help individuals in this province that we‟re maximizing 

public dollars. That‟s the approach we‟ve taken, Mr. Speaker. 

We know there‟s more to do. But, Mr. Speaker, we‟re working 

on behalf of the people of this province. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. We heard 

yesterday, Mr. Speaker, from a Finance critic, we‟ve heard 

today from the Leader of the Official Opposition, questions 

addressed to members opposite that tell the true story of the 

provincial economy and tell the true story of how members 

opposite have mismanaged the books, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well we‟ve seen a constant denial from members opposite that 

there‟s a problem. Instead all we hear is spin and positive 

cheerleading that everything is okay. And now, Mr. Speaker, 

we hear from the Minister of Employment that the minister 

can‟t even admit that a cut is a cut is a cut. 

 

There are individuals requesting funding through a program, a 

program that can help individuals who are out of work, and now 

the program funding is not there. Mr. Speaker, in my books, 

that is called a cut. My question to the member opposite: when 

will he admit that because of the way they have managed the 

budget, because of the way they have bungled the books, 

they‟re now engaged in cutting the programs for unemployed 

workers? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, once again it‟s with great 

empathy that we‟re working with people across the province. 

We know that we‟re not immune from what‟s going on around 

us, and that‟s why we put in place a number of initiatives, Mr. 

Speaker, a number of initiatives. 

 

What we won‟t see from this side, Mr. Speaker, again to quote 

the Leader of the Opposition from years past, we won‟t hear the 

quote that there‟s no use whining and snivelling. We‟re 

working with people, Mr. Speaker, right across the province . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I remind members that if 

you‟d like to hear the answer, it would be appropriate to at least 

pay attention. I recognize the minister. Order. The minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In 

days recent, in recent days, we‟ve heard the Leader of the 

Opposition say that the economy‟s in a free fall, when in fact 

the empirical evidence is clear, Mr. Speaker. We know we‟re 

not immune from what‟s going on around us, but talking down 

the economy is no way to address the issues that we face, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And that‟s why we can go to what the people of this province 

believe: 76 per cent feel that the province is on the right track; 

84 per cent feel that Saskatchewan‟s economy is doing better 

than the rest of the country; and 85 per cent expect that the 

economy will hold steady or get better in the next year, Mr. 

Speaker. That‟s the spirit that we work under, Mr. Speaker, the 

spirit of the people of this province. 

 

[10:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, 10,000 workers who have lost 

full-time jobs are not whining and snivelling. They‟re worried 

about their future, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And for members opposite to characterize it in that way is 

unfair to those workers, Mr. Speaker. The members opposite 

would simply want us to believe harder, to just think positive 

thoughts, to close our eyes, to click our heels, and everything 

will be okay, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, to look at all of the economic indicators in 

the province, to get a full picture, and then to have some 

concerns, Mr. Speaker, that‟s not doom and gloom. That‟s 

realism, and members opposite could use some of that. 

 

My question to the members opposite. Since last year, since one 

year ago now, Mr. Speaker, we know that there are 6,500 more 

unemployed workers in Saskatchewan. We know that at this 

time, with unemployment, the Sask Party government has cut 

$8.7 million from important training programs. My question to 

the members opposite: when are they going to put down the 

pompoms, admit that there is a problem, and show some real 

leadership? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 



November 10, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3527 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, to be sure, the quote 

whining and snivelling comes from the Leader of the Official 

Opposition, Mr. Speaker. That was the approach that was taken 

in years past, and it certainly seems to resonate today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let‟s just put forward we know we‟re not immune 

from what‟s going on around us, but we know that we have 5.3 

per cent fewer EI [employment insurance] beneficiaries month 

over month. We see the improvement. We know that 730 fewer 

people were getting EI than in July, Mr. Speaker. We have the 

third best decline in EI right across the country and we have the 

lowest number of people on EI benefits per capita within 

Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know there‟s more to do. Mr. Speaker, that‟s 

why we‟re working through a number of initiatives to help the 

people of this province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 101 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 101 — The 

Credit Union Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2) be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 

pleasure to stand and speak to this amendment to The Credit 

Union Act. and, Mr. Speaker, I have a special interest in this 

one because what we are doing is amending the 1998 Act, 

which I spent two or three years working on before it was 

introduced and passed in 1998. And now obviously there are 

some things that are being done that allow for the amendment 

of the Act to deal with some of the issues that have arisen over 

the last 10 years. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I think it‟s quite appropriate here to spend 

some time looking at the history of this particular legislation 

and the credit union movement here in Saskatchewan, but also 

how these changes are going to be made and how they‟re going 

to be used as we move forward. 

 

And I‟m also going to be talking about some changes that 

maybe aren‟t here, and about the general situation as it relates to 

regulation of financial institutions and all of the issues that 

surround that, given what‟s happened in the world economic 

situation over the last couple of years. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I encourage people to sit back and enjoy, I 

think, what‟s going to be a very interesting trip through some of 

the history of the credit union movement, about what‟s 

happened here in Saskatchewan and then about where we‟re 

going to go, from my perspective. Because I think it‟s crucial 

that these things are set out on the record as we move forward 

in this particular area. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the minister presented some of the rationale 

for the changes that were set out in this legislation. But after 

reviewing them, I think that it will require that after I‟ve talked 

a bit about the credit union system in Saskatchewan, we‟ll have 

to go through in quite a bit of detail around the changes so that 

they‟re totally understood. 

 

And for people who are listening at home and have access to a 

computer, they may want to go and look up Bill 101 because 

when we get to that point there will be quite a few technical 

comments which I think will be helpful for people if they have 

a chance to take a look at the Bill itself. 

 

Now I think in Saskatchewan we often forget how crucial the 

credit union system is to our province. And, Mr. Speaker, in 

Saskatchewan we have 66 member credit unions in this year 

2009. Over half the people of Saskatchewan, 525,000 people, 

are members. And these 66 different credit unions serve people 

in approximately 282 communities. 

 

Now the interesting part of the history of credit unions in 

Saskatchewan does relate to the last general economic crisis 

that we had around the world of a substantial nature. And that 

clearly was the time after the crash in October 1929 and then 

the very tough years during the ‟30s. That was further 

compounded in Saskatchewan by a number of the climatic 

conditions around the drought. 

 

But the net effect in that time was that many of the banking 

institutions that had been quite optimistic and quite willing to 

lend money in Saskatchewan started to retreat. And as is still 

the case, many of those banking institutions were located in 

eastern Canada, primarily in Ontario and Quebec. There had 

been some discussion at that time in the ‟20s and ‟30s of credit 

unions. But it was clear that with the retreat of much of the 

capital from Saskatchewan in the late ‟30s and subsequently, 

that the credit union movement ended up finding lots more 

business. 

 

Local people were able to get together themselves and, using 

the legislation that we had in place in the province, they were 

able to create local, democratic institutions that had local boards 

of directors. People could be delegates and go to the various 

meetings. And basically people had a greater sense that their 

money was being managed and controlled in the local area. 

 

And so this model — which was mirrored in the co-operatives 

that provided fuel and farm equipment and farm supplies, but 

also groceries and other things that were needed in daily life — 

also I think reflected the nature of our province, which is that 

we are going to help each other. We‟re going to make sure that 

we will have as much local control as possible. And so that 

work has continued over many decades. 

 

Now one of the things that is always quite interesting to look at 

is how our Saskatchewan credit union system compares with 

the Canadian credit union system. 

 



3528 Saskatchewan Hansard November 10, 2009 

As I said before, we have 66 different credit unions now. There 

were quite a few more not that many years ago but there‟s been 

quite a consolidation across the province. And nationally there 

are 449 credit unions. 

 

And the number of members in Saskatchewan are 525,000. The 

number of members on a national basis are 5 million. We have 

almost 3,600 people employed in credit unions in Saskatchewan 

compared on a national basis to 24,000. 

 

The total assets managed in the credit union system in 

Saskatchewan is just over $12 billion worth versus on a national 

basis it‟s 109 billion. The types of loans that are made by our 

credit union system include almost $1.8 billion in agriculture 

loans, almost 2.4 billion in commercial loans, and almost four 

and a half billion in consumer and residential loans. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these figures are as of approximately June 30th, 

2008, but it does reflect and show that our credit union system 

is responsive to individuals in Saskatchewan. And so they 

provide the loans for individuals and for purchase of residences 

as a major part of what their job is. 

 

But credit unions are much more than just these financial assets 

and the things that they do there. They also provide a sense of 

local leadership and province-wide leadership that allows for 

the growth of our communities. 

 

And I know that, as a member of the legislature who has many 

opportunities to travel throughout the province, it‟s quite often 

that a new project or a new idea that is being developed — 

whether it‟s a business or whether it‟s a co-operative or whether 

it‟s a large, new agricultural business — all of these things have 

the support of local credit unions. 

 

Local credit unions also provide a place where people can 

gather together to make sure that people have the services and 

products that are necessary to provide for them and for their 

family and for their businesses. And here I‟m talking about 

some of the savings plans, but also the plans for registered 

retirement savings and a number of others. 

 

We‟ve also seen, as the years have gone on, that the credit 

unions have also become involved with subsidiaries or with 

joint relationships with other credit unions. They‟ve become 

involved in the real estate business, in the insurance business, 

and in some of the other ancillary businesses that will provide 

long-term solutions for their customers and for others within the 

community. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we always have to remind ourselves that 

credit unions have been developed and hold to the principles of 

the . . . of co-operative principles that are endorsed by the 

International Co-operative Alliance. And so these values are the 

values of self-help, self-responsibility, democracy, equality, 

equity, and solidarity. And so our credit unions here are also 

part of the international credit union movement, and that they 

then participate not just in developing good practices here, but 

they also observe the good practices worldwide. 

 

We also know that our credit union system in Saskatchewan has 

been a good ambassador for the province in going to other 

places and helping others to start credit unions and provide the 

basic requirements of capital for the economies in other places. 

 

[11:00] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the types of institutions that make up the 

Saskatchewan credit union network are myriad. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I think it‟s important that I lay out some of these other 

strategic partners because the changes in Bill 101 do relate to 

how some of the rules are written to make sure that these 

various relationships will continue to work for the benefit of our 

citizens. Now basically credit unions are part of a strong 

co-operative . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the member from 

Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan credit unions 

are part of a strong co-operative network, and so they therefore 

relate to quite a number of other institutions. Mr. Speaker, Bill 

101 that we have before us today tries to set out or adjust some 

of these rules in what we hope is a positive way as we move 

forward with the credit union system. But clearly we‟ll have a 

chance to go through, in a few minutes, how some of the 

specific clauses work. But I just want to set out some of the 

related organizations so that the public can understand and we 

can understand what it is that we‟re talking about. 

 

So basically the network of institutions that are related to the 

credit unions in Saskatchewan include the following. There‟s 

one that‟s called SaskCentral — but its technical name is called 

Credit Union Central of Saskatchewan — and it‟s the provincial 

institution that supports all of the credit unions with a wide 

range of core and specialized services including the trade 

association services, the system democratic support, the 

statutory liquidity management, strategic investment 

management, and an extensive array of non-regulatory 

consulting and support services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s this group that we often meet with as 

legislatures because they speak on behalf of all of the credit 

unions in Saskatchewan and provide a broader view of some of 

the issues. 

 

Another institution that‟s part of this credit union network is 

called Concentra Financial, and this is a national or nationwide 

institution that provides products and services to support 

business needs such as commercial leasing, corporate banking, 

corporate finance, financial services, and trust services. 

 

Another of the institutions is called Celero Solutions, and it‟s a 

joint venture among five of the Canadian Prairie co-operative 

organizations. And this group provides the information 

technology products and services to Prairie credit unions, and it 

has proven to be something that works quite well. And we‟ll see 

as we get into the legislation later that I think some of the 

co-operation around that particular institution, Celero Solutions 

Inc., is what‟s driving some of the changes that we may be 

seeing in this legislation. 

 

Another one of the members of the network, one of the partners 

is called CUETS [Credit Union Electronic Transaction Services 

Inc.] Financial, and basically this is the member of the 

Mastercard international area. And so what this does, it allows 



November 10, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3529 

for credit unions to become involved and use the Mastercard 

system in a way. And this one has been around for quite a 

while, and once again it‟s one that‟s worked very well. 

 

Another of the shared institutions is called the Credit Union 

Payment Services or CUPS, and this provides the clearing 

services and related products and services to Saskatchewan and 

Alberta credit unions. And this has been going for a number of 

years, and once again it shows some of this cross-provincial 

borders co-operation, which once again we will see, when we 

get into the details of Bill 101, it‟s part of what we‟re being 

asked to change here. 

 

Another one of the institutions is called the Credential Financial 

Inc. And this allows for the Saskatchewan credit unions as well 

as other credit unions across Canada to provide quality stocks, 

bonds, and other investment products to their clients and 

members. And once again, Mr. Speaker, this word, products, is 

something that we should keep in mind because when we get 

into the changes in Bill 101, this is part of what we are going to 

be talking about in the legislation. 

 

Another one of the strategic partners is called the Ethical Funds 

Company. And this is a wealth management organization that 

allows for credit union members to have access to a 

comprehensive family of socially responsible mutual funds. 

And this provides a choice for many investors to have a better 

handle on exactly where their investment money is going if they 

are involved in some of the mutual fund operations. 

 

Another of the partners is Co-operators, which is a large 

insurance company. And it provides insurance services to credit 

union members right across the country. And we‟re very proud 

to have the leadership and the head office of those companies 

here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Another part of the whole system in Saskatchewan — and this 

will also be something that we‟re going to be dealing with in 

Bill 101 — is called the Credit Union Deposit Guarantee 

Corporation. And for short this is called CUDGC, which I guess 

would be spelled C-U-D-G-C. 

 

And what this is, is since 1953 all deposits in credit unions have 

been fully guaranteed. And so what that means is nobody has 

ever lost a dollar deposited in a Saskatchewan credit union. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think this is something that we should 

emphasize and recognize, that the good work of the credit union 

system, both within the local management and the review of 

what happens, but also working together through the Credit 

Union Deposit Guarantee Corporation, they have made sure that 

there isn‟t a single person in Saskatchewan who‟s deposited 

money at a credit union that that money has been lost. 

 

And so basically this institution, the Credit Union Deposit 

Guarantee Corporation, was originally called the Mutual Aid 

Board. And the name says it all. Basically the credit unions 

said, we‟re going to work together to make sure that the funds 

put into our institutions would be guaranteed. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan of today, many of the 

credit unions are quite large organizations, and there doesn‟t 

really become an issue about guaranteeing the deposits that are 

in them. But in 1953, there were many small credit unions right 

across the province. And this was quite an amazing step by a 

whole group of forward-thinking people to put together a plan 

which they then in turn had incorporated in the legislation that 

would provide for a deposit guarantee. And this institution was 

actually one of the first institutions that did that in the whole of 

Canada. 

 

And so what happens now is that this Credit Union Deposit 

Guarantee Corporation becomes the primary regulator of 

Saskatchewan credit unions. Recalling the time when I was the 

minister of Justice responsible for the credit unions, the people 

who were involved with CUDGC would provide regular reports 

to the Department of Justice and to the minister because they 

were the front line of the regulation of how credit unions 

worked. 

 

And I think that has continued to work quite well, although 

we‟ll see when we get into Bill 101 that some of the provisions 

that are set out in the amendments to The Credit Union Act 

relate to the relationship that people have with the Credit Union 

Deposit Guarantee Corporation as it relates to being on the 

board of directors. And we‟ll take a look at that in a second. 

 

But basically I‟ll repeat again that the Credit Union Deposit 

Guarantee Corporation guarantees all depositors repayment in 

full of all deposits in credit unions. The Credit Union Act of 

1998 put this guarantee right into the legislation, and now we‟re 

having to watch carefully that there‟s not going to be any 

change to that that will cause any difficulty. 

 

Now you might ask, who are the people that serve on the board 

of directors of this institution which plays such a crucial role in 

the credit union movement of Saskatchewan? The board of 

directors of the CUDGC, or the Credit Union Deposit 

Guarantee Corporation, include two individuals who are 

appointed by SaskCentral or Credit Union Central of 

Saskatchewan, at least one of whom is not a member of the 

SaskCentral‟s board of directors or an employee. So basically 

it‟s somebody who is quite involved in their organization plus 

another person. The chief executive officer of SaskCentral is a 

member of the board, or they have the ability to nominate 

somebody. 

 

Then the deputy minister of Justice is a member of this board, 

or somebody that they nominate. And quite often it might be an 

associate or assistant deputy minister who has special 

responsibility for regulatory affairs. And in the same way, the 

deputy minister of Finance would be part of this committee, or 

somebody that they have nominated. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, you can see that this institution is very crucial 

for the overall operation of the credit union system and for 

providing the backstop for the guarantee that has allowed the 

credit union system since 1953 to be able to say to every single 

one of the people who have deposited money in their 

institutions that nobody has lost a dollar. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

think that is a very good record, and the whole system itself 

should be congratulated. 

 

But also I think we should recognize that this legislature and the 

people who have provided changes and provided the 

information to the legislation and the regulations that that we 

have in Saskatchewan, all of these people should be thanked as 



3530 Saskatchewan Hansard November 10, 2009 

well. And, Mr. Speaker, that‟s why I‟m going on at length about 

this because, when we get into Bill 101, we‟re going to see 

some changes that are more understandable when you actually 

have all of this information that‟s laid out. 

 

Now I think that the other credit unions in Canada look to some 

of the things that we do in Saskatchewan as they are regulated 

in their own provincial or territorial jurisdictions. And so we 

need to keep that in mind as well as we take a look at what‟s 

happening with this legislation. 

 

On a worldwide basis, there are credit unions in 96 different 

countries serving over 177 million people. And all of these ones 

look to our Canadian and, I would say, our Saskatchewan credit 

unions for ideas and also the sense that any new ways of doing 

things will be tested and tried and done in a responsible way. 

And so when we go forward with some of the changes that are 

proposed in Bill 101, we need to make sure that they also are 

providing guidelines or rules that other jurisdictions in Canada 

will use, but also other jurisdictions around the world. 

 

[11:15] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, just a couple more comments on the credit 

union system itself. As we know, credit unions are very 

connected to local communities and they are often major 

financial supporters and sponsors of events in our communities. 

And we want to specifically thank them for that role. It‟s shown 

up in various ways in our communities, but I suppose none 

more obvious than in Saskatoon and Regina where we have the 

Conexus Arts Centre and TCU Place and credit union place as 

major community gathering points that are being used for all 

kinds of activities, which we‟re all very, very pleased and 

thankful to the credit union system for this support. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, a little later I will come back to some of the 

issues that aren‟t in Bill 101 because I think it‟s important to 

understand what kinds of things are coming on the horizon, and 

where some of the issues are that are of concern to the public. 

 

So now, Mr. Speaker, I‟m going to go specifically to the Bill. 

And this is a little unusual to actually go through at this stage 

and talk about all of the different points in the Bill, but I think, 

given that the minister‟s remarks were quite short on this, I 

think I will try to fill in so that the public can understand what 

is actually happening here. When we look at the Bill itself, it‟s 

quite clear that we are making amendments to The Credit Union 

Act of 1998 which was almost a . . . It wasn‟t a total rewrite but 

it was a fairly major review and then a rewriting of the 

legislation. 

 

And so as we move forward, we look and see that in section 2 

they‟re going to be . . . or section 3. Actually we‟re going to be 

looking at section 2(1) and it‟s going to be amended to make 

some changes. And one of the changes is that they‟re going to 

be adapting some of the terms and conditions around question 

of capacity to make sure that directors of the credit union 

boards have sufficient capacity to understand what‟s happening 

in the particular institution. 

 

They‟ve basically taken the definition from The Adult 

Guardianship and Co-decision-making Act and put it into this 

legislation. I think this must be in response to some specific 

situations where they‟ve had difficulty providing advice to a 

credit union when there‟ve been people that have been on the 

board, and it may be somebody who‟s in the sort of the sunset 

of their lives where maybe they‟re not as clear as they once 

were, or it could be related to some other illness. But this 

provides the ability to actually challenge the membership on a 

board based on some capacity. 

 

We‟ll also see in this section that they have defined the term, 

chairperson, to mean the person who is the Chair of the board of 

directors. Up until this time that person has been called the 

president of the credit union, and who in fact is then the Chair 

of the board, and the CEO or chief executive officer is the 

senior paid employee doing the work. And I think there‟s been 

some confusion around that, and so this change is going to 

allow for a clear definition of who is the manager of the 

financial part of the board. I think that it makes sense, what they 

are suggesting. I‟m not sure that it‟s going to change any of the 

roles but it may eliminate some of the confusion. 

 

Now when you get to another part of the changes that are being 

made in section 2, we get into a clause (n). And clause (n) 

presently reads: 

 

“Credit Union Central” means Credit Union Central of 

Saskatchewan continued pursuant to An Act to amend and 

consolidate An Act respecting Saskatchewan Co-operative 

Credit Society Limited and Saskatchewan Co-operative 

Financial Services Limited, being chapter 89 of the 

Statutes of Saskatchewan, 1979. 

 

The new clause will read, “„Credit Union Central‟ means an 

entity prescribed in the regulations.” Now, Mr. Speaker, I think 

I understand why this is being done that way because it‟ll allow 

for the definition of Credit Union Central to be prescribed in the 

regulations. 

 

This is an area where we may want to ask some questions as we 

move forward. And the reason for that is that it appears that the 

rationale for some of these changes as it relates to Credit Union 

Central are to allow for a Prairie-wide or Western Canada-wide 

organization like Credit Union Central. And if that can just be 

done in the regulations, it may not have the same scrutiny as it 

would if it was done here in the legislature. And so we will 

need to understand fully what the intentions are as they move 

forward with this particular change. 

 

I‟m not necessarily saying that I‟d be opposed to this, but I 

think it‟s clear that we need to understand what it is that are the 

intentions and whether this should be something that can just be 

changed by regulation when it may have some substantial 

influence on the risk involved. So that‟s one place where I‟ll put 

up a little bit of a flag, but I‟m not sure that I‟m necessarily 

opposed to it yet. But we‟re going to find out more about that. 

 

We notice also in this section 2 where they‟ve amended, they 

are creating or using a term of vice-chairperson. And I think my 

understanding of this is that they want to clearly have 

somebody who is in that role and have it defined in the 

legislation. 

 

And there‟s a third change there where they have basically 

removed a clause that defined the word, written. I think that that 



November 10, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3531 

was a way that we had of dealing with the question of whether 

electronic documents were written in the traditional sense or 

whether some other kinds of things were written, because there 

were quite often in older pieces of legislation the fact that things 

had to be in writing or they had to be written. 

 

In our new world where billions of dollars are transferred 

around the world that are never written in the traditional sense 

of the word, and our previous legislation that tried to deal with 

that by saying that written means in writing, or in any other 

form that may be prescribed by regulation, and I think also got 

to be a difficult issue about how to prescribe it. So this 

particular section was never used, and so therefore it‟s just 

being taken out of the legislation. I don‟t think that‟s a major 

issue. 

 

Now then we go to section 4 of the Bill, which is amending 

section 11. And this one is basically, I think, going forward 

with something that‟s relatively logical and it ends up dealing 

with the types of people who can be members or incorporators 

of a credit union. And so basically what the legislation does is it 

updates some of these qualifications by including that definition 

of capacity that I talked about that they brought in from The 

Adult Guardianship and Co-decision-making Act. 

 

It also deals with some of the types of crimes that will 

disqualify one from being a member of or an incorporator of a 

credit union. And they seem to be in order and basically allow 

for clear rules on who is included and who is not included. 

 

Section 5 deals with amendments to section 13 and so 

subsection 13(2) is amended to make sure that there‟s explicit 

authority in the legislation that allows for electronic voting. 

And it appears that electronic voting is being used more often 

just by the nature of the consolidation of credit unions within 

the province. We now have credit unions that are based or 

headquartered in Saskatoon and have branches all over the 

province, or based in one of the other cities of the province and 

have branches in other places. And clearly electronic voting will 

allow for the democratic nature of the credit union system to 

continue, and we think this clause does make sense as we move 

forward. 

 

Section 6 of Bill 101 deals with amendments to section 30. And 

this one is a little more interesting in a sense, but I think it is 

also a practical suggestion. 

 

What happens is that there‟s a basic member list of all of the 

members of a credit union and this list is confidential and can‟t 

be used except for a situation where one is attempting to run for 

a board of directors of a credit union or in a situation where you 

want to bring forward a special motion at an annual meeting. 

 

And so effectively what this clause does is confirms the rules 

around how these lists can be provided to members and for 

what purpose they can be provided. And so the two purposes 

are really quite straightforward and those are as set out in 

section 30(6)(c). And basically it‟s done by saying, what is the 

information that you have to provide to get access to this list? 

And the person who is going to apply to get access to the list 

has to file an affidavit sworn under oath or affirmation that says 

and declares right in the affidavit why you want the list. 

 

[11:30] 

 

And there are only two reasons — and it has to be either one of 

these or both of them — that you would get the list. One is to 

influence the voting of members of the credit union, in other 

words to campaign for being on the board, or to make a written 

request to all of the members that there be a special meeting. 

And so it‟s campaigning for the board and doing some kind of a 

special meeting. So practically I think that is logical. It also sets 

out some of the penalties that are involved if these strict rules 

are breached. 

 

Now section 7 of Bill 101 deals with amendments to section 34, 

and basically this section is another interesting one that relates 

back to the quite long preamble up to this speech I gave around 

the overall credit union system. Because basically under the 

existing legislation — and this is 34(4)(f) — it allows for the 

credit union itself to: 

 

(f) provide services to its affiliates, Credit Union Central, 

affiliates of Credit Union Central, affiliates of another 

credit union and a financial institution and its affiliates; 

 

Now if you look at what the new provision is in Bill 101, it 

changes that clause that I just read to this clause. So this is what 

we‟ll be discussing and then eventually voting on as we move 

forward with this Bill. It changes this clause to say this: 

 

“(f) provide services to: 

 

(i) its affiliates and entities in which it has a substantial 

investment; 

 

And so basically the old ones had just affiliates. Now it is going 

to include entities in which the credit union has a substantial 

investment. 

 

Then it goes to the next clause, and it says, can provide services 

to Credit Union Central, and then it adds the clause “. . . and 

any entities in which Credit Union Central has a substantial 

investment.” 

 

And then we go to the third clause, and it says “affiliates of 

Credit Union Central” is what the old or the present legislation 

says. What this will add is: “. . . any entities in which the 

affiliates of Credit Union Central have a substantial 

investment.” 

 

And then the next clause it goes is: 

 

(iv) affiliates of another credit union and [then once again] 

any entities in which the affiliates of another credit union 

have a substantial investment. 

 

And then the final part of that one stays the same: “a financial 

institution and its affiliates”. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the question will be, what are these entities in 

which a credit union may have a substantial investment, or a 

Credit Union Central may have a substantial investment, or 

other related credit unions has some kind of a . . . has a 

substantial investment? 

 



3532 Saskatchewan Hansard November 10, 2009 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think those are questions that provide some 

broader abilities for the credit union system in general. So they 

may be okay. But we need to know what kinds of things are 

being contemplated here because there may be some issues 

around, once again, the whole issue of risk which is the 

underlying part of regulatory legislation for credit unions. 

 

Now then the next section 8 of Bill 101 deals with section 44 of 

the present legislation. And what this Bill proposes is that 

section 44 would be repealed and a new section 44 be included. 

So then the question becomes, well what is it that we‟re 

replacing and what are we adding here? And basically when we 

look at this one, and it‟s a restriction on the services that can be 

provided. I guess the title is obvious: “Restrictions on services 

and coercive tied-selling.” 

 

And so basically the old legislation talked about financial or 

services that are prohibited. The new proposed section 44 talks 

about financial or other products or services that are prohibited. 

So the words that are being added to this proposed section 44 in 

Bill 101 is the term other products. So that raises a question, 

well what are these other products, and what kinds of things are 

being restricted? Now it‟s not entirely clear here whether this is 

actually restricting the ability of credit unions or whether this is 

providing some clarification or whether this is expanding what 

happens with the credit unions. 

 

And we will need to look quite carefully at this as this Bill 

moves forward because this is one of the areas where many of 

the competitive institutions are watching the credit union 

system. But in the same sense, the credit union system is 

watching some of the other institutions. And a little later I‟ll get 

into how some of these issues around regulation of the different 

financial industries also has a crucial effect on us as individuals 

or businesses within Saskatchewan. 

 

Section 9 of Bill 101 amends section 69 of the present 

legislation. And this amendment basically deals with the appeal 

rights and procedures where somebody is terminated, their 

membership is terminated in a credit union. And basically what 

it‟s done is to clarify the procedure and set out what would 

necessarily be an interim step, so that a member whose 

membership is terminated can appeal from the board to the 

membership and then to the registrar. 

 

And it allows for, I think, a more logical way for this to be dealt 

with. And it means practically that within a credit union, some 

of these membership issues may be dealt with before they 

actually go to the registrar which is in the department or 

Ministry of Justice. But this will allow for the continuation of a 

way that‟s slightly different than we presently have. And we 

may have some questions on this as we move forward, but I 

think it‟s relatively logical. 

 

Then we go on to section 10 of Bill 101 which amends section 

90 of the existing legislation. And what this does is basically 

take the word president out and put in the word chairperson, so 

that the person who is chairing the board of directors is the 

chairperson and no longer the president. 

 

Then we go to section 11 of the Bill, and section 11 amends 

section 102. And this goes into the whole list of qualifications 

of the directors, the people who are directors. And once again 

this confirms some of the things we talked about earlier around 

capacity and around the criminal record, and makes sure that 

certain of these people are not qualified to be on the directors of 

a credit union. 

 

Then we go on to section 12 of Bill 101, and this amends 

section 103. And once again it‟s removing the word president 

and putting in the word chairperson. And so that‟s a logical 

change. 

 

Now when we get to section 13 of Bill 101, we are now getting 

into a change of the section 113 of the existing legislation. And 

section 113 deals with material contracts. As one might expect, 

especially when credit unions were much more locally 

controlled, it was quite often that a person who was a member 

of the credit union and then maybe on the board might be a 

local business person who would end up in a situation where 

they‟d have to disclose their interests in a contract or a 

transaction in order to have this contract or transaction be valid. 

 

And what this proposed change here seems to do is it adds a 

clarification around how you deal with material contracts that 

are challenged and therefore void, and then how do you get 

them to be cured, if I can use that word, or how do you get them 

to be finally approved? And what this does is it clarifies that 

process whereby a contract which appears to be pretty 

straightforward but a step of having the interest declared may 

have been neglected or not done properly, it allows for the 

contract to be returned to the board and to the membership to 

get approved. And this sets out an approval process. 

 

It‟s also important to note though that the matter can still go 

before a court for a final adjudication. It also has the process 

whereby either the registrar or the Credit Union Deposit 

Guarantee Corporation can take the matter to court if there‟s a 

concern. So I think this in an area of clarification, but it is an 

area of clarification of something that is of concern to 

everybody because you want to make sure that there‟s 

transparency in how the credit union operates, and especially 

transparency as it relates to some of the contracts that are 

entered into by the institution. 

 

Section 14 of Bill 101 amends the section 119 of the existing 

Act, once again putting in the terms “chairperson or 

vice-chairperson” for the terms “president or vice-president.” 

 

Section 15 of Bill 101 does the same thing to section 283 of the 

existing Act whereby the word chairperson replaces president. 

 

[11:45] 

 

Now when we get to the section 16 of Bill 101, we‟re getting 

into the whole area of the regulatory power of the cabinet to 

make regulations for the purposes of this legislation. And I 

think this is an area where we have to look carefully at what is 

actually being proposed and make sure we understand it. Most 

likely it‟s that these may be logical, but let‟s go through them to 

make sure that we understand what the proposals are. 

 

So basically section 16 of Bill 101 amends section 440 of the 

existing legislation. And what happens there is subsection 

440(1) is amended by adding some of the term around the entity 

Credit Union Central. And as I said earlier, this is the regulatory 



November 10, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3533 

power that was referred to earlier which allows for Credit 

Union Central to be changed, moved to some other institution 

by regulation. This may be an area where we will have to have 

some debate, and we may need some advice from within the 

credit union movement because it is the kind of change that 

does relate to where the security in the whole system is. So this 

is one that I think we should, once again, flag for some further 

discussion. 

 

Now the next part of section 16 repeals clause (b) of 440(1). 

And clause (b) right now says that regulations may be made 

“authorizing a form of communication for the purposes of 

clause 2(1)(aaa) and prescribing terms and conditions 

respecting the use of that form of communication.” And 

basically this relates to that whole concept of written and that 

seems to be straightforward, cleaning up the legislation there. 

 

The next regulatory power in section 440 that‟s being amended 

or being added is the one that relates to electronic voting by 

directors and members. And, Mr. Speaker, this will obviously 

set out some rules, if those are needed, around how electronic 

voting should take place. And we‟ll look forward to hearing 

what the plans are as it relates to that. 

 

Section 16(d) of Bill 101 adds another regulatory-making 

power. And this regulation-making power allows for setting up 

the process for review around termination of members in the 

credit union. And this is added to reflect the fact that there‟ve 

been some changes made to that in the legislation. 

 

And then the final part of section 16, amending the regulation 

powers. It sets out how credit union directors, what further 

qualifications may be necessary for them to be directors of a 

credit union. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this has been quite a thorough 

review of this piece of legislation, and as you can tell, there are 

some areas where there are questions that we will need to be 

asking as we move forward. 

 

But once again we see these changes that are being made as 

changes that are coming forward to better enhance the service to 

members, whether they be individuals or corporations or other 

institutions within our province. And so, Mr. Speaker, we will 

be asking for further clarification as we move forward on that 

particular legislation. And one of the questions that arises when 

we‟re looking at this regulation of the credit union industry is, 

why would one do that? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, some of the things that have been happening 

in the economy in the last year are ones that, as are described 

here in the magazine, the CGA Magazine, which we just 

received this month . . . It‟s the November-December issue 

2009 of the CGA Magazine. And there‟s an article in this 

magazine that talks about the new investing paradigm, and 

basically it says that the whole economic crisis of 2008-09 is 

not the last one that‟s going to be here. So we have to end up 

making our plans around risk control as we move forward.  

 

And I just read a couple of sentences here which I think 

describe what we are doing as a legislature when we‟re working 

on this kind of legislation: 

 

Economists and capital market forecasters collectively 

failed to predict the great meltdown that began in the 

summer and fall of 2008 and that ended suddenly on 

March 9, 2009 when the market stopped . . . [following]. If 

there were ever a time that they were justly called 

practitioners of the dismal science, it was in those nine 

months when it seemed that there was no bottom to global 

stock markets and that 1929 might seem a breeze in 

comparison. It was as though all the economic theories 

that had worked well when markets were not subject to the 

stress of a global financial collapse suddenly failed to 

work or to ring the alarm bells when they were needed 

most. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the things that we have in Canada — and 

the evidence of this is our credit union Act of Saskatchewan and 

also the credit union Acts in other provinces and our federal 

banking regulations — is the fact that we have a system of 

regulations which has tried to maintain that balance between 

allowing for commercial practices, commercial lending, for 

people to assume risk, at the same time as making sure that the 

public is protected. 

 

And what the CGA Magazine article is getting at is that we need 

to further look at in our institutions worldwide . . . And we 

know that our federal Finance minister is participating in that 

kind of an exercise with the G20 nations. But we also have to 

look at it in our own personal investments and how we organize 

those.  

 

And I would argue we also have to look at it in how we regulate 

those institutions over which we have responsibility. Bill 101 is 

a piece of legislation that we have in Saskatchewan which 

regulates one of our most important financial institutions, and 

so therefore we need to be watching it very carefully as we 

move forward. 

 

Now another person who‟s made some comments in just a 

recent book is a politician from England named Vince Cable. 

And he‟s just written a book called The Storm: The World 

Economic Crisis and What It Means. And basically one of his 

quotes is that what‟s happened in the last year, year and a half 

or so has been a conjuncture of extreme events. His quote is, 

“This conjuncture of extreme events and an increasingly hostile 

political environment has been described as a „perfect storm.‟” 

And in his book then he‟s going to go on to describe how this 

storm took place. 

 

But this is the quote I want to put on the record: 

 

Economic storms, like those in nature, come and go. They 

cannot be abolished. But, as with hurricanes and typhoons, 

they can be anticipated and planned for and a 

well-coordinated emergency response, involving 

international cooperation, can mitigate the misery. They 

also test out the underlying seaworthiness of the vessels of 

state. The fleet has been plying a gentle swell for some 

years and making impressive progress. But big waves are 

already exposing some weaknesses. SS Britannia, said to 

be unsinkable, has sprung a leak, and the vast supertanker 

USA is listing badly. Passengers and crew are starting to 

panic and have noticed that most of the life rafts are 

reserved for those in First Class. How many ships will 



3534 Saskatchewan Hansard November 10, 2009 

finally make it back to port in good order after the storm is 

in doubt. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as this author says, some of these very 

dependable, extremely large ships have been having some 

major troubles. And, Mr. Speaker, in using that kind of 

imagery, our credit union Act is our smaller ship — quite 

nimble, quite able to respond to the kinds of issues that are there 

in the world economy but also our protection for our people in 

Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, we have to make sure that we 

keep it in the best shape so that it can respond to any further 

storms that may show up on the horizon as we move forward. 

 

Now it‟s always interesting to take a look at the kinds of things 

that legislation like this credit union Act are meant to deal with. 

And it‟s not very often you see a book in our very good 

Legislative Library that makes you want to jump to take a look 

at it even though it‟s kind of a boring cover. But this title 

jumped out at me and I thought, well maybe I should take a 

look. 

 

The book is called Regulated Lives: Life Insurance and British 

Society, 1800-1914, written by Timothy Alborn. And he starts 

off his book with a quote from a fellow named Norwood 

Young, and this quote was in the Badminton Magazine in 1896. 

So this fellow, Norwood Young, is writing to people in the 

times of the late 19th century. 

 

A great change is gradually coming over the world. 

Adventure, sport, enterprise, are giving way to caution and 

the calculation of averages. Men do not take the risks they 

used to. The modern man is surrounded by police 

constables, sanitary inspectors, and insurance agents.  

 

Mr. Speaker, this is well over 100 years ago that there was this 

recognition that, as we started living in increasingly large 

numbers closer and closer together, risks were things that need 

to be managed. They needed to be dealt with. And so what we 

saw and what Mr. Alborn‟s book shows is that there was a 

dramatic increase in the use of insurance to deal with risks. I 

think sort of in a parallel way our banking system, our credit 

union system started to use legislative protections and 

institutions to also manage the risk as it related to our finances. 

 

And as I said previously, our Credit Union Deposit Guarantee 

Corporation, which was first called the Mutual Aid Board, was 

set up in 1953. It was part of that same movement to manage 

the risk that people felt as they were dealing with their 

hard-earned dollars and wanting to make sure that they would 

be protected. And once again I want to say congratulations to 

the credit unions of Saskatchewan because there‟s not been a 

single dollar deposited in a credit union in Saskatchewan since 

1953 that has been lost. 

 

[12:00] 

 

So we are in an interesting, interesting time. And part of what 

we‟re doing in this legislation is looking forward to see, as the 

one fellow said, what is the next storm that‟s going to come that 

will challenge some of our institutions. 

 

And I‟ve always had a strong interest in the use of maps. And 

one of my books at home is a book that describes how maps can 

do things for people and how they‟re used to do things.  

 

So when I saw an article in The New Republic just a couple of 

weeks ago, the October 21st, 2009 edition — and this is on 

page 14 — there‟s an article called “The Network: How a map 

can prevent the next financial crisis.” The article‟s written by 

Daniel Altman who is president of North Yard Economics, a 

non-profit consulting firm serving developing countries. And 

he‟s in the process right now of writing a book on the future of 

the global economy. 

 

Anyway he, in a very short article, describes how there‟s an 

international movement that‟s coming from quite a few 

different angles around a mapping theory. And basically it‟s 

mathematics, you know, sort of a . . . But basically what it‟s 

saying is, we with our ability to measure things in our increased 

capacity of a computerized world can now track transactions, 

financial transactions around the world and see where the 

money is flowing. And this goes back to some of my previous 

comments in this speech around Bill 101, when one of the 

proposals is to remove the word written because in writing 

doesn‟t really describe how our financial institutions work any 

more. 

 

But what Mr. Altman talks about is the fact that an ability to 

measure the quantity and quality of financial transactions 

worldwide and then plot them on a world map gives regulators, 

but also investors and bankers and others, the ability to see 

where money is flowing and also possibly see where some of 

the difficulties may be within the international system. 

 

Now they‟re getting co-operation as they move forward with 

this kind of a project, but it‟s interesting to see where and how 

these new tools might be developed. What the researchers 

envision would be that if you can actually track all of these 

transactions on a world — effectively electronic — map, you 

should be able to see when there‟s a buildup that might lead to a 

crash which would then bring the whole system down. 

 

And so basically there are researchers working within the 

United States in the Federal Reserve Bank system. There are 

others that are working along similar lines at Sandia National 

Laboratories, which is a government research installation in 

Albuquerque, New Mexico, and its main concern when it was 

set up was dealing with nuclear safety and national security. 

And what Robert Glass, who‟s one of the researchers working 

there, had been studying was highly mathematical topics like 

how fluid flows through porous materials and the patterns that 

form in air turbulence. 

 

And basically people who know this field know that this is 

some of the chaos theory work, which shows that even in chaos 

there are patterns. And so what they did was they took some of 

the work that they‟d been doing around fluid flow and around 

air turbulence and started using the same kinds of measurement 

skills onto the power grid of the United States, so looking at 

electrical power, but also the payment system that is the 

backbone of the world financial architecture. 

 

And when they started creating maps of these seemingly chaotic 

transactions, they started to see that these maps looked a lot like 

the maps they had created around water flowing over a rock or 

how air turbulence around a wing on an airplane actually has 



November 10, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3535 

some patterns. And they noticed that there were a large number 

of nodes in the system that had only one or two connections. 

And so what they started to show, that is, if certain problems 

arose in some of those key spots, then it would affect virtually 

all of the other institutions that were connected. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this seems to be sort of out there in a way in 

thinking about what one might do. But clearly our credit union 

Act amendments here need to anticipate some of the changes 

that may start taking place on a world-wide basis so that we 

aren‟t damaged in some way by things that happened in other 

places. 

 

All of us know the hit that our savings took in our pension 

plans, RRSPs [Registered Retirement Savings Plan], and other 

related types of instruments over the last number of months. 

And those were things that may have been able to be predicted 

by some of these world maps. And I guess what I would say is, 

let‟s not be skeptical of how some of these new ways of 

thinking might assist us as we move forward, and I would say 

let‟s keep our eyes on the possibility of a world economic flow 

map that actually provides some warnings for how the system 

will work. 

 

Now the final area that I want to talk about as it relates to this 

legislation and the credit union system relates to what is quite a 

challenging issue and that relates to how insurance products are 

delivered within Canada. And one of the issues that‟s been there 

for quite a number of years has been the ability of banks to 

provide insurance through their banking system or not, for 

credit unions to do that, for insurance companies to provide 

banking services. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this issue still has not been totally 

sorted out, but it is an area where I know that the credit unions 

have asked for some assistance. And as far as I can tell, the 

amendments in this particular Bill don‟t deal with that issue 

directly, and what we will be asking is whether they are trying 

to deal with it indirectly. 

 

In Saskatchewan right now, we know that the nationally 

regulated banks have a clear directive from the federal Finance 

minister that they‟re not to market their insurance products 

directly with their financial products, and so they do have 

stand-alone institutions that do that. We know that basically 

there‟s a similar situation with our credit unions in 

Saskatchewan and some of the institutions that work with them 

around the delivery of products. 

 

We also know, though, that we have some new institutions in 

Saskatchewan. One of them is called the Western Financial 

Group. It‟s basically a consolidator of independent insurance 

brokers and they provide insurance through a whole number of 

agencies across the prairies. But they also do provide quite a 

few investment products and financial products, and so they end 

up coming from the insurance side. And also we end up then 

being in a situation where maybe we have to go back and take a 

look at, from the consumers‟ or the customers‟ perspective, 

what it is that the customers want as far as a number of these 

different products are concerned. 

 

So we know that in Bill 101 there‟s an emphasis on adding this 

word, product. There‟s an emphasis on adding the word, 

affiliates, in which a credit union has a substantial interest. And, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we need to understand what it is that these 

words in the legislation hint at so that we can make sure that 

we‟re doing any changes here in a transparent fashion, and to 

make sure that however they‟re done as we move forward, 

they‟ll be done in a way that preserves the long, proud integrity 

of credit unions as extremely good service providers to the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with all those comments — I would 

probably like to continue a while longer, but I know some of 

my other colleagues might want to speak to a couple other Bills 

— but with these comments, then, I will adjourn debate on this 

particular Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview 

has moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 101, The Credit 

Union Amendment Act, 2009. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 102 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 102 — The 

Personal Property Security Amendment Act, 2009 be now read 

a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a pleasure to 

rise today in the Assembly and join in on the debate on Bill 

102, An Act to amend The Personal Property Security Act, 

1993. 

 

Before I get into my comments on The Personal Property 

Security Act, I do want to comment on the great speech by the 

member from Lakeview in front of me. At the beginning of his 

speech, Mr. Speaker, the member said that he invited members 

and perhaps people at home to sit back, enjoy, and listen to an 

overview of the history of the credit unions and the good work 

that they do in the province. And indeed I wasn‟t able to catch 

all of his speech because of some other commitments, but it 

certainly was enjoyable and it certainly was thorough. And I 

have to confess now, as I turn my attention to Bill 102, I 

perhaps feel somewhat inadequate to address 102 because of the 

thorough manner in which the member from Lakeview did 

address Bill 101. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bill 102, An Act to amend the Personal Property 

Security Act, 1993 deals with a very important matter for people 

here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and that‟s the issue of 

personal property. The issue of personal property, the concept 

of it, is something that‟s very important to our society here in 

Saskatchewan as well as something that is essential and vital to 

economies and democracies around the world, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We‟ve seen over the history of time, as societies have evolved 

from a feudal system to the modern democracies that we have 



3536 Saskatchewan Hansard November 10, 2009 

now in much of the world, and you know our hope, Mr. 

Speaker, is that the spread of democracy can continue 

throughout the world because of the personal liberties it brings 

to people, because of the ability for individuals to exercise their 

democratic right to choose in how they want to be governed, the 

ability for individuals to choose in how they want their society 

to be structured and organized, the ability for individuals to 

really get ahead in life, to get ahead in the world, to be in a 

position where they‟re able to improve the quality of life for 

children as opposed to the existence that they may have had as 

individuals. 

 

[12:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, essential to the vibrancy and the strength of 

democracies and of market economies throughout the world and 

the use of commerce, Mr. Speaker, is the aspect of personal 

property. We‟ve seen this throughout time, in many parts of the 

world, over many centuries. And we continue to see how, here 

in Saskatchewan, the role and existence of personal property 

has a very important influence on how we order our society, 

how we manage our affairs, and how individuals are able to 

improve their lot in life. 

 

We see in parts of the world where there are personal property 

laws that are not supportive of individuals having property — 

clearly defining who owns property, clearly stating how, when 

there‟s a dispute about property, how resolution is brought to a 

particular case — we see in these instances, Mr. Speaker, 

around the world where this occurs, that the people in these 

countries truly do suffer. The people in these countries do not 

have the quality of life that we enjoy here in Canada, and that 

citizens of other countries that have strong property laws, that 

they are able to experience as well in their countries, whether 

we at look at Europe or parts of Asia or other continents or parts 

of the world. 

 

It‟s clear that personal property is fundamental to our 

democracy. It‟s fundamental to how we engage in commerce 

and industry as well, Mr. Speaker. And all of these countries 

and situations that I identified, when the rules around personal 

property are not clear, when they‟re not firm, when they are not 

well organized and well structured in order to allow the 

resolution of conflict to happen in a democratic and peaceful 

way, we see, Mr. Speaker, that there are instances of unrest. 

There are instances where individuals are forced to go to the 

streets, where there are coups that may take place in a country, 

where there is the type of civil unrest that does not lead to a 

stable, safe, and thriving economy for people. 

 

And we‟ve seen this throughout the course of history. And 

sadly, Mr. Speaker, we continue to see this in certain parts of 

the world where the property laws are not modern, when they 

do not support the democratic system, and therefore, Mr. 

Speaker, they do not support commerce and trade the way that 

they truly need to in order to facilitate the strong democracies 

that we want around the world. 

 

And I think this is something that I know . . . I make these 

comments, Mr. Speaker, because it‟s important for us to 

remember and think about how Saskatchewan fits into the 

broader picture and how we are one province, Mr. Speaker, in a 

country of many provinces and territories. The laws that we 

have here are important because we work and co-operate and 

have interactions with many other jurisdictions — jurisdictions 

within Canada, Mr. Speaker, as well as jurisdictions outside of 

Canada within North America and beyond North America to the 

rest of the world. 

 

So it‟s important as we look at property laws, personal property 

laws here in Saskatchewan, it‟s important for us to remember 

how this does fit into the bigger picture. What we‟re engaged in 

here is important for everyone. And I think it‟s important that 

here in Saskatchewan, living in a democratic country, in one of 

the most advanced countries in the world . . . Most certainly we 

have problems in this country and there‟s things that we really 

do need to improve, because not everyone in Canada does share 

the same standard and quality of life. It‟s important for us to 

remember though that as a country, as a province and a country 

where many things are going right, Mr. Speaker, it‟s important 

for us to look at the broader picture and see how the decisions 

that we make here might tie in, might have a bearing, might 

have an influence on how things happen in other parts of the 

world. 

 

So I wanted to make those initial comments, Mr. Speaker, on 

personal property because when we look at some of these Bills, 

and often the Bills that we look at here in the Assembly, when 

we‟re going through them, often they‟re very technical and 

sometimes they‟re housekeeping in nature. It‟s important to 

remember what some people might think is boring or just 

overly wordy, it‟s important to remember how these ideas tie 

into the broader picture, how they tie into the world economy, 

into the world relations that countries and different jurisdictions 

share and co-operate and have to work in. 

 

In looking at Bill 102, An Act to amend The Personal Property 

Security Act, 1993, we see that much of the language here, as I 

had made an earlier reference to, is about housekeeping. It is 

about modernization. In my initial comments, I talked about 

how the history of property ownership is a long one. It‟s 

evolved in different ways in different jurisdictions. And, Mr. 

Speaker, as that has occurred over time over the centuries, it‟s 

important for us to return to the legislation to make sure that the 

language and the words that we‟re using in the legislation are in 

fact reflective of the current language and words that we use 

nowadays in our modern society. 

 

So there will be instances where there‟s been legislation that 

has been in existence for a long period time or has evolved over 

a long period of time. There‟ll be instances when we need to 

pause for a moment, go back to the legislation, examine the 

legislation, and see the types of wording, the types of language 

that is used, the types of ideas that are talked about. We want to 

make sure that these are modern ones. We want to make sure 

that they are contemporary. We want to make sure that they 

speak to the current reality that we face here in Saskatchewan 

because the world indeed, Mr. Speaker, has changed a great 

deal from when the notion of personal property was developed 

in the Western world and then as it has evolved here in Canada 

over the years. So it‟s important that we stay current. It‟s 

important that we stay up to date. 

 

In the same way, Mr. Speaker, that language and ideas can 

evolve, what we also see is that the way we do things evolves. 

And this happens for a number of reasons, Mr. Speaker. One 



November 10, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3537 

reason it occurs is because of technology. With technological 

changes and advancements, we learn that there can be different 

ways to do things. Perhaps the equipment, perhaps the approach 

and the know-how that we had at one point in time to how to 

deal with an issue, perhaps that has changed. Perhaps there has 

been some sort of an advancement that has been adopted by our 

jurisdiction here, by other jurisdictions of a similar nature 

across the country. Perhaps these changes have occurred, and 

therefore it‟s not so much language that is outdated, but it is the 

process or the means by which the legislation and the 

regulations are carried out that that has changed. 

 

And therefore it‟s only appropriate when that does occur, Mr. 

Speaker, that we go back to the legislation, and we see where 

are the places that we can ensure that this legislation is up to 

date.. It‟s up to snuff, it‟s doing the job, and it is consistent with 

what the reality is in the ground. 

 

Because far too often . . . Not far too often; I can see how this 

can happen, Mr. Speaker, that when we look at all of the Acts in 

the province, and how many of these have been changed and 

brought in and adapted over time . . . You know the world is a 

fast-paced place, and there are many changes that do occur. And 

it‟s easy to get behind in these things. 

 

So for that reason, Mr. Speaker, I do think when we are looking 

at legislation and doing housekeeping or modernization of the 

legislation, it‟s important that we‟re checking it and we‟re 

weighing it against what the current reality is here in the 

province. 

 

And with the personal property Act, Bill No. 102, the one 

modernization aspect that needed to be incorporated into this 

revised legislation — based on my reading of the Bill as well as 

the comments that the minister made off the beginning — was 

that there have been changes to the land titles registry. This is 

computerized and automated, and this only makes sense, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Saskatchewan, I can think of many fronts where we‟ve been 

leaders over the years, leaders and innovators, and where we 

have pursued best practices in order to ensure that the people of 

Saskatchewan receive the best government that they can 

possibly have and the best government they deserve, Mr. 

Speaker. Because as you know, Saskatchewan people are 

hard-working, honest people, and that‟s the kind of government 

that they seek and that they desire to have in the province. 

 

So if there are advancements with the land titles system — how 

this has become computerized, how it has become automated — 

it‟s most appropriate that the language in Bill 102 would be 

modernized and changed and updated in order to take into 

account those changes that have occurred in the land titles 

registry. 

 

And I know my limited experience, Mr. Speaker, with the land 

titles registry is that it has been a smooth and a good process to 

work with. I think Saskatchewan people are happy when more 

things can be done in an automated way, so long as the quality 

of the service is not being reduced — so long as the ability to 

ask questions, the ability to seek answers, the ability to receive 

quality service — if automation is part of that, if automation 

supports quality service then, Mr. Speaker, I do think that it is a 

good and appropriate thing. 

 

So I‟m pleased to see that in the housekeeping and the 

modernization that occurs in Bill 102 that that is taken into 

account, that the land titles registry, now that it is automated 

and computerized, that this is paid attention to by these 

amendments. And I‟m glad that the minister chose to include 

that in these changes here. 

 

Another aspect, Mr. Speaker, that‟s included in these changes 

here with the amendment or An Act to amend The Personal 

Property Security Act, Mr. Speaker, is the great amount of 

interprovincial movement of goods and services that we see 

here in Saskatchewan. And it‟s important for our province to 

have consistent legislation with other jurisdictions. 

 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, for many years we‟ve been a 

province that has not operated by ourselves on our own, but 

we‟re a province that deals and trades with other provinces and 

with other countries. This is something that all members of this 

Assembly will appreciate because all of our constituents greatly 

benefit from the trade that occurs in the province. So whether 

that is producer growing a crop for a trade, whether that is, you 

know, someone in our constituency who is involved with the 

spinoff industries, involved with the trade and the movement of 

goods of services, it all ties together. It‟s really how well we‟re 

trained, how well we‟re getting along with other jurisdictions 

has a direct bearing on how well we‟re doing as a province. 

 

And we‟ve seen in recent months, Mr. Speaker, where there 

have been problems with the trade of our potash resources, 

where there hasn‟t been a market for these resources. I won‟t 

get into the debate about who, what and when and so on, but we 

clearly know that when we‟re not trading with things like 

potash, and when we‟re not engaged in the exchange of services 

across borders, Mr. Speaker, we clearly know that this has an 

effect on the bottom line of the province. 

 

And because it has an effect on the bottom line of the province, 

it has an effect on the bottom line of Saskatchewan families on 

the home budgets because how well the province is doing has a 

direct implication in terms of how well families can be doing. 

That‟s because government provides services, provides 

programs, sets the climate and the tone for how well 

Saskatchewan families are doing. So it‟s important for us to 

ensure that our legislation facilitates, promotes, ensures that the 

smooth trade and exchange of goods and services occurs across 

provinces here in the country. 

 

So in reading the remarks by the minister in his introduction of 

the legislation and reading the Bill myself, I do see that a good 

amount of Bill 102, An Act to amend The Personal Property 

Security Act, 1993, I see a good amount of the language in this 

work here addressing the issue of consistency between our 

provincial jurisdiction and other jurisdictions. So I see that as a 

good thing. 

 

We certainly are aware there are instances and locations where 

you can have consistency in legislation that promotes trade, 

promotes stability, promotes understanding, promotes clarity 

for all people involved with the exchange of goods and services. 

When we can ensure that there‟s consistency among 

jurisdictions, I think this promotes stability and growth. 



3538 Saskatchewan Hansard November 10, 2009 

And I say that, Mr. Speaker, because I think that when there is 

consistency and when there is modern language in legislation, 

this allows good regulations. And this allows for when 

individuals — either in Saskatchewan or other parts of the 

country — have questions, it allows them to get the answers 

they need. It clears up the ambiguity, some of the question 

marks, the scratching of the head that might occur when there‟s 

a conflict, when there is some question about how to resolve an 

issue, when there‟s a question about how this process should 

occur. When there‟s consistency in the legislation between 

jurisdictions, that‟s a positive thing. 

 

[12:30] 

 

Now I say it‟s a positive thing when there‟s consistency in 

legislation between jurisdictions, but I don‟t see that, Mr. 

Speaker, as carte blanche for simply consistency across the 

board in all and every case. There are certainly instances, Mr. 

Speaker, where we as Saskatchewan people, whether it‟s 

personal property, whether it is a different issue around 

professional credentials, accreditation . . . 

 

It‟s also important, Mr. Speaker, that while we recognize 100 

per cent that we are a trading province, that our strength to a 

great deal depends on how well we‟re doing with other areas, 

we also have to make sure that the unique nature of 

Saskatchewan — the things that we‟re most proud of, the types 

of industries that are at the core of the commerce that goes on in 

this province — you have to make sure that the desire for 

common legislation, Mr. Speaker, is not simply a race to the 

bottom in terms of legislation, regulations, and so on. 

 

So that‟s the caution I put on a move for consistency in the rules 

concerning interprovincial movement of goods and services. 

Now my understanding, my basic understanding, Mr. Speaker, 

of this legislation is that that is not the case. My understanding, 

my basic understanding — and I‟m more than happy to be 

proven wrong if there‟s members on my side or on the other 

side who disagree with me — I think that consistency in these 

types of regulations as proposed in this legislation are not 

positive and good for Saskatchewan.  

 

But I think, in my view, that it is a good thing. For example the 

one issue that the minister brought up in his remarks in 

introducing this legislation was the issue of liens on vehicles. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, some people like buying brand new cars, 

and that‟s fine and fair. I know some people love that new-car 

smell, and every chance they can trade in their car and get a 

new one, they go after that opportunity because they want the 

newest and the best. 

 

There‟s other people, Mr. Speaker, in our province who are 

happy with a slightly used vehicle or a broken-in or a 

pre-owned or however you want to put it nicely, Mr. Speaker. 

And so when people in our constituencies . . . And increasingly 

as we see the economic climate change in the province, and if 

there are fewer people buying new vehicles, we might see more 

and more people wanting to look for good deals and good 

bargains in other parts of the country on vehicles. It‟s important 

that the rules in place allow for that to happen smoothly. 

 

I think of a personal situation, not a personal situation, but I 

think of an experience that I heard of and learned of through 

conversation with a constituent, and how this individual had 

indeed purchased a vehicle from somewhere else. And for a 

variety of reasons, the proper checks had not occurred, and 

there was a lien on this vehicle, Mr. Speaker. So that‟s 

certainly, you know that‟s not the type of situation where we‟d 

want . . . Where someone who might have limited resources or 

might not have the money to go out and buy that brand new 

Patriot or whatever the vehicle might be, they might not have 

that cash. And they might want to get a good used vehicle. 

 

I talked earlier on about how technological changes occur, how 

things can be automated with computers and so on. And what 

we‟ve seen over the past years for individual car owners and 

individual people here in Saskatchewan, the ability to look for 

vehicles through non-traditional means. Not everyone goes on 

to a car lot and finds the vehicle that they want there. And 

perhaps they‟re looking on Kijiji, Mr. Speaker, perhaps they‟re 

looking on Auto Trader online, looking at different services. So 

it‟s important, as more and more people seek this type of car 

purchasing scenario or set-up, that the rules and the legislation 

in place here in Saskatchewan are consistent and co-operate 

well with the rules in other places. And the rules need to be 

clear. 

 

I had talked about a bit earlier, Mr. Speaker, how it‟s important 

that when there‟s a question mark about legislation or an issue 

comes up that is a question mark around personal property, it‟s 

essential that the legislation clears up that question mark. 

 

So if we can imagine a scenario, there‟s an individual here in 

Saskatchewan who finds their dream vehicle in another 

province and it‟s a good deal, in their view. And they do the 

transfer of funds, and they arrange for the shipment of the 

vehicle. They get their new vehicle and, you know, it‟s 

everything they dreamed of. They get it detailed and they‟re 

cruising along Spadina in Saskatoon in the summer, just 

enjoying life. Everything is going well. 

 

But then they learn of a lien on this vehicle, Mr. Speaker. And 

what they had thought was a great situation, what they had 

thought was their dream vehicle . . . They had saved up their 

resources for some time to buy this vehicle. You know, whether 

this is an older person, it‟s their retirement car or whether it‟s a 

younger person with the first vehicle wanting to impress their 

friends and their family — and that‟s okay — but if a situation 

comes up where there‟s a lien on that vehicle, that‟s a sad 

situation if it means that that vehicle is taken away from that 

person. 

 

So it‟s important that the language to do with personal property, 

with personal possessions, that the language in the legislation is 

clear so that, if it is a bad situation, it can be resolved as soon as 

possible, hopefully in a positive resolution for the individual 

who purchased the vehicle. And hopefully, you know, the least 

amount of pain in a financial and well we‟ll say emotional too 

because that‟s . . . You know, financial things affect us on an 

emotional level too. I mean it‟s no secret that, you know, 

personal finances can cause a lot of strain in one‟s life. So it‟s 

necessary that our legislation‟s modern, up to date, and speaks 

to that issue. 

 

So we see, Mr. Speaker, really in Bill 102, An Act to amend the 

Personal Property Security Act, what begins as a housekeeping 



November 10, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3539 

measure, what begins as something routine, perhaps dry, 

perhaps quite wordy, when you see how the legislation has a 

first-hand, real impact, an influence on real Saskatchewan 

people, we see that these are important issues. And we see that 

it‟s necessary for us to get the legislation right. It‟s necessary 

for us to ensure that people here in Saskatchewan are well 

served. 

 

Another area I address, Mr. Speaker, issue of personal property. 

You know, perhaps an individual has a vehicle or wants to 

pursue a vehicle. This legislation of course also has 

implications for the business sector, for the exchange of 

commerce on a larger scale as opposed to individual 

transactions between one individual. We‟re talking about 

corporations. 

 

And you can imagine, Mr. Speaker, if the legislation can be 

complicated for matters such as purchasing a pickup from one 

province to another, when we‟re dealing with large 

corporations, corporations that might have activities, 

involvements in a variety of provinces, a variety of countries, 

and indeed, a variety of continents, Mr. Speaker, I can only 

imagine that it becomes all the more complicated, all the more 

complex. 

 

So it‟s important that our legislation here gets the small things 

right, the things like the pickup truck for the young guy who‟s 

able to save up his money and get that truck that he really 

wants. But it‟s also, of course, Mr. Important, it‟s also . . . Mr. 

Important — you are important, Mr. Speaker, but, Mr. Speaker, 

I apologize for calling you Mr. Important. Mr. Speaker, it‟s also 

important that we get it right for the large scale of things to do 

with the economy. 

 

The example that the minister referenced in his opening 

remarks was, for example, the oil industry, how there might be 

a conflict, how one company might do well and another one 

might not do well, and there needs to be debts collected, and so 

on. Legislation needs to speak to how these two corporations in 

a very complex environment here in Canada and around the 

world, how these corporations . . . or what the road map is, what 

the path is in order to ensure that things are resolved in an 

efficient, prudent, and time-effective manner. 

 

And so again, by listening to and reading the minister‟s 

remarks, it appears that this type of housekeeping and changes 

does indeed address that issue — the reality that, you know, 

Saskatchewan does live in a complex environment, that we are 

a complex place, and that we need to make sure we get it right 

in order for businesses and various industries to thrive here in 

Saskatchewan like we want them to. 

 

So whether that‟s the oil industry or any other industry, Mr. 

Speaker, the more modern our legislation can be, the more 

thorough it can be, the more current it can be, the more 

comprehensive it can be, the better off I think we‟ll be here in 

Saskatchewan as we‟re looking at the concerns for everyday 

citizens as well as the large corporations. And that‟s important 

because it affects the bottom line of the government and it 

affects our province as a whole and it affects the bottom line of 

Saskatchewan families. 

 

I also see in this legislation, reference in the minister‟s remarks 

and in reading the Bill 102 is that much of this language in the 

legislation is not completely new or pulled out of thin air. Much 

of this language is actually reflective of what‟s actually been 

occurring for some time, whether that was through regulations 

or through other conventions. So I think that‟s a positive thing 

as well. 

 

So it‟s not only the modernization. But if through simply the 

process of day-to-day interactions there have been patterns 

established, there have been approaches identified that work 

well for the resolution of conflict around personal property, if 

there is approaches that are working that‟s been done already, 

we might as well put it down in writing. We might as well be 

clear about it because it does clear up the ambiguity. 

 

You know, as I talked about the history of personal property 

around the world, we know that the history of personal property 

has evolved greatly over the course of time. And those changes, 

Mr. Speaker, I would guess, it would be my hunch, that they 

have occurred through a variety of approaches. You know, 

sometimes the changes happened through violent means or 

people in the streets demanding these types of changes. 

Sometimes, Mr. Speaker, they occur at the behest of legislators 

who determine that this is the best way to do it so we‟re going 

to change the legislation. And my hunch, Mr. Speaker, is that 

sometimes these changes occur through a gradual evolution of 

rational, common sense people figuring out the best way to do 

things. 

 

So when we‟re in an environment where rational, common 

sense people have figured out the best way to do things, if our 

legislation can see what‟s working on the ground, if our 

legislation can examine, do the environmental scan, see what‟s 

working best, and if our legislation can then be changed to 

better incorporate what‟s actually happening and what‟s 

working well, then that too, Mr. Speaker, I see as a good thing. 

 

There‟s a few comments I made at the top, Mr. Speaker, about 

the land titles registry system and how that interacts with people 

here in Saskatchewan. It ties in of course, Mr. Speaker, to the 

larger work that ISC [Information Services Corporation of 

Saskatchewan] does. And I want to state, I know our 

commitment here, that it‟s important that ISC is supported, and 

it‟s important that the changes that occur in this House do in 

fact allow ISC to do the work that it needs to do with the land 

titles system. 

 

So if these changes are occurring, if these changes that are put 

forward in Bill 102, The Personal Property Security Act, An Act 

to amend the Personal Property Security Act of 1993, in 

reading the comments from the minister and doing my own 

reading, it would appear that the intent of this legislation is that 

it is to support ISC and the important work that it does here in 

Saskatchewan tying into the stability of personal property here 

in the country, here in Saskatchewan, the stability that all 

people here in Saskatchewan truly rely on, truly depend on. 

Then I think that is a good thing. 

 

I wasn‟t here, Mr. Speaker, when members on this side sat on 

the other side before the change in government occurred in 

2007. I was elected for the first time in 2007. So I really do 

appreciate the opportunity to speak to these Bills and gain a 

better understanding about some of the history and, you know, 



3540 Saskatchewan Hansard November 10, 2009 

the type of history that the member from Lakeview was so 

capably and appropriately able to deliver to members about the 

credit union system. I don‟t necessarily have all of that 

background information, but I appreciate the opportunity to 

speak to these types of Bills because it is an opportunity for an 

opposition MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] to gain 

more understanding and gain more experience in dealing with 

these aspects of government and indeed the provincial 

economy. 

 

From reading and listening to others, I understand that many of 

the changes that are put forward in this Bill No. 102 are changes 

that have been occurring for some time and changes that 

perhaps the ball started to get rolling or the changes were first 

initiated or thought of under the previous government when 

members on this side were opposite. If that is the case, it‟s good 

to see the continuation of certain aspects. It‟s good to see the 

continuation where things are going well that we carry on the 

work. 

 

[12:45] 

 

Well indeed, a huge amount of work, Mr. Speaker, that we do 

in this Assembly is partisan and is controversial and is 

head-to-head. And that‟s appropriate. That‟s the way that this 

system and this House is designed. And that‟s the way that in 

the Westminster system we believe good, quality government is 

delivered to people. I think that‟s appropriate. Political back and 

forth and partisanship is good and is a necessary aspect of our 

democracy. But when there are instances such as personal 

property, I think members on both sides can agree that this is an 

important issue for all people whatever our political stripe 

might be. 

 

So if there are initiatives and ideas that have been started by one 

party and they can be carried forward by another, if they‟re not 

partisan, if they‟re just simply the right thing to do — the right 

thing to do for the people of Saskatchewan, for the businesses 

in Saskatchewan — then I think that‟s a good thing. And I 

really do thank the minister for carrying on with those changes 

and ensuring that the legislation here is going to meet the needs 

of Saskatchewan people, Saskatchewan businesses, our 

provincial economy. Going to meet our needs as we live in a 

truly dynamic time where, you know, we‟re not an island, that 

we are a province that engages with Western Canada, the rest of 

the country, North America, and the rest of the world. That‟s 

who we are and I know all people in this Assembly are truly 

proud of that nature of Saskatchewan. 

 

So where changes have occurred, where the minister has 

identified that there are modernization aspects and 

housekeeping measures that can occur in this legislation, or to 

ensure that the functioning of our economy in society does well 

and continues to do well, I‟m very supportive of that. 

 

I make those comments, Mr. Speaker, but another caution. 

Because I have not sat in this Assembly as long as some 

members, sometimes I‟ve found this in other things, you know 

— if I have an initial or a first understanding of something, the 

more you learn, the more you understand that it‟s a complicated 

issue. The more you know, the more you learn that there‟s a lot 

more to learn, if that makes sense, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So for that reason I want to hear from some other members on 

this issue. I know here on the opposition side we‟ll have some 

more discussions and conversations that need to occur with 

different people in Saskatchewan, whether that‟s the individual 

person wanting to buy that favourite pickup truck or whether 

that‟s the large corporation with operations on a variety of 

continents. 

 

We want to make sure that any meddling — not meddling, any 

modernization of personal property legislation — we want to 

make sure that we get it right. Because as I stated in my initial 

comments, the concept of personal property is so fundamental 

and so key to our democracy. It‟s so fundamental and key to 

how we conduct our business. It‟s so fundamental and key to 

how we simply meet the needs and wants of our families. So we 

want to make sure that we get it right. 

 

So I‟m encouraged by the words and the remarks made by the 

minister, and the reading that I‟ve been able to do on it. I‟ve 

appreciated reading the first response from our deputy leader on 

this side, Mr. Speaker. But I‟m quite sure, pretty confident, very 

confident in my statement that I want to hear from other 

individuals on this side and I want to hear from other people in 

the broader community as well. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I will conclude my remarks on Bill 

No. 102, An Act to amend The Personal Property Security Act, 

1993. I will conclude my remarks now, and I move that we 

adjourn debate on Bill No. 102. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Massey 

Place has moved adjournment of debate on Bill 102, The 

Personal Property Security Amendment Act, 2009. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 103 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 103 — The 

Miscellaneous Statutes (Professional Discipline) Amendment 

Act, 2009 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am pleased 

today to rise and speak to the miscellaneous statutes 

professional discipline Act. I notice in the legislation that it 

affects several, like 40, professions that affect a broad range of 

services in our province: agriculture, municipalities, education, 

health services, the sciences, money management, information, 

community development, forestry, engineering, social work, 

and funeral services. So quite a variety of professions are 

impacted by this Act. 

 

There are apparently some professional organizations who 

already have this in their Act. I understand the minister has 

mentioned six. I would be interested in knowing which ones 

those are, and also — these are questions for committee — 



November 10, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3541 

what has their experience been with the Act when they have this 

ability to do this for two years? 

 

In self-regulatory bodies, discipline is an internal process that‟s 

usually triggered by a complaint by a citizen. And we certainly 

wouldn‟t want to see any eroding of public confidence when 

some member of a professional association can dodge a 

disciplinary action by just resigning their membership. And I‟m 

encouraged by the minister‟s comments about having a registry 

or interprovincial sharing at a national level so that if there is an 

action against a professional in one of these professions that are 

mentioned, that that could be shared in some way across the 

country. 

 

We‟ve seen some fairly high-profile cases of professionals who 

have had some serious issues in their practice, and probably the 

most widely known was the breast cancer ones in the East, in 

the Atlantic provinces. So it‟s difficult for other provinces to 

know when somebody is moving into their province to take up a 

practice and not . . . We are unable here, say in Saskatchewan, 

to track the person‟s background in disciplinary processes, or 

maybe they have just moved and stopped one mid process. And 

I think that was also a case where we have seen this in 

pathology. 

 

So with self-regulatory bodies, the idea is to make sure the 

public trusts the ability of the professional body to regulate 

itself. And this I think speaks to enhancing the public‟s 

confidence in the ability of self-regulatory bodies to do that. 

 

And I know that an interesting case that always comes to mind 

when I think of who sets the standards and who governs who, is 

the listeriosis case in the meat-packing industry. The federal 

government was just about ready to allow the meat-packing 

industry to police itself, and then listeriosis hit and that 

legislation disappeared. I think it was a good lesson for us to 

remember about what happens when policing is so internal or 

our standards are guarded only by those who have a vested 

interest in maintaining those standards. 

 

So I think this Bill speaks to more transparency and more 

accountability. I‟m thinking that there‟s several questions that 

need to be asked. I know the 40 professions that the Acts will 

apply to, it will be very interesting to contact them and see what 

their comments are. It‟s a question of what impact will this have 

on their association, perhaps financially, what other resources 

will they be needing. And it would be interesting to know the 

six professional Acts who already have this in their Act, what 

experience they‟ve had with it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I think that it‟s also interesting to know that . . . I think it‟s 

going to be a very positive change for professional associations. 

I think it will give them the opportunity to clear up 

misunderstandings or the public‟s scrutiny of them if there‟s 

some outstanding issue that has just been able to die because 

someone has left the profession. And I think when this Act was 

originally proposed it only covered judges because it was 

particular to one certain incident. And I believe my colleague 

from Meewasin wanted exactly this, was to broaden it out to 

touch other professions. 

 

So we basically will see this as a positive change and I think 

we‟re going to want, we definitely want to ask some questions 

and I think there are interesting questions to be asked. And I 

really would like to see how different professions have dealt 

with this. 

 

And I think that what I really am very encouraged to see is the 

ability to share the information across the country. I think this 

definitely speaks to public confidence, especially since the 

experiences that have been brought to light — fairly serious 

situations — where someone has left one province and moved 

to another without any warning to the public in the receiving 

province that this person has issues of malpractice or some 

other complaint against them. 

 

So I think this is going to be very helpful in those situations. I 

think that we‟re going to see obviously something about the 

national standards. Many professions would like to see national 

standards and I think the more we look at sharing information 

across the country, the more we move towards national 

standards in certain professions. 

 

And I think with the TILMA [Trade, Investment and Labour 

Mobility Agreement] type questions out there about these 

agreements and what TILMA type agreements will do, we will 

see more mobility between the provinces and in the professions. 

So we need to make sure that we have the public‟s best interest 

at heart and that we do end up having strong associations that 

take their self-regulatory mandate very seriously, and the public 

does feel assured that the self-regulatory process will be in their 

best interests. 

 

I think when I mentioned . . . I‟d like to see what other 

jurisdictions have done with this type of legislation, if we have 

any information from other jurisdictions. I don‟t know if that‟s 

true or not, but I would like to see. Those are questions again 

for the committee. 

 

And I think that given the fact that we‟re going to have 

significant conversations with 40 different professional bodies, 

this will take a bit of time. And I‟m sure that many of my 

colleagues would like to speak since many of these 

organizations affect, like I said, a broad swath through the 

province, from agrologists to architects, and then significantly 

into the health field, midwifery. 

 

I‟m also concerned that we have a consistency in the wording. 

And it appears to be, as I read the Bill, that the clauses are being 

changed to make sure that the wording is consistent in every 

Act so that we are assured that each profession is not 

disadvantaged in any way or that anybody is missed capturing 

the intent of the legislation, which is basically to protect the 

public. And I think that there‟s been some cases where the 

public has definitely felt that the professional association has 

been used to dodge accountability. And I think the public really 

do want to see that the people that do deliver services in the 

public‟s interest — and for the most part a lot of them publicly 

funded — that they will have the public‟s best interest at heart. 

 

So like I said, we will be, for the Bill, basically in favour of it. 

And like I said, when we saw the Bill last time it was just being 

judges that were being mentioned as a possible change which 

was in reaction to a certain case, that it will be better to see that 

this legislation covers a wide variety of professions and 

self-regulatory bodies. I know that many professional 



3542 Saskatchewan Hansard November 10, 2009 

associations really want to be self-regulatory. Their disciplinary 

processes are basically internal. Many of them have public 

trustees sitting on their boards, so that while their disciplinary 

processes are internal they still do have an accountability to the 

public and an awareness of the public‟s interest in what their 

members do delivering the services basically to the public. 

 

So I think it‟s going to be interesting to speak to all of these 

professional associations to see how they see this will happen 

and what has been the history in the other Acts — the other six, 

I think, the minister mentioned. What has been their experience 

with having this in their ability to do this already? I don‟t see 

any mention of if that‟s been successful, but I would assume 

that that‟s what we‟ve seen in some of the lead-up towards this 

legislation. 

 

And I think it‟s also interesting to note what‟s going to happen 

across the country. I really think that people are very much 

interested in having a system of accountability that moves from 

province to province, so that you‟re not able to escape any 

repercussions or any disciplinary action from something that 

you have done in one professional group or that you have done 

in one province and then can move to another province with 

impunity. I think people are quite concerned that this will be 

something that they will not want. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Hour of adjournment having been 

reached, this House now stands adjourned. With the observation 

of Remembrance Day tomorrow, this Assembly will stand 

adjourned until Thursday, November 12th at 10 a.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 13:00.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3519 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3519 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3519 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3519 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3519 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3519 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3520 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3520 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Remembrance Day 

  Chisholm .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3520 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3520 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3520 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3521 

  D‟Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3521 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3522 

 Aboriginal Woman of Distinction from Prince Albert 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3521 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Management of Provincial Economy 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3522 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3522 

 Government Contracts 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3523 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3524 

 Skills Training and Employment Issues 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3525 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3525 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 101 — The Credit Union Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2) 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3527 

 Bill No. 102 — The Personal Property Security Amendment Act, 2009 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3535 

 Bill No. 103 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Professional Discipline) Amendment Act, 2009 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3540 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium Development 

Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

 Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

Government House Leader 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. James Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Capital Commission 


