




















































Hansard: March 02, 2009


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 25A  MONDAY, MARCH 2, 2009, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2001 

 March 2, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

The Speaker: — Welcome back, members, to the spring 

session 2009. I trust you‟ll find it enjoyable. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s my pleasure to 

introduce to you and through you to all members of the 

legislature 18 students from Sheldon-Williams Collegiate, 

seated in the east gallery. They‟re accompanied by their teacher, 

Ms. Steffany Salloum, and they‟re here to observe the first day 

of the session in the spring. And I would ask all members to 

welcome them. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood River. 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

have a number of guests in your gallery that I would like to 

introduce to you and through you to the rest of the Assembly. I 

don‟t have my list here but I will ad lib it, I guess, from the 

start. 

 

We have retired Brigadier General Cliff Walker, a long-time 

friend and very, very supportive to myself. And when I call for 

advice, I get lots of advice from Cliff. We have the hon. Larry 

Schneider in the gallery. Tim Cheesman is one of the reserve 

COs [commanding officer]; we have Tim here. Kenny Garbutt 

— Ken‟s a honorary colonel. Brad Hrycyna is a CO of the 

squadron. We have Bob Cade, Colonel Bob Cade and his wife, 

Val. And Bob is an honorary colonel. Cory Thiemann from the 

naval side. 

 

And also, Mr. Speaker, we have the Shipways here. Their son 

was lost in Afghanistan and we‟re very pleased to have them 

with us here today. 

 

We have a number of our veterans that have returned from 

Afghanistan here with us today. Special acknowledgement of 

Tim Huckle. His father and I used to fly together and Tim is a 

veteran of Afghanistan also. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟d just like to see who I‟ve missed here now. 

Colonel Jim Stakiw is with us from Saskatoon. Malcolm French 

is exec officer for HMCS [Her Majesty‟s Canadian Ship] 

Queen. We have Petty Officer Mauro, Master Corporal 

MacKenzie from the North Saskatchewan Regiment, Master 

Corporal von Falkenhausen from the Regina Rifles. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m very, very pleased to have these guests with 

us here in the legislature today, and I would ask all the members 

to give them a warm welcome to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you, in the 

Speaker‟s gallery there are two interns who have offices beside 

me. Andrew Restall is my intern. And since Glen Hart isn‟t 

here, this is his intern, Dawn Gibbons. And they‟re working 

with us for three months so I‟d like you to give them a warm 

welcome, please. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to all members of the Assembly, I would like to introduce 

three special guests seated in your gallery. Mr. Speaker, my 

mother, Anne Broten, is seated there, as well as my sister, 

Julianne Broten Noble, and my sister, Nancy Johnson. 

 

Julianne is home for a visit from Northern Ireland where she 

works in the legislative assembly of Northern Ireland in 

Stormont, and my sister Nancy works at the University of 

Saskatchewan at the Language Centre. So I‟m very happy that 

they‟re here to join us today. And my mom works at SIAST 

[Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology] as 

well, so that‟s important. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition that speaks to the cost of living, in 

particular to housing and the impact that it is having on 

Saskatchewan senior citizens. Mr. Speaker, the petition speaks 

to the need for affordable housing options that would be helpful 

to seniors across this province, especially those living on a fixed 

income. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to act as quickly as possible to expand 

affordable housing options for Saskatchewan senior 

citizens. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 



2002 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 2009 

today to present a petition. Wage equity for CBO 

[community-based organization] workers . . . We know that 

many of these folks are chronically underpaid and in fact work 

at poverty level wages. I‟d like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the development and 

implementation of a multi-year funding plan to ensure that 

CBO workers achieve wage equities with employees who 

perform work of equal value in government departments. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 

These folks, Mr. Speaker, are from Foam Lake, Yorkton, 

Langenburg, Norquay. Some are from Saskatoon, Regina; 

again, Yorkton; Watson, Prince Albert, Hudson Bay, and we 

have folks here from Swift Current and Humboldt. Thank you 

very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

two petitions. Mr. Speaker, the first petition I wish to present 

today is in support of a new Saskatchewan Hospital in North 

Battleford. It recognizes that the existing, nearly 100-year-old 

structure is in much need of replacement. Mr. Speaker, the 

petitioners call on the Legislative Assembly to: 

 

. . . call upon the Government of Saskatchewan to 

immediately recommit funds and resources for the 

continued development and construction of a new 

Saskatchewan Hospital at North Battleford and provide 

the Prairie North Regional Health Authority with the 

authority necessary to complete this essential and 

much-needed project. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by residents of The 

Battlefords. The first name on the petition, Mr. Speaker, is 

Mayor Julian Sadlowski, city of North Battleford. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the second petition I have today recognizes the 

need for affordable housing in The Battlefords, Mr. Speaker, 

and it recognizes that the vacancy rate for rental 

accommodation in The Battlefords is very low. Mr. Speaker, 

the petition to the Legislative Assembly asks that the 

Government of Saskatchewan should: 

 

. . . invest in an affordable housing program that will 

result in a greater number of quality and affordable rental 

units to be made available to a greater number of people 

throughout The Battlefords and across Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition on housing in The Battlefords, Mr. 

Speaker, is signed by residents of The Battlefords and the 

surrounding area. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions in support of a reduction in the education 

portion of property taxes. This is needed by Saskatchewan 

families and business, many of whom have seen a large increase 

in their taxes as a result of 2009 reassessment. The prayer reads 

as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to stop withholding and to provide significant, 

sustainable long-term property tax relief to property 

owners by 2009 through significantly increasing the 

provincial portion of education funding. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are signed by good folks 

down in Estevan. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Order. First of all let me begin . . . I‟m not 

sure if it‟s the lights in the Assembly or the long time we‟ve 

been away, but I‟d just like to remind members that firstly in 

regards to petitions — one petition per individual per day. And 

so if we can keep that in mind for the future, that would be 

appreciated. Order. 

 

Before I call for statements by members, just a heads-up. 

Member statements are 90 seconds. The Speaker has in the past 

allowed for — if it‟s on a specifically personal nature — a little 

extended time. But I‟d appreciate if members would keep in 

mind the 90-second limit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Saskatoon Organization Fights Homelessness 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Thursday, 

February 26, Saskatoon‟s Passion for Action Against 

Homelessness held a series of events to work towards ending 

homelessness in our communities and in fact throughout 

Canada. 

 

The day started at city hall at noon with a lunchtime rally and a 

downtown walkabout, marching to the local Social Services, 

Sask Housing offices. They called on motorists along 22nd 

Street to honk to end homelessness, and the day ended with 

soup and bannock and an evening vigil at the Rainbow 

Community Centre. 

 

Debbie Frost, the local representative for Canada Without 

Poverty, brought greetings of support from Calgary, including 

Susan Scott, the author of All Our Sisters: Stories of Homeless 

Women in Canada. A group of Calgarians held a moment of 

silence in support of the day of action in Saskatoon. People 

signed a petition supporting Bill C-304, proposed by NDP 

[New Democratic Party] MPs [Member of Parliament] Davies 

and Leslie, calling for a national housing strategy. And in fact 

the Act will likely be debated in parliament as early as April. 



March 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2003 

Sometimes, Mr. Speaker, we look to our young people for the 

right words. Meighan McGraw, 14, that night read her poem, 

“What can I do? How can I help?” She asks: 

 

They have a life just like I do 

And I wonder to myself . . . 

 

What can I do? How can I help? 

It hurts not only them but me. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 

Saskatoon‟s Passion for Action Against Homelessness for their 

leadership on this very important task. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Recognition of Saskatchewan Curling Team 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Mr. Speaker, I stand today to talk about an 

outstanding group of local athletes that have done our province 

proud on the national stage. I speak about Team Saskatchewan, 

the Lawton curling team which made it to the playoffs in the 

Scotties Tournament of Hearts. 

 

After a shaky start, Team Saskatchewan came roaring back with 

six straight victories and entered the playoffs as the third ranked 

team. Sadly Lawton‟s team was defeated by Team Canada, led 

by Jennifer Jones, this past Saturday. 

 

They exemplified the true spirit of competition and 

sportsmanship and showed that Saskatchewan curlers can still 

throw with the best of them. I invite my colleagues to join me in 

congratulating skip Stefanie Lawton, her sister, Marliese 

Kasner, Sherri Singler, and Lana Vey on their performance. 

 

I would also like to offer our prayers to Stefanie and Marliese 

for their mother, Linda Miller, who was unable to watch them 

compete due to an inoperable brain tumour. This kept their 

father and coach, Bob Miller, from their side and it took a lot of 

strength to compete at such a high level with greater concerns 

on their minds. Marliese Kasner eloquently stated in the 

National Post a couple of weeks ago: 

 

It puts things into perspective . . . We have other things in 

life. 

 

We play the game because we enjoy it. 

 

Once again I would like to extend congratulations on behalf of 

the province of Saskatchewan to Stefanie Lawton curling team. 

We are proud to have such strong and inspirational role models. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Recognizing AIDS Saskatoon 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Monday, 

February 23, I had the pleasure of visiting AIDS Saskatoon, a 

community-based organization serving Saskatoon as well as 

central and northern Saskatchewan. While AIDS Saskatoon 

helps many throughout our province, it is located in the 

constituency of Saskatoon Massey Place just a few doors down 

from my constituency office. 

 

Founded in 1986, AIDS Saskatoon supports people affected by 

HIV [human immunodeficiency virus] and educates for the 

prevention of HIV infection. Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity 

to meet with Nicole White, executive coordinator of AIDS 

Saskatoon, as well as board Chair, Katie Scoular. I found our 

visit to be very informative and eye-opening. They shared with 

me information about the many services and projects under way 

at AIDS Saskatoon and also about their plans and ideas for the 

future. 

 

I also had the pleasure of meeting the many dedicated staff 

members of AIDS Saskatoon and, in speaking with them, it was 

clear to me that they are highly committed to their work and to 

making life better for the most marginalized in society. 

 

Mr. Speaker, whether it‟s a warm meal, advice on harm 

reduction, or simply providing community and belonging, 

AIDS Saskatoon plays a very important role in the lives of 

many Saskatchewan residents. I would ask all members to join 

me in thanking AIDS Saskatoon for the good and important 

work they do in our province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu‟Appelle Valley. 

 

Pharmacy Awareness Week 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this is 

Pharmacy Awareness Week across our country. It is during this 

week that we take the opportunity to recognize the value and 

the importance that pharmacists play in our society. With an 

aging population throughout Canada, along with the 

ever-increasing number of medications, pharmacists offer a 

vital advice and services for all types of health issues. 

 

Our government understands the importance of readily 

accessible prescription drugs for members of our community. 

That‟s why we made a campaign promise in the last election to 

ensure that prescription drugs covered under the provincial drug 

formulary were capped at $15 per prescription for children 

under age 14, as well as for seniors with a net income under 

64,000. Our government kept the promise and provided this $15 

cap in last year‟s budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to note that personally I had the 

pleasure of bringing greetings to a recent grand opening of a 

new Medicine Shoppe pharmacy. And this pharmacy is located 

in my own constituency of Regina Qu‟Appelle Valley, and this 

pharmacy is owned by Mr. Spiro Kangleff. 

 

Mr. Kangleff is an individual who is passionate about providing 

a comfortable and inviting atmosphere to his pharmacy 



2004 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 2009 

customers. Congratulations to Mr. Kangleff and his 

commitment to health care in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

New Facility for Veterans’ Club 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the Moose Jaw ANAVETS [Army, Navy & Air Force 

Veterans in Canada] Local 252 held a grand opening of their 

new facility in January of this year. I was very pleased to 

participate in the ribbon cutting ceremony, along with my 

colleague from Moose Jaw North. In attendance were many 

ANAVETS members, life members and directors of the 

organization, and a number of interested citizens. 

 

The new building is somewhat smaller, but members can expect 

the same level of service in the new headquarters. There is a 

lounge and a bar, as well as various activities that are available. 

 

The organization, which is a veterans‟ club, derives its name 

from those remnants of British and French colonial regiments 

which were left in Canada when their regiments returned home 

following their tours of duty. These members banded together 

to exchange information on service benefits available to them 

and to fraternize. They called themselves the Army Veterans in 

Canada. Since that time, to recognize the inclusion of members 

from both the navy and air force, the official title was changed 

to the Army, Navy & Air Force Veterans in Canada — 

commonly known, the ANAVETS. 

 

In June of this year, the ANAVETS provincial command will 

be hosting their 47th biennial convention in Moose Jaw, where 

they will be welcoming leaders from their organization from 

across the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in thanking the 

ANAVETS for not only the services they provide for veterans 

but for the work they do in our community, and extend to them 

congratulations on the opening of their new location. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Rural Women’s Month in Saskatchewan 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, our 

government has proclaimed March Rural Women‟s Month in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Dedicating this March to rural women is about recognizing and 

celebrating the contributions rural women have made to our 

province. It also raises awareness and appreciation of the 

significant role, past and present, that women have played and 

continue to play in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Rural Women‟s Month will be observed in 

conjunction with events held in March by various women‟s 

groups in communities across Saskatchewan. Many of these 

events are in association with the United Nations International 

Women‟s Day on March 8. 

 

Mr. Speaker, rural women in Saskatchewan have and continue 

to have a significant influence in the development of our health 

care, education, and social services. Rural women serve as 

volunteers in churches, schools and hospital boards, 4-H clubs, 

sports organizations, and agricultural societies, and are leaders 

in many of our small communities. In many cases they are at 

least half of many farm operations across our great province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in addition to their dedication to the land, many 

work in off-farm jobs in addition to raising their families. 

Everyone in Saskatchewan is indebted to these great 

accomplishments of Saskatchewan‟s rural women since these 

early homesteading days. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to take this opportunity to thank all the 

rural women of our province for the contributions they‟ve made 

to their communities, and I would invite all members to join 

with me in thanking rural women for the important role they 

play in shaping the Saskatchewan way of life. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Christmas Dinner for Less Fortunate 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It was my 

honour to act as a server at the eighth annual Christmas dinner 

for Regina‟s less fortunate residents on December 22. I was 

joined by the member from Regina Elphinstone. This event is 

organized by the Regina & District Labour Council along with 

affiliate and non-affiliate unions, the Saskatchewan Provincial 

Building and Construction Trades Council, and community 

partners. This event would not be possible without the 

incredibly generous donation of the Delta Hotel and its staff. 

 

At this year‟s event, more than 1,400 people attended and were 

provided a fantastic meal and warm drink. Christmas is a time 

of year that can be incredibly strained on individuals and 

families that are struggling financially, emotionally, and 

socially. The thankfulness and sincere happiness of guests while 

sitting at the tables to warm up and receive an excellent 

full-course meal was evident. 

 

I would be remiss not to thank organizing Chair for this year‟s 

dinner, Janice Bernier, and the many, many volunteers and 

donors that made this evening possible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this Assembly to join with 

me in thanking all of those who recognized some broader needs 

within our community and supported the eighth annual 

Christmas dinner. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 



March 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2005 

Rosemont. 

 

Property Tax Relief 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — The Sask Party is failing the people of 

Saskatchewan. When they were in opposition and oil was $40 a 

barrel, they complained that the NDP was sitting on a mountain 

of money and insisted that the money existed now to help 

families. And during the last election they made a promise to 

the people of Saskatchewan. They promised to save the average 

homeowner more than $450 a year in education property taxes. 

 

We‟ve recently learned, Mr. Speaker, that Regina property 

owners will be paying at least 8 per cent more in property taxes 

this year — before increases in program costs are taken into 

account. To the minister: when will this government keep its 

promise to save Regina homeowners $450 a year in property 

tax? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

do want to inform the member opposite and the people in the 

province of Saskatchewan that we‟ve kept one very significant 

promise that the NDP didn‟t keep, and that was to deal with 

infrastructure in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this budget alone, in this budget alone, Mr. 

Speaker, we promised during the time of the budget that we 

would spend $117 million on infrastructure. Mr. Speaker, I was 

very proud to announce not more than a few weeks ago that we 

were enhancing that by $142 million. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, $259 million in 

infrastructure to build the schools that the former government, 

the NDP, refused to do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Taxpayers 

in The Battlefords are tired of paying more for property taxes, 

Mr. Speaker. They want to know when this government is 

going to keep the promise that they made when they were in 

opposition — like when the member from Cut Knife-Turtleford 

said back in 2005, the government was doing well but people 

were struggling and that had to change. 

 

To the minister, Mr. Speaker: when will this government keep 

its promise to homeowners in The Battlefords — a $450 a year 

savings in education property tax? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

think it‟s time for people in the province of Saskatchewan to 

understand where those members have been on this particular 

issue. And I want to read a quote from Hansard of September 

22, 1987, and it says this: 

 

And I say, Mr. Speaker, is there any wonder that a tax 

revolt is brewing in this province? People are being taxed 

to death and they‟re saying, we can‟t take any more. 

 

Mr. Speaker that‟s a quote of the former premier of this 

province in 1987. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do also want to say, that there‟s another quote of 

very great significance. And it says this: 

 

Our priority in tax reform for government over the next 

several years must be the matter of funding education. 

 

The status quo is not on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that also was the leader of the NDP at a 2003 

SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] 

convention, Mr. Speaker. We will continue with our rebate 

program and we will ensure that taxpayers understand that we 

are helping them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well homeowners in Moose Jaw are still 

waiting to find out how much they‟re going to be paying for 

property tax this year, but it‟s a safe bet that we‟re going to be 

paying more. And we‟re still waiting for property tax relief that 

the Sask Party kept promising while they were in opposition, 

like when the member from Wood River said in 2005 — I know 

that‟s a little recent for the minister but it‟s the best one we can 

do — that “There‟s been enough study and it‟s time for action.” 

Well over 14 months in government, when will this government 

keep its election promise and save Moose Jaw property tax 

owners $450 a year? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

besides dealing with the tax problem, and it is a problem and we 

understand that, and that‟s why we have a rebate program for 

the short term. And we are going to look at a long-term 

solution. 

 

But I do want to talk about five other initiatives, Mr. Speaker: 

income tax savings, loan income tax credit savings, active 

families benefit . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I ask members to come to order and 

allow the Minister of Education to respond. Minister of 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Seniors income plan increase, Mr. 

Speaker, and the fifth one, employment supplement increase. 

 



2006 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 2009 

Mr. Speaker, for a family of four with a $35,000 income, the 

savings to that family alone, provided by the Saskatchewan 

Party government in a short 14 months, is $2,648, Mr. Speaker 

— way more than that government ever did over its 16 years, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We‟re told that 

Saskatoon property tax payers will pay significantly more in 

property taxes before increases in program costs are taken into 

account. It‟s time for the Saskatchewan Party to live up to its 

rhetoric in opposition, like when they promised to reduce 

property taxes in both the 2003, 2007 provincial election 

campaigns. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we appreciate the support of the NDP rebate 

program, but when will the Saskatchewan Party keep its 

election promise to save homeowners in Saskatchewan and in 

Saskatoon $450 a year in property taxes? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, we made, as a political 

party entering an election campaign, we made a promise. We 

made a promise that we would implement a four-year rebate 

structure and while that rebate program was in place, we were 

going to look at a permanent structure within the mandate of 

this current government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have kept that promise. We have indicated that 

the rebate program, which was at 12 per cent and was enhanced 

to 15 per cent, and now will be moving forward to 17 per cent 

and 20 per cent over the four term. 

 

Mr. Speaker, unlike the NDP who promised agricultural 

owners, landowners in rural Saskatchewan, nothing, Mr. 

Speaker — nothing — we have indeed kept our promise. In fact 

we have increased the percentage from 47 to 56. We will be 

looking at a 66 per cent rebate, Mr. Speaker. And in the final 

year, if we‟re not at a permanent structure, that rebate, Mr. 

Speaker, will be 80 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — . . . on both sides of this Assembly 

should be rightfully standing on this issue. As you can see, this 

is an issue right across our province. Saskatchewan people are 

tired of paying more for property taxes, particularly at a time 

when other costs are rising as well — thanks to this 

government. 

 

People and families want a permanent solution and permanent 

property tax relief, instead of paying more year after year. And 

like the member from Rosetown-Elrose said last summer, I 

quote: “„(Education property tax) has been studied and studied 

and studied . . . It‟s a question of how we set priorities and get 

things done.‟” 

 

To the minister: when will the Sask Party set some priorities 

and get things done? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the audited financial 

statement for this fiscal year will show that by March 31, 2009 

the Saskatchewan Party government will have returned $156 

million to the people of Saskatchewan in the way of a rebate. 

Mr. Speaker, is that enough? No. And we have indicated to the 

people of Saskatchewan that we‟re going to change those 

percentages. And, Mr. Speaker, that number will rise to $200 

million if indeed the rebate program is going to be the solution 

for the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to read a quote from the Saskatoon 

StarPhoenix. It‟s dated April 3, 2007, and it says this, and I 

quote: 

 

It is now four years since Premier Lorne Calvert told rural 

municipal leaders that when it comes to stratospheric 

levels of property tax in Saskatchewan, “the status quo is 

not on.” As his term draws to a close, there is still no 

long-term plan aimed at reducing the education portion of 

property tax. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that was a quote in the year 2007, and I can assure 

the members opposite that we will be moving forward with a 

plan that is sustainable as well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Energy Costs 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m pleased to hear the Deputy 

Premier speaking of rebates. Mr. Speaker, in this economic 

boom Saskatchewan people are asking what they and their 

families can expect from their government. So far people are 

paying more for heat, more for power, more for property taxes 

— more for everything. 

 

Just in time for the coldest months of the winter, the Sask Party 

hiked natural gas prices by 20 per cent, and then they threw in 

an extra $2 a month for good measure. 

 

Will the government today commit to rebate SaskEnergy 

customers for the amount that they were overcharged last 

winter? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 



March 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2007 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our 

commitment to Saskatchewan people is to provide them the 

service and the commodity at the lowest possible cost, and 

that‟s indeed what we have done, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I remind members opposite that SaskEnergy has . . . 

SaskEnergy, for example, has provided gas at the lowest cost in 

the country for 7 of the last 10 years, including, including the 

entire 2008 — if the members opposite will just listen closely, 

they‟ll gain a valuable fact here — the entire 2008 time period, 

Mr. Speaker. I would remind the members opposite that it‟s the 

same policy that was under the NDP. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Sask Party 

government is finally requesting a rate reduction for April 1 

when the winter is basically over — too little, too late, Mr. 

Speaker. Families need to stop paying more now, not when the 

snow melts. The Sask Party government should provide relief 

from the gouging — starting today, not a month from now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: will he implement the SaskEnergy 

rate reduction today instead of April 1? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it didn‟t take 

long. We heard from the wannabe leader of the NDP that he 

was soon going to order or direct his members to start asking 

these questions in the legislature. And I quote: 

 

“I am confident that my members, NDP members, will 

hold the Wall government accountable,” Lingenfelter, 

[said] getting a little ahead of himself, on the SaskEnergy 

pricing issue. 

 

And we all know the drive-by flurry that was created by that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, SaskEnergy rates are the lowest in the country, 

they have been the lowest in the country. In 2008, Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatchewan residents paid an average of $7.20 a gigajoule — 

lower than Alberta, lower than Manitoba, the lowest in the 

country, bar none, Mr. Speaker. That‟s what we‟ll continue to 

do, provide the lowest possible cost utilities, Mr. Speaker. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party is on the verge 

of making a terrible mistake and if they proceed, Saskatchewan 

consumers are going to pay a lot more. 

Today‟s natural gas costs are plummeting. Coal costs are 

dropping worldwide. SaskPower made $138 million profit in 

2007, the last year they filed a report for. The Sask Party 

government has agreed, in the face of all this, to have 

SaskPower rates go up by 13 per cent when there‟s clearly just 

no justification for any rate increase. The government should be 

asking SaskPower to implement a rate decrease. 

 

My question to the minister responsible is: will he instruct 

SaskPower to ask for a rate decrease? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I don‟t have to take 

instruction from that member or any member opposite on the 

file of SaskPower, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What did they do when they were in charge? They had one 

plan, one $4.2 billion plan for a new coal facility. What did they 

do? They dropped that like a hot potato, ran the other way. Did 

they have a plan B? None whatsoever. Did they have an 

infrastructure plan for SaskPower going forward? None, Mr. 

Speaker. Did they have any plans at all to address a growing 

economy? They were planning for failure, Mr. Speaker. That‟s 

what members on the opposite did. 

 

That‟s not what members here will do. We will plan for a 

growing economy. We will provide safe and reliable power for 

Saskatchewan families, Saskatchewan businesses. And that will 

drive our economy, whether the members opposite like it or not. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party is failing the 

people of Saskatchewan, and they completely miss the point 

when it comes to our Crown corporations. 

 

As New Democrats, we believe that the Crowns exist to provide 

Saskatchewan families with a quality service at an affordable 

cost. But the Sask Party seems to have a completely different 

philosophy, one that the Minister of Parks explained back in 

December when she increased provincial park fees. 

 

To the minister: does the Sask Party believe that Saskatchewan 

families just don‟t appreciate home heat and electricity enough? 

Is that why we‟re paying so much more under a Sask Party 

government? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m trying, I‟m 

trying really hard to find the humour in that question, but I just 

can‟t, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I‟ll reiterate again. What this 

government is committed to . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Minister of Crown 



2008 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 2009 

Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟d be 

happy to talk about the policy regarding Crown Corporations 

and pricing going forward and over the past number of months 

since we‟ve been in government. 

 

We‟ve provided the lowest possible cost for Saskatchewan 

residents. We‟ve provided . . . In 2008 SaskEnergy rates were 

the lowest in the country. And I‟d ask members opposite to 

compare. If they know somebody, for example that was living 

in Calgary back in June or July of last year, ask them how much 

a gigajoule they were paying at that time, when Saskatchewan 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The minister may finish his 

response. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — I just throw that out as an example. 

There are many other examples that we can use across the 

country, but the bottom line is that Saskatchewan residents paid 

the lowest cost, will continue to pay the lowest cost. 

 

At the same time we will be addressing the infrastructure needs, 

not only of schools and highways, but of the Crown 

Corporations because that is our commitment, to ensure that the 

Crown Corporations are properly funded — something 

members opposite failed miserably to do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Tuition Fees 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party is failing the 

people of Saskatchewan. A few months ago the Sask Party 

Minister of Advanced Education axed the fully funded tuition 

freeze and announced he would be hiking tuition through 

something called a tuition management system. But all we 

know so far about this new system is that students will be 

paying more. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it‟s that time of year when students and their 

families are starting to make their plans for next fall. To the 

minister responsible for the tuition management system: how 

much more will he force students to pay? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, thanks very much for the 

opportunity to provide an update. I guess I better contextualize 

this. Here are a couple of quotes: “Anywhere that we‟ve seen 

tuition freezes . . . [put] in across the country, they just haven‟t 

worked.” That‟s from Andrew Thomson. He considered 

running for you guys again but changed his mind. 

 

“The government doesn‟t favour a tuition freeze . . . in other 

provinces it has been shown to be non-sustainable.” Graham 

Addley says that. “Reducing tuition does nothing to narrow the 

yawning gap in academic performance between low-income 

high school students and their high-income counterparts.” A 

gentleman by the name of Sean Junor said that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we can say is all the members opposite need 

to do is glance their eyes just slightly one province to the east 

and see what‟s happening in NDP Manitoba, as the NDP there 

are rolling off a tuition freeze, Mr. Speaker. We‟re working on 

behalf of the students and post-secondary stakeholders to ensure 

that affordable tuition remains the order of the day. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — The minister can go on all he likes, but he can‟t 

escape the simple fact that students are being forced to pay 

more for their education because of the Sask Party government. 

The Sask Party chose to end the funded tuition freeze. They 

decided that students and their families should pay more tuition 

and go further into debt. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s often said that a good education is the best 

defence against an uncertain future. But in the midst of global 

economic uncertainty, the Sask Party has chosen to make a 

good education less affordable and less accessible. To the 

minister: why is he forcing students and their families to pay 

more for tuition in these uncertain times? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, we can focus on the 

graduate retention program that provides the most aggressive 

youth retention program in the country. It‟s been recognized in 

other provinces. People have called and said, what is it that 

you‟re actually doing here, Mr. Speaker. They‟re wondering 

what Saskatchewan‟s doing, making sure that those attending 

— from journeypersons all the way through to the completion 

of their undergraduate degrees — are benefiting from the most 

aggressive youth retention program. 

 

What I can say to the virtual critic, what I can say is, I didn‟t 

see him. I didn‟t see him at the University of Saskatchewan 

when we announced within 48 hours of receiving the report — I 

didn‟t see him there either — of new student housing, Mr. 

Speaker. I didn‟t see him. What I can say, Mr. Speaker — the 

dialogue continues. What we‟re working towards, Mr. Speaker, 

is sustainable and affordable tuition right here in the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. That‟s the priority and that‟s what 

we‟re staying focused on. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this is what it comes down to: 

students are facing increased expenses across the board now 



March 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2009 

that that minister and the Sask Party government want them to 

pay more for tuition. 

 

To the minister: does he have the same philosophy as the 

Minister of Parks? Does he simply believe that students were 

not appreciating their education enough? Is that why students 

and their families will be paying more for tuition this fall? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — You know, Mr. Speaker, across the 

province we‟ve had a few events lately, and again I haven‟t 

seen the virtual critic. What we can say is the students and their 

families are benefiting from record investments in advanced 

education. We can see that in Prince Albert with the recent 

announcement. We can see it in Swift Current. We can see it 

right here in Regina. We can see it in Saskatoon. We can see it 

across the province, Mr. Speaker: $26.4 million out of a $500 

million booster shot put into advanced education to reinforce 

the students, their families, and other stakeholders within 

advanced education remain a priority — a key priority — for 

this government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Provincial Park Fees 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, there seems to be no end of added 

burden that the government wants to place on Saskatchewan 

families — more for property tax, more for home heat and 

electricity, more for putting their kids through the 

post-secondary education, and also now more for people to go 

and camp in their provincial parks. 

 

People are trying to make their decisions now about what 

they‟re going to do about their summer vacation. The Minister 

of Parks said back in December that she‟s increasing the fees 

because campers just didn‟t appreciate the parks enough. The 

Premier described this as reasonable, which kind of shows us 

where he is as it relates to the cost on families here in 

Saskatchewan. To the minister: why is she making families pay 

more to take a holiday in our provincial parks? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you for the question. Camping 

reservations in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 

have doubled from 2008 to 2009, and, Mr. Speaker, they have 

quadrupled for 2007 to 2009, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan has 

the second lowest nightly camping fees in Canada, Mr. Speaker, 

and of course the members opposite are aware of the fact that 

every penny and more collected in fees is reinvested back into 

the parks. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government‟s commitment to the parks in 

Saskatchewan is unparalleled: $20 million over four years, Mr. 

Speaker, to improve the parks. Under the members opposite, 

when they were in government, they did almost nothing for the 

provincial parks in this province. Mr. Speaker, our record of 

commitment in the provincial parks in the province is 

unparalleled and stated clearly. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, not only is the Sask Party adding 

cost to people who want to use our provincial parks, they‟re 

being hypocrites when they do this because basically what they 

did last year was remove the campfire fees that were part of the 

system, save $375,000 and made a big hullabaloo about that 

and then, this year, they increase the fees right across the board 

which raises 1.25 million a year. So they‟ve raised three times 

the revenue than what they got rid of last year. 

 

How is this smaller sum worth taking the fees away around the 

campfires and making sure that people will stay away because 

of those fees when she says that if they increase the fees, the 

people will appreciate what‟s going on. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Premier has also indicated that he thinks 

that these fees are reasonable and that they shouldn‟t be a real 

concern for Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I call the House to order 

and ask the member to state his question. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, why is the Premier and all of the 

members of his government, why are they so oblivious to the 

increasing cost to families right across the province that they 

raise the fees in all of these important areas that we‟ve 

discussed today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to quote from the 

January 8 StarPhoenix. This is from president John Froese of 

Saskatchewan Regional Parks Association, and we agree with 

his point of view on this: “I would much rather the government 

uses my tax dollars on things such as health care, education, 

infrastructure, and affordable living for the underprivileged 

workers than to heavily subsidize campers at provincial parks.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, that‟s exactly what we‟ve done with the rate 

increases, Mr. Speaker, increasing regional parks from $75,000 

a year to $600,000 a year. Mr. Speaker, our investment in the 

provincial parks is unparalleled. And we again — I will say it 

again — we stand by it and we will see that it happens, Mr. 

Speaker. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



2010 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 2009 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Saskatchewan Scholarship of Honour 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I‟m pleased to announce today the creation of the 

Saskatchewan Scholarship of Honour. This is a scholarship that 

will show Saskatchewan‟s utmost admiration and respect for 

the courageous sacrifices of the men and women who serve in 

the Canadian Forces. 

 

The scholarship, Mr. Speaker, has been created for 

Saskatchewan soldiers returning from active duty since 

September 2001, and for the spouses and the children of 

soldiers who have been severely injured or killed in active duty 

since September 2001. 

 

The scholarships are valued at $5,000. They are available to all 

eligible candidates enrolled in a recognized Canadian 

post-secondary institution. Mr. Speaker, they don‟t have to be 

enrolled at a post-secondary institution in the province but 

anywhere in Canada. 

 

The Scholarship of Honour, Mr. Speaker, will provide valuable 

support to the brave women and men who unselfishly give of 

themselves to build a better world and a stronger future for all 

Canadians. As well it will assist the immediate family members 

of those who are severely injured or who have made the 

ultimate sacrifice in order to preserve our freedom. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is pleased to bestow this 

scholarship on Saskatchewan‟s returning soldiers as well as 

their spouses and their children — their sons and their 

daughters — for those who have lost a parent who have made 

the ultimate sacrifice. 

 

The scholarship is one way that we can recognize Saskatchewan 

soldiers who stand up for all of our freedoms with courage and 

with dedication. Mr. Speaker, we thank them for our peace and 

for our prosperity. We thank them for our security. We thank 

them for their selflessness and their willing to give the utmost 

sacrifice. 

 

Mr. Speaker, thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty‟s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I 

extend my thanks to the Premier for providing us an advance 

copy of his statement today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we in the opposition today welcome the 

introduction of the Saskatchewan scholarship program, Mr. 

Speaker, as we welcomed the announcement that was made in 

the Throne Speech. And today we welcome the Premier‟s 

answer to that commitment and to seeing it in place. 

 

This scholarship, Mr. Speaker, as the Premier has indicated, 

will be for members of the Canadian Armed Forces from 

Saskatchewan who return from active duty, and in some cases 

for their spouses and their families. It is, Mr. Speaker, a very 

tangible gesture of appreciation that this legislature and the 

people of Saskatchewan can make to those who serve us 

through the Canadian Armed Forces. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are some details of the scholarship plan that 

are yet to emerge surrounding eligibility. And it‟s my hope that 

the criteria will be as broad as possible — for instance, in the 

definition of active duty. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, let me say while today we recognize the 

contribution and sacrifice of those who serve us in uniform 

through the Canadian Armed Forces, and we also would want to 

recognize those who serve us through uniform in other capacity. 

And the events of this very week in Saskatoon remind us of 

those who serve in the policing services and the protective 

services who wear uniform and who are also sometimes called 

upon to provide the ultimate sacrifice. 

 

And if I may say, Mr. Speaker, and on occasion there are those 

who don‟t wear a uniform except perhaps for a hard hat, and 

once a year we recognize the sacrifice that some who are 

injured and killed on the job. And so, Mr. Speaker, while we 

very much welcome this gesture of appreciation, this very 

tangible and meaningful gesture of appreciation to those who 

have served in the Canadian Armed Forces, we would also want 

to recall and remember all those who serve us in uniform and 

out. 

 

And as the opposition, we will be very supportive of this 

scholarship program; and as an opposition, we will continue, 

Mr. Speaker, to call upon this government for more universal 

access to post-secondary education for all. Thank you very 

much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

TABLING OF SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before 

orders of the day, it is my pleasure to submit supplementary 

estimates accompanied by a message from His Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I would ask members to rise for the 

message from the Lieutenant Governor. The message is as 

follows: 

 

The Lieutenant Governor transmits supplementary 

estimates of certain sums required for the service of the 

province for the 12 months ending March 31, 2009, and 

recommends the same to the Legislative Assembly. 

[Signed by] His Honour Gordon L. Barnhart, Lieutenant 

Governor, province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Please be seated. I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By leave of 

the Assembly, I would like to move a motion permitting 



March 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2011 

absence of a member from the House. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has asked for 

leave to move a motion regarding a member‟s absence. Is the 

House agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Leave of Absence 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, by 

leave of the Assembly: 

 

That leave of absence be granted to the member for Last 

Mountain-Touchwood for Monday, March 2, to Friday, 

March 13, 2009, to attend the 58th Seminar on 

Parliamentary Practice and Procedures in Westminster on 

behalf of this Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved, 

by leave of the Assembly: 

 

That leave of the Assembly be granted to the member for 

Last Mountain-Touchwood for Monday, March 2, ‟09, to 

Friday, March 13, ‟09, to attend the 58th Seminar on 

Parliamentary Practice and Procedures in Westminster on 

behalf of this Assembly. 

 

Is the Assembly agreed to the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 70 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 70 — The 

Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2008 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a 

pleasure to rise to speak to this Bill in respect to restitution 

orders, The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act. On 

the surface this Bill appears to be one that will provide a benefit 

to the people of Saskatchewan. The amendment addresses the 

enforcement mechanism provisions of the existing Act and 

provides clear authority for the Ministry of Justice and the 

Attorney General to enforce restitution orders on behalf of 

victims. 

 

These new provisions respecting enforcement of restitution 

orders will apply to orders the judges may make at the time of 

sentencing and include sentencing of people convicted of 

provincial offences and people convicted of criminal offences 

under the Criminal Code. 

 

Mr. Speaker, collecting on a restitution order can be a long and 

complex process and of course the cliché that one cannot get 

blood from a stone often unfortunately applies. But these 

changes will, it appears, assist victims in collecting on 

restitution orders. By taking steps to enforce compliance with 

the court orders that require offenders to pay their debts to 

victims, these changes will result in a greater accountability on 

the part of offenders. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there‟s a — well a relatively new model; it‟s not 

that new — model of the criminal justice system in respect to 

restorative justice, Mr. Speaker. Restorative justice involves a 

great deal more, Mr. Speaker, than merely restitution. And 

restitution ordered by the court isn‟t necessarily the type of 

restitution that is foreseen by the proponents of restorative 

justice, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But restitution — trying to make the victim as whole as the 

victim can be made under the circumstances, Mr. Speaker — is 

under that model of restorative justice not only a benefit to the 

victim, which it clearly is, Mr. Speaker, not only of benefit to 

the wider community, Mr. Speaker, but is seen as a benefit to 

the offender. An opportunity to the offender, to the extent that 

it‟s possible, restore the victim to the place that they were, and 

thereby pay a debt that they owe to society and pay to society 

ordinarily and traditionally in our criminal justice system, but a 

debt that they owe to the specific victim as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the value of doing that, the value of doing that of course 

goes first to the victim, but secondly to the offender — the 

offender‟s opportunity to rejoin the community against which 

he has offended. And of course anything that benefits an 

offender, particularly a first-time or a young offender, benefits 

society as a whole. Restoring these people to the community, 

giving them an opportunity to make restitution, of course, is 

good for their future and what‟s good for their future is of 

course good for the future of a community that has fewer 

victims for that change. 

 

As I said, Mr. Speaker, this doesn‟t really speak to the model of 

restorative justice. I know that model was strongly felt within 

the Ministry of Justice and the Attorney General when I was 

minister. I hope that that model is still there, Mr. Speaker. I 

hope that those voices are still being heard. But by taking these 

steps which, as I say, Mr. Speaker, don‟t do much in respect to 

the model, but are good steps, they‟re taking these steps to 

enforce compliance of court orders that required offenders to 

pay their debts to the victims. 

 

These changes will result in greater accountability on the part of 

offenders, and these are good measures, Mr. Speaker. This is 

not to give a carte blanche to the Bill. I think it requires some 

study. But the government seems to be moving in the right 



2012 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 2009 

direction and the opposition is willing to see it go to committee. 

And with that, Mr. Speaker, I will conclude my remarks and our 

remarks in the Chamber. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is Bill No. 

70, The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2008. Is 

it the pleasure of the of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. To which committee shall 

this Bill be sent? 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — Which committee shall this Bill be referred 

to? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — This Bill, Bill No. 70, The Summary 

Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2008 be referred to the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Bill No. 47 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Boyd that Bill No. 47 — The Pipelines 

Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And just a 

signal to the Assembly and the minister opposite: I will be very 

brief in my remarks on the Bill. The Bill before us is indeed Bill 

No. 47, The Pipelines Amendment Act, 2008, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This legislation was introduced in the fall session, Mr. Speaker. 

We had the opportunity to listen to the minister‟s remarks at 

second reading and, Mr. Speaker, had the opportunity to do a 

brief response in the Chamber, Mr. Speaker. We took the 

opportunity to consult widely on the legislation, Mr. Speaker. I 

say widely — not a lot of stakeholders affected directly by the 

legislation, Mr. Speaker. But for the most part, the response we 

got back was this legislation has value, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we are now prepared to see the legislation discussed in 

committee where we have an opportunity to ask a couple of 

questions, Mr. Speaker. So at this time, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t 

have any further concrete or specific remarks on Bill No. 47. 

We would like to see it move to committee. And so at this 

point, Mr. Speaker . . . Strange sounds in the Chamber, Mr. 

Speaker. I don‟t think I can claim there‟s a stranger in the 

House, can I? No. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would conclude my remarks and ask the 

government if they‟re prepared to move the Bill to committee at 

this time. 

 

The Speaker: — If I could call members to attention, we‟ll 

have someone check on what the emergency sound is that we‟re 

hearing at this time. 

 

While we‟re waiting to hear back, the motion before the 

Assembly is the motion regarding Bill No. 47, The Pipelines 

Amendment Act, 2008 be now read the second time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the 

Standing Committee on the Economy. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on the Economy. 

 

Bill No. 57 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff that Bill No. 57 — The 

Land Titles Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a second time.] 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again, it‟s a 

pleasure to rise this afternoon, this time to address Bill 57, The 

Land Titles Amendment Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is one of those occasions where one can‟t help 

but comment on how the members opposite, now in 

government, have changed their tune. The land titles in 

Saskatchewan always operated under what is called the Torrens 

system, which I am not going to wax eloquently or wax on 

about at all. The system served the province very well and 

served the West of Canada very well and indeed was a great 

improvement upon its predecessor, a system of deeds. 

 

But the paper system that was in place for much of this 

province‟s history grew ponderous and often difficult to use. 

And as pieces of land changed ownership, but also different 

interests applied to these pieces of land, it became more 

ponderous and more difficult to use and a question would arise 

as to why one would continue to use a paper-based system 

when the digital equivalent was already in place in so many 

different areas. 

 

And so the Information Services Corporation was created and, 

Mr. Speaker, it deals now with far more than land titles. It deals 

with personal property as well and it has a role now in vital 

statistics, and there is nothing like a convert, Mr. Speaker. 

When the Saskatchewan Party has learned that an initiative of 

the previous NDP government has worked, although it takes 

them a while to learn that, Mr. Speaker, they are willing to 

adopt it, and in this case they have and they have, I think, with 

enthusiasm, Mr. Speaker. 

 



March 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2013 

The members opposite never used to miss an opportunity to 

criticize ISC [Information Services Corporation of 

Saskatchewan]. Now they clearly recognize its value and these 

amendments, I think, have to recognize that, at least implicitly. 

Members opposite don‟t want to make that explicit admission 

now. 

 

The legislation is intended to address the issue of fraud 

attendant to land sales. And while that is very rare, Mr. Speaker, 

and even more rare that that cannot be addressed under the 

current system, on the occasion . . . which is not entirely 

speculative, Mr. Speaker. It may approach that, but on the 

occasion when it can occur, it creates enormous difficulties. 

This particular legislation appears to give the registrar the 

power to correct titles, which used to be reserved pretty well for 

the courts, and that‟s to the good. 

 

This legislation also relates to the registry of grants and will 

provide information setting out what the original grant was 

from the Crown. It does raise the continued question of how we 

move forward in the province as we deal with unpatented or 

ungranted land in all parts, but especially in northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The legislation allows for the compensation for appropriate 

extra costs if they relate to the problem of title, including fraud. 

We do not believe, having looked at the legislation, that it is a 

gift to title insurance companies who would be getting fully 

compensated by the Government of Saskatchewan — which the 

victims of the fraud would have been compensated by the 

Government of Saskatchewan in any case — but we want to 

keep an eye and make sure that it actually adds something to 

people‟s protection, Mr. Speaker, and not just redirect the 

payment. 

 

Another positive point of the legislation is that there are quite a 

number of places where the present rules are located in 

regulations — in other words, that are easy to change by the 

government. Easy to change, I think, without a lot of 

government members noticing, Mr. Speaker, if the first 14 

months of this government is any indication. And it‟s been 

recognized by officials that they should actually be in the 

legislation so that if the government members aren‟t paying 

attention to what other government members are doing, at least 

the opposition has the chance of addressing those matters when 

they come before the legislature, when they are actually in the 

Act and not in regulations. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, on the face of it, all improvements, with the 

caveats that I mentioned. In all likelihood a Bill that we‟ll be 

able to support. Again some questions, and it may give rise to 

some issues in committee, but that said, we‟d be happy to see it 

go there, Mr. Speaker. And that‟s the conclusion of my 

remarks. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is Bill No. 

57, The Land Titles Amendment Act, 2008. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Referred to 

the Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Committee on 

Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

Bill No. 65 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 65 — The 

Seizure of Criminal Property Act, 2008 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m 

extremely pleased this afternoon to stand and enter into debate 

on this particular piece of legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 65 is a Bill about the seizure of criminal 

property. Mr. Speaker, this Bill looks just about identically to a 

Bill that was introduced in 2005 by the then New Democratic 

Party government, Mr. Speaker, that had the ability to do the 

exact same thing. Mr. Speaker, so of course I guess we are in a 

position where we will support this Bill because it in essence 

does exactly what was being done previously, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill is an attempt to make the new 

government look like they are tough on crime and they are 

dealing with the issues that the people of Saskatchewan care 

about. But, Mr. Speaker, and we agree they should be dealing 

with seizing property, Mr. Speaker, but at the same time, Mr. 

Speaker, this Bill is just about identical to a previous Bill. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we support the Bill and we supported it in 

2005. Mr. Speaker, in 2005 this was a new approach, trying to 

give the police new tools, tools in which they could hold those 

who are involved in criminal activity in our province to a higher 

standard so they could be held more accountable, and so that 

the profits made partaking in criminal activity could in fact be 

seized. And, Mr. Speaker, I think that‟s something that we 

would all agree with. I think all members of this Assembly, 

both then in 2005 and today, would agree. Mr. Speaker, it was 

good legislation in 2005; it‟s good legislation today. 

 

But it‟s only one element in a broader strategy that needs to be 

looked at in order to curb crime in our communities, Mr. 

Speaker, and the previous government put forward many, many 

initiatives to try to curb crime in our communities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And at the time members opposite talked about our auto theft 

strategy that was put forward and the effect we‟ve had on our 

communities and those who have, Mr. Speaker, been dealt with 

as a result of that strategy. It has resulted in our communities 

being safer. It has resulted in those who would steal cars being 

held more accountable, Mr. Speaker, and it has resulted in an 



2014 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 2009 

overall reduction in the theft of vehicles in the city of Regina 

and the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this legislation changes the emphasis. In the 

previous legislation, the police had the authority to seize the 

property. In this particular case, the emphasis has now been 

moved to the Crown, Mr. Speaker. But, Mr. Speaker, the Crown 

also had the authority in the previous Act and this Act in fact 

leaves the authority with the Crown, but takes it away from the 

chiefs of police and police departments. 

 

There is no reason that the previous Act could not have been 

amended if that‟s what the government wanted to do, rather 

than repeal that Act and bring forward a new Act, Mr. Speaker, 

that does virtually the same thing, except this government 

wanted to take credit for something that the previous 

government actually put in place, Mr. Speaker. So this is 

another example of the Sask Party taking credit for things that 

other people have done, taking credit for the work of others and 

the accomplishments of others, Mr. Speaker. We see that in the 

provincial economy, we see it on resource revenues, Mr. 

Speaker, and we see it regularly from this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Brad Wall and the Sask Party . . . Excuse me, Mr. 

Speaker. The Premier and the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. 

Speaker, want to take credit for this particular piece of 

legislation, Mr. Speaker. It is a positive piece of legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, but it‟s one that could have been amended from its 

previous form without the introduction of a new Bill and, Mr. 

Speaker, we believe that that should have been done. 

 

Why are they repealing a good piece of legislation and 

reintroducing virtually the same Bill, Mr. Speaker? They‟re 

doing that because they want to take credit for something that‟s 

been previously done. They want to create an illusion that 

they‟re going to be tough on crime and that they are tougher on 

crime than the previous government, Mr. Speaker, but that‟s 

simply not true. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is what we‟ve learned to expect from the new 

government — to repeal legislation and put virtually identical 

legislation in place in order to take credit for initiatives. But, 

Mr. Speaker, they don‟t fool the people of Saskatchewan. They 

certainly aren‟t fooling members of this legislature. And, Mr. 

Speaker, this piece of legislation that we have before us today 

does the same thing the previous piece of legislation did so, Mr. 

Speaker, how can we not support what we did? So at the end of 

this, Mr. Speaker, at the end of the day we will have to support 

this legislation because of course it‟s just building on what 

we‟ve already done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members of the Saskatchewan Party may be 

confused about the fact that we have gang problems in our 

provincial jails. They may be confused about the fact that we 

have gang problems on the streets of our cities in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, but we‟re not on this side. We 

knew that. That‟s why we introduced this legislation in 2005. 

That‟s why today we see strategies to help reduce crime on our 

streets, Mr. Speaker. It‟s why we had put in place an auto theft 

strategy. It‟s why we put in a strategy to deal with break and 

enters, Mr. Speaker. It‟s because we wanted to have an impact 

on the criminal elements in our communities, Mr. Speaker, and 

we wanted to decrease, Mr. Speaker, those types of violations in 

our communities, Mr. Speaker. And they have worked. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this particular piece of the legislation moves 

the onus from the police departments and puts in on the Crown, 

Mr. Speaker. We don‟t particularly have a problem with that, 

but had they wanted to simply do this in a more effective and 

faster way, Mr. Speaker, they simply would have amended the 

legislation that was in place with a simple amendment, and we 

could have had this passed many, many days ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the main difference between the Bill in 2005 and 

this one is the Crown has the authority to seize the property — 

not the chiefs of police, not the police departments. Is the Sask 

Party saying that they don‟t have faith in our chiefs of police 

and our senior police officers in this province, Mr. Speaker? I 

hope not. I hope they in fact have looked at this and are 

believing that this strengthens the Bill in some way. 

 

[14:45] 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the Crown had the authority in the 2005 Bill, 

as they do in this Bill, Mr. Speaker, so why was the need to 

introduce this Bill, Mr. Speaker, to simply take away authority 

from one group and not adding to any particular group, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have faith on this side in both our police 

departments across the province and, Mr. Speaker, with our 

Crown prosecutors and the Crown. Mr. Speaker, we all want to 

have a province where we work together to try to reduce crime, 

on crime reduction strategies, and we will continue to support 

legislation that‟s brought forward that‟s going to help achieve 

those objectives, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a piece of legislation that members opposite 

obviously think is important enough to repeal and reintroduce in 

virtually the same form, Mr. Speaker. We do agree that the 

legislation is valuable, Mr. Speaker, and will help to achieve a 

goal of holding those who are involved in criminal activity in 

our province more accountable and give the opportunity to seize 

the assets from those who are involved in criminal activity and 

any assets in particular, Mr. Speaker, that are acquired as a 

result of that criminal activity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a Bill that we‟re going to continue to 

consult with others about prior to moving it to committee. So at 

this time, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Dewdney has 

moved adjournment of debate. Is the Assembly agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I just need to remind the member that 

the member has returned it once and is unable to adjourn it the 

second time. We‟ll need another member to adjourn the motion. 

 

I recognize the member from Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We 

would like to adjourn the debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana has 



March 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2015 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 65. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. 

 

Bill No. 73 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Norris that Bill No. 73 — The 

University of Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 2008 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m 

really quite pleased to be able to enter into debate on the 

amendments that the government is proposing to The University 

of Saskatchewan Act, 1995. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟ve had the opportunity to review the proposed 

amendments and they are few in number. And I think for the 

most part, two of the amendments are amendments that 

certainly make sense. The notion of deleting the visitor — 

which does seem to be an archaic way of approaching conflict 

at the University of Saskatchewan — and also the notion of 

extending the government appointments to the board of 

governors from two years to three years . . . or two terms to 

three terms does make some sense. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟ve had an opportunity to speak to a number of 

people who are members of the convocation. And to be a 

member of the convocation, it means that you are a graduate 

from the University of Saskatchewan. And once you‟re a 

member of convocation, you have the opportunity to participate 

in the election of our chancellor at the University of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what the university has asked the government to 

do is to change the process by which the chancellor is chosen. 

At present, all members of convocation — that means all people 

who‟ve graduated from the University of Saskatchewan — have 

an opportunity to vote on who they would like to see as 

chancellor of the university. And the chancellor is always a 

graduate and member of convocation as well. 

 

What the university is proposing to do is to change that process 

so that those of us who are members of convocation, but do not 

sit on the board of governors, who are not members of the 

senate, we will no longer have the opportunity to help 

determine who the chancellor of the university will be. And this 

causes consternation for a number of members of convocation 

who have . . . one of their things that they‟ve been able to do as 

a member of convocation is to choose who our chancellor shall 

be. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I remember as a young student who 

convocated, John Diefenbaker was our chancellor, the former 

prime minister of Canada, Member of Parliament representing 

our province. And when I convocated, I was able to have my 

hand shaken by John Diefenbaker. And that is a memory that I 

will have for some time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members of convocation, all of those people 

who are graduates of the University of Saskatchewan, had an 

opportunity to choose who our chancellor would be. And in this 

case the members of convocation chose the Rt. Hon. John 

Diefenbaker. 

 

Over the years, Mr. Speaker, we‟ve had the opportunity to vote 

for former Lieutenant Governor Sylvia Fedoruk. And I 

remember as a member of convocation, I got to vote for Ms. 

Fedoruk, who I think is an outstanding member of convocation, 

and obviously other members of convocation thought she was 

because she was elected. 

 

Last time, Mr. Speaker, we went through a process and we 

elected Dr. Vera Pezer who is an outstanding academic, taught 

at our university, but also is a world champion curler, Mr. 

Speaker. As a member of convocation I got to participate in 

Vera Pezer‟s election. 

 

With the amendments that the government is putting forward, I 

will no longer have that opportunity. The only people that will 

be able to choose who the chancellor will be, will be members 

of the board of governors and the senate. And I think that that is 

very sad. And I understand the reasons why the university is 

proposing this. They‟re proposing this because they indicate 

that it costs a lot of money for members of the convocation to 

participate, and they want to implement a different procedure. 

 

The procedure now will be two members of the board of 

governors, three members of the senate; they will sit down and 

determine who they‟re going to recommend as chancellor to the 

senate. Well, Mr. Speaker, I have a problem with that. I think 

that as the world becomes more complicated and more 

complex, I think that we as legislators need to assure ourselves 

that we give people more opportunities to participate in their 

institutions, and the University of Saskatchewan is an institution 

that people need to participate in. 

 

And if you look at what‟s been happening at the university, 

extension services are no longer there, and that‟s also referred 

to. Extension was the way for people to participate in the 

university. In tough times the university got rid of extension 

services. The university is now recommending — I suppose in 

tougher times, in order to reduce costs — that there is a less 

expensive way for a chancellor to be chosen. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I beg to differ. I think that in tougher times 

we need to figure out how people can participate. The last time 

I participated in the election of the chancellor, I did so over the 

Internet. I think with email nowadays that there are 

cost-effective ways for members of convocation to participate 

in this type of an election. And so I would say, Mr. Speaker, 

that this amendment, while it‟s being requested by the 

university, it‟s not something that the government of the day 

needs to agree to. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that the university and the government of 

the day needs to do everything that they can to ensure that those 

of us who have graduated and convocated from the University 

of Saskatchewan continue to participate in this fine, fine 

institution. Members of convocation for decades have 



2016 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 2009 

determined who the chancellor should be. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

would submit to the university and to members in this House 

and to government members that members of the convocation 

should continue to determine who the chancellor should be — 

not a small group of people representing the board and the 

senate determining and then making a unanimous 

recommendation to the senate, who would then rubber stamp 

the recommendation. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with that, I wanted to put my comments on the 

public record. There are many other members of convocation 

that support my comments. And so, Mr. Speaker, when I speak 

in this House, when I speak on this matter, I am speaking upon 

. . . I‟m speaking for hundreds of members of convocation who 

hold my view, Mr. Speaker. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to adjourn debate on this 

Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly, the member 

from Saskatoon Nutana has moved to adjourn debate. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? Is the Assembly agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 66 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion of the Hon. Mr. Hickie that Bill No. 66 — The Witness 

Protection Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Bill 

No. 66, The Witness Protection Act may now be based on the 

high-risk witness protection program put in place by the 

previous NDP administration in September 2007. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP program was put in place to protect 

witnesses who did not meet program criteria for the RCMP‟s 

[Royal Canadian Mounted Police] national source witness 

protection program. Mr. Speaker, as the minister had said, the 

federal witness protection program, which is administered by 

the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, did not meet the needs of 

some witnesses for protection that were less extreme. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we had a program in place, a policy program 

which worked quite well. We see that the present government 

wishes to pass legislation. The content, Mr. Speaker, is similar, 

and we look forward to this program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government invested over 80,000 for the 

remainder of 2008 fiscal year and 320,000 thereafter. Our 

program, Mr. Speaker, was to be staffed by one program officer 

and one support person within the Department of Justice. As I 

see, this Act establishes a $500,000 fund to pay for the cost of 

protecting witnesses, and that witness protection will be the 

responsibility of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

officials rather than Justice, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Since the witness protection program has been running for a 

year, I assume these changes reflect what has been learned from 

that year in experience, Mr. Speaker. We would hope that, 

unlike the past where this government continually refuses or 

does not see the importance of consultation and discussing 

issues with the public or stakeholders, perhaps this might be a 

slight change. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased that the Minister of Corrections and 

Public Safety and Policing, that the minister at least 

acknowledges that the previous NDP administration had a 

witness protection program in place. There was no such 

acknowledgement of the previous administration‟s seizure of 

criminal property Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s interesting that the Premier and the Sask Party 

talk about being tough on crime, but they appear to have no 

ideas of their own about how to go on about it, Mr. Speaker, 

again borrowing here as they have done continuously during 

their first year, announcing and re-announcing programs and 

policies that we have put forward, Mr. Speaker. Not a lot of 

initiative, Mr. Speaker. Not a lot of initiative. Not a lot of 

consultation by those members opposite, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Both of the Sask Party‟s anti-crime Bills are ideas they‟ve lifted 

from the previous administration. And, Mr. Speaker, they were 

part of our overall strategy to reduce crime that was working, 

Mr. Speaker — another good proposal adopted by this 

government who clearly in some cases, Mr. Speaker, have lost 

. . . no sense of ideas or creativity in areas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Witness Protection Act and The Seizure of 

Criminal Property Act are both examples of the Premier‟s and 

the Sask Party introducing legislation that make them appear to 

be competent on the law and order file, or are they simply 

taking credit from the previous administration‟s work, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[15:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, just to make a point in that, I would probably 

repeat that I understand the members opposite are quite 

interested in this. The Witness Protection Act and The Seizure of 

Criminal Property Act are, as I said, two examples of the 

Premier and the Sask Party introducing legislation to make 

them appear to be competent on the law and order file, Mr. 

Speaker, while they are simply taking credit for previous 

administration‟s work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I‟ve said, we originally put the witness 

protection program in place and that legislation makes law 

because we recognize this necessity, and we can support this 

Bill as long as it meets the witness protection needs that must 

be met. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with this we do not see . . . And I suppose I am 

glad in some ways that they simply accepted the work that we 

have done, but it would have been much better had there been 

some consultation and perhaps a written review, so we could all 

see the highlights, perhaps the highlights of the good work done 

by the previous administration in this area. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, just to put this into focus, to just make the 



March 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2017 

points that I have made, is that this Act is based on the high-risk 

witness protection program that the former NDP government 

administration had in place in September 2007. Mr. Speaker, 

this program, again, was put into place because the federal 

government has a witness protection program, but it was felt 

that citizens . . . that what was needed was a proposal to give 

assurance to all our citizens who choose to come forward with 

testimony against individuals accused of crime receive 

protective services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is an attempt, and I‟m glad that they can see a 

more comprehensive attempt, at dealing with this type of 

legislation. And again as I said, we look forward after more 

work — which we need to do to talk to people, which the 

opposition members failed to do — we will be looking over the 

Bill carefully to establish that it meets all the criterion, and in 

fact nothing has been left out which was in the previous 

program, Mr. Speaker. 

 

On first review, it does appear that most things are in and are in 

place. Mr. Speaker, again, the amounts of money that we have 

put in that we hope that these again will be met by this 

government, that we will have . . . that the program will be an 

efficient program, and it will meet the needs of Saskatchewan 

residents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Act again, as I said, establishes a $500,000 

fund to pay for the costs of protecting witnesses and that the 

witness protection will be the responsibility . . . Again we had it 

under Justice; they are putting it under the Corrections, Public 

Safety and Policing officials. 

 

Now we can only hope that we get a little better responses and 

we get a little bit more information, and quicker information 

where necessary, or at least the appropriate administration of 

this Bill from that particular minister, which has not been our 

past experience with this minister. So I can only hope that this 

all goes well even though we have done all the work for them in 

this program. 

 

Again as I said, it is good to see that there‟s an 

acknowledgement of the previous NDP administration‟s work 

in this area, and as well as the . . . Where however there was no 

such acknowledgement, Mr. Speaker, under The Seizure of 

Criminal Property Act. Mr. Speaker, it sometimes takes a while 

for a government to understand that perhaps reaching across or 

working together, that things can be accomplished — and not 

grandstanding and perhaps taking all the credits for themselves; 

that in fact these issues are shared. When we come here, some 

of the issues that we deal with are shared issues and we too are 

in favour. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, that we had policies up and running. 

That we had put in staff and a budget in place definitely showed 

our commitment to that. I hope that the commitment from the 

other side is equal to the task. And I would say to that minister, 

not often does he get credit. But under this, that there was some 

acknowledgement from that minister of the work that the 

previous administration had done. So, Mr. Speaker, he got that 

right. And I would also say to him and thank him for that. 

 

This whole area, Mr. Speaker, it is a benefit to residents of 

Saskatchewan who come forward and are prepared to act as 

witnesses that they have protection. And perhaps after we have 

a closer look at this, we can give it our final nod, Mr. Speaker, 

to have this Bill proceed. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we put in, because there was a need because 

of consultation, because of discussions with the residents of 

Saskatchewan, we put forward policies and put forward a 

witness protection program because we saw the need for that. 

And to put legislation to it, we have to look at the legislation to 

make sure that in fact it purports to do what our policies had 

initially intended. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many other points here that need to be 

made in terms of when police and Crown prosecutors identify 

that a witness may be at risk, an assessment of that individual, a 

threat to the risk — all of those things, Mr. Speaker, we‟ll have 

to have a look at before moving forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just with those acknowledgements of the previous 

work done by the former government, at this time I would just, 

subject to us doing some further work, I‟d like to adjourn 

debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Fairview has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 66. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. 

 

Bill No. 67 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 67 — The 

Education Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2)/Loi n
o
 2 de 2008 

modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a 

pleasure to rise and join the debate on Bill No. 67, An Act to 

amend The Education Act, 1995, with some consequential 

amendments to various regulations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I‟ve gone through the related information — 

the Bill itself plus the explanatory notes and some backgrounder 

information, and also had a look at the minister‟s initial remarks 

that were made in this House that speaks to the reasoning and 

rationale behind the changes to The Education Act, the intent of 

what it will accomplish and what it does — I‟m a little 

surprised by some of the comments, and not necessarily the 

comments themselves but how this whole process has unfolded. 

 

The minister made the point that he felt that these changes that 

he was introducing would strengthen the education system for 

students and ensure that Saskatchewan is compliant with other 

jurisdictions across Canada. And he also spoke to the reasoning 

for putting in place these changes, that it would bring 



2018 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 2009 

Saskatchewan in line with an interprovincial protocol to include 

improvements to the process of identifying and disciplining 

teachers who have behaved in a manner that constitutes 

professional misconduct or incompetence. 

 

So he talked about compliance with the interprovincial protocol, 

what he felt it would do, seems to be quite in favour of it, and of 

course he must be, being he signed the legislation and brought it 

forward. But one of his comments really strikes me as being a 

little unusual. And it says that it is our hope that this legislation 

reflects the high standard, and he was speaking to educators in 

the province of Saskatchewan and the reputation that they have. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I would hope that the minister would do 

more than hope. I would have felt that it would have been part 

of the minister‟s responsibility to do a thorough consultation on 

this legislation before it was put forward. And from many of the 

people that we have spoken to, that is an area that we have 

heard a number of concerns been raised over the past number of 

months, and that is a problem. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if you look to other provinces and you look at the 

history of Saskatchewan and the partnership that the previous 

governments of Saskatchewan have always maintained with the 

education sector, it is second to none right across this country. It 

is something that Saskatchewan should be very proud of it 

because it has paid benefits with the superior education system 

and the relationships that we have. And in those relationships it 

has really meant that we have been able to solve problems and 

work through issues and move ahead opportunities, not only for 

the professionals in this field across the province but also for 

students. I mean everything that works well in this province and 

in the education sector really filters down to students and 

provides Saskatchewan students with opportunities that are 

second to none, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So that really is the concerns with this legislation, that it has not 

been considered to the fashion with which the education sector 

in Saskatchewan is accustomed to, and some have even said 

that it‟s ill-considered and conceived in a bit of a vacuum. And 

that really speaks to the lack of consultation and the process that 

some feel was fundamentally flawed. And often the comments 

are that this flawed consultation process that was used is really 

a complete departure from the customary full consultation 

practised by all previous governments in Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it doesn‟t take long to realize the value of the 

consultation process and the discussion between the 

stakeholders and the partners in the education sector. And if you 

have an opportunity to speak to others across Canada, they are 

often impressed and amazed by the amount of communication 

that goes on here in the province of Saskatchewan between the 

ministry, between the stakeholders. And they are often envious 

of this communications because it is continual. 

 

It can be very onerous at times. Without a doubt to have this 

level of communication and this level of interaction with all 

people connected to the education sector, does take a great deal 

of work and does take a great deal of effort. But, Mr. Speaker, it 

truly is a benefit to the sector right across Saskatchewan and a 

credit to the people that work within the sector. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, that is a great deal of the concerns that I have 

heard when we talk about The Education Amendment Act and 

what‟s been proposed. 

 

Now when we look at the actual proposals and changes that are 

recommended in this piece of legislation, many feel that it is 

appropriate, that the changes are probably in the best process to 

put forward for dealing with issues that do arise within the 

education sector. So for many people, it isn‟t about the intent of 

the Bill, that that‟s not necessarily the concern, but it‟s the 

process, the content, and the implications that are all an issue. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when we look at making changes within a 

sector, there is often a need. I remember a colleague of mine 

that said, you know, as government you can put in place any 

Bill or changes to legislation that you like if you have the 

numbers. And it‟s true; you could jam through just about 

anything in this Assembly. But the value of legislation, the 

value of the process is that you aren‟t forcing changes upon 

someone. 

 

They may not agree with you. They may not support what 

you‟re doing. But there is a real value in having a good 

consultation process so that those stakeholders and those people 

that may be affected by the changes that you are proposing have 

a clear understanding as to why they are being put in place, how 

they are being put in place, and the process that the minister or 

the department has chosen to move this legislation ahead. 

 

[15:15] 

 

In the end of all that, Mr. Speaker, they still may not agree with 

all of the changes, but there is great value in having an 

understanding as to why they‟re being put in place, and also a 

great value in stakeholders having input into the decisions and 

changes that are being put forward. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, while it may not be, as I said, it may not be the 

intent of the legislation that is a concern, it‟s just that many of 

the stakeholders have not felt like they have had adequate input 

into the legislation and the changes, and that really is a problem. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there is a number of issues that are brought 

forward in this legislation. Some seem to be purely 

housekeeping changes, modernizing so to speak, of some of the 

titles and some of the designations that were probably formerly 

more common than what they are today. So we are seeing a 

number of those changes that have been made. 

 

But there‟s also the process that‟s put in place quite clearly if 

there is a complaint against a teacher within the education 

system in Saskatchewan: what happens, what process is 

followed, who would be part of what would be called a 

professional conduct committee, how it would be structured; if 

there is a notice that is given or a public complaint against a 

teacher, the steps that need to be followed. The professional 

conduct committee — how that committee is established by the 

minister and what kind of information and how a hearing will 

be held by this professional conduct committee. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is hopefully a committee we won‟t have 

to use too often, but we always need to be prepared and there 

always needs to be processes in place if a complaint should 

arise. 



March 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2019 

So, Mr. Speaker, there is a number of good parts to this 

legislation, but again what we‟re hearing over and over is that 

lack of consultations and the lack of input that many 

stakeholders have been able to have input into the legislation. 

Now I‟m sure the minister may be able to provide a bit more 

information, and I know that there are stakeholders that we need 

to touch base with to see if any of those concerns have been 

dealt with over the recess that we had over the last few months. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, again I want to say to the minister that 

Saskatchewan has a reputation, we have a history of having a 

very good consultation process. Sometimes it may seem too 

lengthy, sometimes it may seem too intensive, sometimes it 

may seem repetitive, but it has great value and has had great 

results over previous governments. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would just say to the minister that there does 

need to be more consultation done on the proposed changes to 

The Education Amendment Act and that there needs to be work 

done. 

 

And what we will do over the next little while, Mr. Speaker . . . 

I know there are colleagues of mine that would like to make 

some comments on this legislation, and there are stakeholders 

that we would like to touch base with again to see what 

changes, if any, have happened over the last couple of months. 

But I truly believe that it‟s in the best interest of quality 

education policy that the government slow down, revisit the 

consultation piece — on this piece of legislation especially and 

maybe within the department totally — and address the many 

questions that this current legislation is raising with members of 

the education community. Saskatchewan‟s working reputation 

and reputation across Canada is well deserved, and we need to 

make sure that it remains so and that there is good input into all 

changes and any changes proposed to The Education Act. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with those short comments, I will adjourn 

debate on the Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Moose Jaw Wakamow has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 67, The Education 

Amendment Act, 2008. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 71 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 71 — The 

Innovation Saskatchewan Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s my honour 

to rise here today and to discuss some of the changes that Bill 

71, The Innovation Saskatchewan Act presents in practice from 

this Assembly. 

 

On a broad brush it would be worthwhile to note, Mr. Speaker, 

that Saskatchewan‟s history is filled with stories of innovation, 

of Saskatchewan people‟s successful search to find creative 

solutions to the many problems and issues of our days and over 

the years. Our history is rich with the ingenuity of 

Saskatchewan people and the innovation that our province has 

served the province. This is why the list of Saskatchewan firsts 

is so impressive. It‟s ironic that many of those innovations are 

precisely what the members opposite consider to be wrong with 

the province — our health care system, our incredibly 

forward-looking social policies, and our publicly owned Crown 

corporations. In fact this one‟s really kind of interesting, 

because I know the minister opposite who‟s listening in has, in 

essence, created a new Crown corporation. And certainly that 

hasn‟t been consisted and supported by all of the support on that 

side of the House or that base of support for the Saskatchewan 

Party. 

 

We certainly support investment in research and development 

and are extremely proud of our record in supporting new, 

innovative initiatives and technologies. This is really important, 

Mr. Speaker, as we look at the broadening of our economy 

beyond the resource- and petrol-based reliance and the busts 

and booms of that resource economy. And I know as oil sits 

around $40 a barrel right now, Mr. Speaker, I know the Finance 

minister‟s making more difficult decisions here as we speak, so 

I don‟t have to preach to a converted Finance minister who 

likely now understands the importance to diversify this 

economy. 

 

But I can certainly speak to specifics that we‟re incredibly 

proud of in our role in fostering and developing. And I can 

point to the synchrotron, certainly the Petroleum Technology 

Research Centre, the International Test Centre for CO2 Capture 

at the U of R [University of Regina] right here in Regina — real 

proud of that institution — Innovation and Science Fund that 

leverages funding from the federal government and other 

national bodies, our Saskatchewan Research Council, and the 

role in fostering commercialization of new technologies such as 

enhanced oil recovery. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think we can be incredibly proud of some of 

these achievements and some of the roles that these entities 

play, arm‟s-length, within our economy and within our 

province. I think we can notice the discussion that goes on 

globally here now around carbon capture and sequestration. We 

can be proud of the investment that Saskatchewan New 

Democrats and that the innovation of Saskatchewan people had 

in making this possible. 

 

This new entity, Innovation Saskatchewan, with its 

seven-person board of directors and the way it is funded . . . 

And basically it‟s mandated as another new Crown corporation. 

And I know the Deputy Premier, I have his attention. I was 

surprised to know that the Minister of Enterprise was such a fan 

of expanding our fleet of Crown corporations. But you know, 

never, never . . . You can always be surprised. 

 

The Sask Party is creating agencies of government that remove 

transparency and accountability. Innovation Saskatchewan, 

along with Enterprise Saskatchewan, essentially take the place 

of the entire Department of Industry but with far less financial 

scrutiny. Detailed budget entries will be replaced with a single 

line item for Innovation Saskatchewan. This is a concern, Mr. 

Speaker, at a time where we should be offering more separation, 

more transparency, more accountability, more access to where 

our public dollars are going. We‟re going in the exact opposite 

direction with this Act. 



2020 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 2009 

The Sask Party has been in the past extremely critical of 

investment in immature industries, but now they seem to be 

more willing to look at this. In fact this is exactly what this is 

intended to do. The Sask Party claimed in the past they would 

never pick winners or losers, but again this whole structure of 

Innovation Saskatchewan is designed to do this completely. 

And actually I‟ll quote the minister here in a StarPhoenix article 

on October 23, 2008, and I quote: 

 

Unlike Investment Saskatchewan with its independent 

board, there . . . [will] be political involvement in the 

decision-making process around investments, Stewart 

acknowledged. 

 

This is interesting, Mr. Speaker. This is the exact opposite way 

that governments around our globe are going, and it‟s 

interesting that they would choose to do this — to be investing 

into immature industries when in the past they haven‟t 

supported that investment, and that they choose to remove some 

of the accountability that is so important to Saskatchewan 

taxpayers. 

 

Politicizing investment decisions could prove problematic for 

Saskatchewan research and development organizations, like the 

Saskatchewan Research Council and the synchrotron, that 

should remain arm‟s-length from government. It‟s important 

that they have that independence, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There were some failures of these kinds in the past, I guess back 

to the Devine era. And I know members opposite get tired of 

hearing about Devine era mistakes because there are so many 

and so many different aspects, Mr. Speaker. But just in case the 

Saskatchewan public might have forgotten some of these 

mistakes, I guess we‟ll look at some of the investments that 

were made back in the, you know, back in the Devine era there 

and some of the losses. 

 

I know the member from Wood River can basically read off any 

penny that was lost under the 16 years of strong financial 

management that the New Democrats provided, but he 

sometimes doesn‟t point to the losses from the Devine era. So 

we‟ll look at a few. Impact Packaging systems, $17.2 million 

loss. Intercontinental Packers, $16.8 million loss. Federated 

Co-op, $15 million loss. Flexi-Coil, $10 million loss. 

Westank-Willock, $7.4 million loss. Supercart, who knows, but 

it certainly lost. And then maybe the mother of all of them, 

GigaText, with $5.5 million lost, and of course convictions and 

other things which is a shame. 

 

I guess we need to talk about Joytec too, which was a sort of 

golf simulator which, you know, it certainly never made the 

member from Coronation Park a better golfer, and it lost the 

people of this province $1.5 million, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, the Sask Party claims that Innovation Saskatchewan 

will only invest in non-mature industries. But this is the same 

Sask Party government that dismantled the $320 million Green 

Future Fund, Mr. Speaker. This would have inspired and 

allowed some of this very kind of innovation and investment 

that we are looking at here today. 

 

So this is the same Sask Party government that continues to 

ignore forestry despite the potential for innovation in the new 

sector. And we have new opportunities if we‟re looking at wood 

products and biomass. At the same time, they specifically 

mention coal — hardly a spring chicken when it comes to new 

technologies, when it comes to industries — as an area possibly 

that will receive some interest. This Sask Party says that the 

Enterprise Saskatchewan and Innovation Saskatchewan are 

about consultation despite the fact that this government has 

failed to consult with people on a wide variety of significant 

issues. 

 

So there‟s a lot of inconsistencies here, Mr. Speaker. I‟ll point 

out, I guess, another comment here. It attacks some of the 

values of the Saskatchewan Party. At one point the 

Saskatchewan Party claimed that they would never pick 

winners and losers as I‟ve mentioned. This does the opposite. 

The minister has already admitted that politics will be a factor 

in how these decisions get made. How can they justify this 

hypocrisy, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think the article in The StarPhoenix on October 

23, 2008, the headline sums it up best: “. . . investment agency a 

flip-flop”. So, Mr. Speaker, at a time where people are 

expecting more of their governments, we‟re getting less when 

we‟re talking about transparency and accountability and 

separation. We certainly support investment into industry to 

foster new technologies, to diversify our economy. But let‟s 

make sure that the Saskatchewan public‟s well aware of the 

risks that they‟re taking on, the losses and the gains that will be 

incurred, instead of having this one line that will be reported 

back through estimates. It doesn‟t offer Saskatchewan people a 

fair process for the dollars that they‟ve placed in trust with this 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are so many more questions to be asked, a 

lot more members on this side of the house that will want to 

discuss this Bill. But at this time I move adjournment of the 

debate on Bill 71. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Rosemont has 

moved that Bill No. 71, The Innovation Saskatchewan Act be 

now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. 

 

[15:30] 

 

Bill No. 74 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 74 — The 

Miscellaneous Statutes (English) Amendment and Repeal Act, 

2008 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m very 

pleased this afternoon to enter in debate on The Miscellaneous 



March 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2021 

Statutes Amendment Act. Mr. Speaker, this is the type of Bill 

that we see year after year in the legislature that helps us to 

ensure that our legislation, our regulations, Mr. Speaker, are 

current and relevant to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, every year a number of Bills are repealed and a 

number of regulations as well, Mr. Speaker. And it is an 

ongoing process to update and keep legislation relevant and 

current, Mr. Speaker, and ensure that those provisions within 

the legislation, in fact, reflect upon the values of the people of 

Saskatchewan and reflect upon the current trends and 

importance of the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Many pieces of legislation that are introduced in a particular 

period of time, Mr. Speaker, are relevant for a number of years 

and then perhaps need to be amended, updated, or repealed in 

order to reflect current practices within society, Mr. Speaker, or 

to reflect changes in the needs or importance of the people of 

the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So what we have before us is a Bill that repeals pieces of 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, that are no longer relevant, no longer 

needed by the people of the province of Saskatchewan. And as I 

said, Mr. Speaker, we see a Bill like this on an annual basis in 

which some changes are made in order to update and keep 

legislation both current and relevant. 

 

Mr. Speaker, an example is the one piece that‟s being repealed, 

Mr. Speaker, The Agri-Food Innovation Act that came into 

effect in 1995. It in fact established a fund aimed at enhancing 

the agricultural industry in our province. It was a fund that was 

needed at that particular time to move forward with some 

particular needs in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

It is clear that that fund isn‟t needed today, Mr. Speaker. So as a 

result, of course, it‟s being repealed. And, Mr. Speaker, there‟s 

no sense keeping legislation on the books that‟s no longer 

needed or required. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we‟re moving forward and we see these Bills 

. . . On an annual basis they will repeal different pieces of 

legislation — some that are perhaps 10 or 15, 20 years old, Mr. 

Speaker; some that are only a few years old; some that may 

have been introduced to fix a particular problem that no longer 

is an issue or no longer a problem, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So what we have before us today, Mr. Speaker, is a Bill that is 

largely housekeeping; in fact is referred to as housekeeping on 

an annual basis. But it changes or repeals various sections of 

Acts or entire pieces of legislation to, Mr. Speaker, show us that 

we . . . to show the people of Saskatchewan that we in fact do 

want to keep our legislation, Mr. Speaker, and regulations 

current and up-to-date. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there isn‟t a whole lot that can be said about this 

particular piece of legislation. We also have a bilingual form of 

the same Bill before us, Mr. Speaker, that the members of this 

Assembly will also look at. There are a number of Bills, Mr. 

Speaker, that come before the House in both French and 

English and, Mr. Speaker, we‟re making the same changes in 

both the English version and the French version and repealing 

legislation that . . . in repealing these particular Acts, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s interesting that at least one of these pieces of 

legislation goes back several years to talk about dealing with 

community programming, and that only cablecasters in our 

province did in fact put forward community programming on 

their cable stations, Mr. Speaker. And it dealt with a very 

specific need at a period of time to have local programming 

with our cable providers and on our cable channels in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that‟s no longer a required and necessary 

provision. We have other provisions, Mr. Speaker, that in . . . 

both under the CRTC [Canadian Radio-television and 

Telecommunications Commission] and other legislation that 

provide for Canadian content, local content in our 

programming, Mr. Speaker. So as a result, that particular piece 

of legislation‟s being repealed. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as this is largely housekeeping, Mr. Speaker, 

there isn‟t sense taking hours of the members‟ time talking 

about this particular piece of legislation. We will want to deal a 

little more in-depth, check on each of the particular pieces to 

make sure that they‟re in fact, you know, doing what we believe 

they‟re doing. But, Mr. Speaker, at this time, I would move we 

adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Dewdney has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 74, The 

Miscellaneous Statutes (English) Amendment and Repeal Act, 

2008. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 75 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 75 — The 

Miscellaneous Statutes (Bilingual) Amendment and Repeal 

Act, 2008/Loi corrective (lois bilingues) de 2008 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Bill No. 75 

is in fact the French version of Bill No. 74. It‟s the repeal of the 

same legislation in French, Mr. Speaker. It is a requirement that 

legislation in our country are provided in both the French and 

English language, Mr. Speaker, so this is identical to the 

previous Bill. 

 

Now Mr. Speaker, if I wanted to challenge the members‟ 

French opposite, and try to actually speak to this Bill in French, 

I think many of them would be more confused and would have 

to take more time in order to examine their own legislation. So, 

Mr. Speaker, we‟re not going to try to confuse the members 

opposite, or for that matter, my own colleagues on this side, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But this particular legislation, once again, is housekeeping. It 

does nothing but repeal pieces of legislation and portions of the 

Act, Mr. Speaker, that are no longer required. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, because it‟s identical to the previous Bill, Mr. Speaker, 



2022 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 2009 

I‟m not going to take a great deal of members‟ time, and at this 

time I would move that this Bill be adjourned. 

 

The Speaker: — The member of Regina Dewdney has moved 

adjournment of debate on Bill No. 75, The Miscellaneous 

Statutes (Bilingual) Amendment and Repeal Act, 2008. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Bill No. 76 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Heppner that Bill No. 76 — The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I was just reviewing the information for the 

amendments to An Act to amend The Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act, and also to amend The Wildlife Habitat Lands 

Designation Regulations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the information that I have comes with a series of 

maps that shows where the land that is being changed . . . 

changing the designation on this land and the areas across the 

province where it is located. So, Mr. Speaker, there is a concern 

here, and I know . . . Previously I was involved in a number of 

debates. People in Saskatchewan are quite protective of the 

wildlife lands. There is always a very conscious effort to make 

sure that there is adequate wildlife habitat across the province. 

 

We have a number of species that are endangered and protected 

but not only that, for producers, for hunters, for naturalists, for 

birdwatchers, there is always concern about the amount of 

habitat that is available for species right across the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is something that Saskatchewan people take 

very seriously. And there is always concern for what‟s being 

. . . lands that are being established and developed right across 

the province and to make sure that that wildlife habitat is 

maintained, and officially maintained, not just set aside as 

designated here or there, but they want official designation. 

They want the land posted to make sure that people are well 

aware of the importance and the need for maintaining habitat 

for wildlife right across the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when previously we‟ve dealt with any changes 

being made to wildlife lands, it can come in really a wide 

variety of issues that we‟re dealing with. Often we‟ll see that 

when there are changes or proposals made for adjacent land or 

for the land itself that there may be some inaccurate 

descriptions that have been entered into land titles or when the 

land was first designated. So some of it may be just to update 

those designations, update the descriptions, and make sure that 

they are accurate in land titles. Also it may be adjustments for 

neighbours where there have been mistakes in the descriptions 

of the land. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, sometimes it‟s to change the designation, to 

remove the designation, and have the land used for something 

else. And there can be many, many reasons for a change in 

designation. So, Mr. Speaker, that‟s actually . . . When you look 

at the maps, you wonder, is it just a correction? Is it a change in 

designation? Is there some reason for these specific 

designations to be put forward as ones that are needing to be 

changed? 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we talk about . . . The people of 

Saskatchewan are very particular about wildlife habitat. There‟s 

a great deal of work that goes on by many organizations across 

the province to make sure that there is adequate habitat across 

the province. So, Mr. Speaker, the first thing that comes to mind 

is, when the minister is putting forward changes to land that is 

wildlife habitat and under the protection of the Act, we have to 

ask, why, why the specific pieces are being changed as 

designation? But also what land is being replaced with the 

wildlife habitat protection to replace the habitat that is 

obviously being pulled from the protection of the Act? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there is a number of questions. The maps, for 

sure, are helpful in looking at where exactly the land is and 

what it joins up to and what may be the reason. But these are 

more questions that we will need to ask of stakeholders across 

the province and the various groups that pay a great deal of 

attention and put in a great many hours of hard work to make 

sure that there is wildlife habitat across the province. 

 

We always had a policy with the previous government that 

when land was removed, it was replaced with comparable land, 

preferably within the area, to maintain that balance of wildlife 

habitat. So I don‟t know of any land that is replacing the pieces 

that are being withdrawn from the protection of the Act. So 

those are further questions and issues that we will have to speak 

to stakeholders about. 

 

Understandably and occasionally there are mistakes that are 

made, like I say, in descriptions of the land, and those errors 

need to be corrected. But what we need to do is make sure that 

we have that balance and that we are maintaining adequate 

wildlife lands across the province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there is a number of people that we will need 

to consult with, and we will have to look at the specific changes 

that are being made to the wildlife lands. So with that, Mr. 

Speaker, and the work that we need to do, I would adjourn 

debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Moose Jaw Wakamow has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 76, The Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2008. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. 

 

Bill No. 68 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Tell that Bill No. 68 — The Arts 

Professions Act/Loi sur les professions artistiques be now read 

a second time.] 



March 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2023 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

pleased to rise to enter into the debate about Bill No. 68, The 

Arts Professions Act. This legislation somewhat mirrors the 

status of the artist legislation that was introduced in last term by 

the NDP government under the former premier, Lorne Calvert. 

It was a privilege for me to have been part of the process and 

debate of the status of the artist legislation. Status of the artist 

legislation was a federal initiative that the majority of provinces 

adopted on a provincially regulated level, and the NDP was, 

and is, fully committed to seeing similar but comprehensive 

legislation in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

In 2002 status of the artist legislation was implemented which 

laid down in law, for the first time, the following principles 

among others: number one, the right of artists to free speech 

and freedom of artistic and cultural expression; number two, the 

ability of artists in all artistic fields to earn a living from the 

making of their art; and number three, the rights of artists to 

enjoy the same economic and social benefits that are available 

to other workers in Saskatchewan. 

 

[15:45] 

 

There was a tremendous amount of work not to mention 

extensive consultations that took place under the two former 

NDP ministers of Culture, Youth and Recreation — the former 

minister, Joanne Crofford, and the former minister, Glenn 

Hagel. The dedication of the department officials and staff 

should also be recognized as well as the countless volunteer 

hours that were provided by the stakeholders to the process. 

 

The fruition of that work was The Status of the Artist Act that 

was first introduced in November 2006 with an amended final 

version in early May 2007. This legislation provided a means 

by which artists could organize and bargain collectively and 

provided for advisory committees on a number of issues 

important to artists including pension plans, the application of 

workers‟ compensation and occupational health and safety 

legislation to artists, education and training programs for artists, 

and taxation issues. 

 

Now this legislation, because of the amount of comprehensive 

consultations that it undertook, also went through a rigorous 

process in House committee, in the Human Services 

Committee, again which I was privileged to be privy to. There 

were countless hours spent in debate by both the NDP 

government at the time and the opposition members, and it 

provided very good discussion and very good information that 

was sought to further clarify some of the questions that the 

committee had. I‟m encouraged to see from the government‟s 

press release that the Minister for Tourism, Parks, Culture and 

Sport says that “‟The Government of Saskatchewan is 

committed to creating an environment in which the artist is able 

to thrive and succeed‟ . . .” And I‟m also encouraged to see that 

the Saskatchewan Arts Board Chair, Ken Sagal, says: 

 

“Today‟s legislation will benefit Saskatchewan artists and 

help protect their professional integrity . . . [as] The Arts 

Professions Act assists Saskatchewan artists in furthering 

their careers and recognizes a valuable contribution of 

professional artists to the cultural and economic prosperity 

of this province.” 

 

There are a number of things to be celebrated in the legislation 

that has been presented; however, one has to question why the 

name of the legislation has changed. We have status of the artist 

legislation federally. We have status of the artist legislation 

across the country in various provinces. We had status of the 

artist legislation in this province which unfortunately didn‟t get 

passed in the final hour because for some reason the Sask Party 

opposition at that time saw fit to ruin the hopes and optimism 

and joy that the arts community was going to experience with 

the announcement of the passing of that legislation. 

 

So one has to find it somewhat questionable as to why the Sask 

Party government has now decided to change the name of that 

legislation, which has become so well-known across the country 

under its title as status of the artist legislation. We‟ll have to, I 

guess, wait and see what nefarious workings going on there are. 

 

But the obvious and most glaring omission in this legislation is 

the fact that it doesn‟t contain collective bargaining. And 

collective bargaining was one of the primary concerns of the 

arts community in terms of making sure that their work is 

valued as much as any other professionals we have in our 

society that are functioning under the same advantage. 

 

Another thing that one has to question, Mr. Speaker, is — 

despite the fact that this legislation has, as I said, first been 

tabled in 2002 under the NDP government and was then tabled 

as an Act in November of 2006 with an amended version in 

May of 2007 — why it is, with all those consultations that took 

place over all those years with all the dedication and hard work 

that was applied to making sure that this legislation gets 

implemented in Saskatchewan, moves forward, and becomes 

part of the working advantage of the artists in our province, 

why this Act is not going to come into effect until 2010. 

 

That is to me a giant question mark which has yet to be 

answered. It wasn‟t addressed in the minister‟s comments when 

she stood on the first reading of this legislation in the House. 

And I would be interested to know why the delay must take 

place for such a significant period of time. There surely is 

enough information, enough consultation that‟s taken place 

over the years that this is something that could have been 

implemented quickly, if not immediately. And the delay until 

2010 causes me to wonder as much as the new-found title that 

the Sask Party government has decided to apply to it. 

 

There are some concerns about this legislation outside from 

what I‟ve just described. We also have, for instance, the 

executive director of the Saskatchewan Arts Alliance, Marnie 

Gladwell, said that she was at this time still reviewing the 

legislation but welcomed some of the changes — as do I, quite 

frankly, Mr. Speaker. This is long overdue.  

 

There was no reason for it not to have passed in May 2007. The 

Sask Party opposition at the time was not showing any major 

concerns with respect to the legislation and quite frankly, in the 

eleventh hour, the day before a session ended, decided to pull 

the plug on this legislation and sink it, so to speak. There was 

no explanation given by the Sask Party opposition at the time as 

to why they were sinking the legislation. And the few 



2024 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 2009 

explanations — the two minor explanations, I should say — 

that were given didn‟t hold water. So I‟m still interested in 

someone giving me an explanation as to why the legislation 

couldn‟t go forward at the time. 

 

Now Marnie Gladwell, who is the executive director of 

Saskatchewan Arts Alliance, also says that “„It includes a 

definition of a professional artist, which looks positive.‟” She‟s 

saying that they‟re still needing to look at it “„. . . but in 

general” [she says] I think it‟s a step forward.‟” 

 

So again I question the legislation from that perspective, Mr. 

Speaker. Why are we only taking a step forward when we 

could‟ve taken a giant leap forward, so to speak, for the artists 

of this province? There is no reason to be taking baby steps at 

this time, Mr. Speaker. As I said, there was extensive 

consultations done since 2002 when the NDP government at the 

time first introduced status of the artist legislation. 

 

There were comprehensive consultations done, reviews done, 

studies, cross-country studies done with respect to comparisons 

of other jurisdictions. And why we‟re only taking a step 

forward at this point instead of a giant leap forward on behalf of 

the artists in this province is something that is troubling to me 

and is troubling to the arts community and quite frankly should 

be troubling to the Sask Party government as well. But 

unfortunately it looks like they may be somewhat out of touch, 

or perhaps it ties into the nefarious goings-on of why they 

wouldn‟t let the legislation pass in May 2007 when we were 

literally sitting in the eleventh hour assuming that it was going 

to pass that evening. 

 

And if anybody is truly interested in seeing what the goings-on 

of that committee was at the time — and you can imagine the 

shocked expression on some of our faces — I suggest they 

simply go on to the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly 

archives, and they can actually view the streaming video of that 

committee proceeding and can see for themselves what 

occurred that evening and that we had no knowledge, prior 

knowledge, that there were some significant concerns on their 

behalf and that they wouldn‟t allow this legislation to pass. So I 

would suggest that the viewing public may want to research that 

for themselves. 

 

Now the minister said that “The collective bargaining aspect is 

not currently being considered . . .” One has to wonder why that 

is. As I said, they were part of the extensive committee 

proceedings, had as much opportunity to ask as many questions 

as they wanted and didn‟t seem to have any overarching 

concerns as to the issue of collective bargaining. 

 

Marnie Gladwell, who is the executive director of 

Saskatchewan Arts Alliance, also said that legislation to allow 

collective or sector bargaining for artists who are contract 

workers is something the arts group would still like to pursue. 

And she‟s saying, “We can see it as being the next place we 

need to go.” 

 

So if this is something the arts community is still wanting to 

pursue, if this is something that the arts communities were 

expressing to us should be part of the comprehensive package 

of status to the artist legislation, and given the amount of 

consultation and consultative process that took place, one has to 

wonder why that omission is present in this current Act that 

they‟re putting forward, which is The Arts Professions Act. 

 

Again, why take baby steps when there was no need to simply 

take baby steps? Why not make this a comprehensive piece of 

legislation that would bring absolute and true value to the arts 

community of this province versus them having to lobby for 

some more baby steps to be able to move forward to get the 

legislation in place that they truly need. And it‟s not a matter of 

just want, Mr. Speaker, it‟s a matter of need. And that‟s why 

I‟m saying I‟m surprised that the Sask Party government is so 

out of touch with the actual needs of the arts community in this 

province. 

 

One also has to also look at, for instance, some of the 

disappointment that was being projected after the Sask Party 

didn‟t allow the status of the artist legislation to pass in May 

2007. We can look at, for instance, a quote from Brian Dojack, 

the secretary-treasurer of the Regina Musicians‟ Association. 

This is from June 9, 2007 in the Leader-Post: 

 

To say I was disappointed to see the Opposition‟s tactics 

on May 17 is a gross understatement. 

 

Government members of the committee reviewing it were 

willing to extend sitting time in order to get Bill 68 dealt 

with; the Opposition [Sask Party] was opposed to doing 

so. 

 

It is long past time for the opposition to quit playing 

games and get this bill, which it acknowledges is needed, 

passed into law. 

 

So as you can see, the arts community was told and was 

informed by their discussions with the then Sask Party 

opposition, that the Sask Party opposition didn‟t have any major 

concerns. The arts community believed that the Sask Party 

opposition was going to be supportive of this legislation, that 

they also believed the arts community deserved this legislation, 

and then in the eleventh hour decided that, no, I guess no, they 

didn‟t deserve it, or whatever their reasons were for deciding 

the legislation was not going to be passed in the eleventh hour. 

 

Another quote for instance, from the Leader-Post from May 18, 

2007, says: 

 

Pat Close, Saskatchewan‟s representative for the national 

artist advocacy organization CARFAC, said the legislation 

represented the culmination of efforts around policy 

development in the arts for the past nearly twenty years. 

 

Now Pat Close, I know, was one of the original stakeholders 

involved in the original consultations of status of the artist 

legislation. This man gave an amazing amount of dedication, 

time, knowledge, expertise, passion to seeing this Bill passed — 

to seeing status of the artist legislation as comprehensively as it 

was presented under the NDP in 2006 and 2007 — to seeing 

that legislation passed. This was part of his life‟s work, if I dare 

say — having dedicated, as he said, nearly 20 years to seeing 

this legislation going forward as comprehensively as it was 

presented. 

 

He goes on to say: 



March 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2025 

“This morning I‟ve been dealing with e-mails from all 

across the country, saying what a wonderful initiative this 

was, how other provinces and other jurisdictions were 

looking forward to us having passed it so they could 

advocate in their own provinces for similar legislation,” 

Close said. 

 

So how disappointing, how ultimately disappointing for the arts 

community to believe the Sask Party was supportive of this 

legislation, for the Sask Party opposition at that time to have 

allowed the arts community to feel that they were going to be 

supportive, only to literally have yanked it in the eleventh hour 

before the last day of session. It is absolutely unconscionable, 

Mr. Speaker, that that happened at that time. 

 

Now in case the Sask Party government is somewhat remiss as 

to what was done under the NDP government in terms of the 

ongoing support of the arts community over the years leading 

up to status of the artist legislation — which should have passed 

had it not been for their partisan beliefs or whatever other 

beliefs led them to simply walk away at the eleventh hour from 

allowing that legislation to pass in May 2007 — let me just fill 

in some of the blanks. 

 

[16:00] 

 

On record, the NDP increased base funding for the 

Saskatchewan Arts Board by 14 per cent in the 2007-2008 

budget. On record, the NDP government provided $2.5 million 

in special funding to the Saskatchewan Arts Board in October 

2007 for the status of the artist initiative, including funding for 

touring and arts marketing. The NDP government at that time 

provided $2 million in special funding for cultural industries as 

music, film, video, publishing, and visual arts in October 2007 

to assist with marketing, the creation of a fund to provide small 

loans and equity investments, technological innovation, and the 

development of business and marketing skills. The NDP 

government provided and respected artistic freedom of 

expression and the independence of the Saskatchewan Arts 

Board in its funding decisions. 

 

Now someone‟s chirping from their seat that this is why we lost 

the last election. God help us if that is their actual belief 

because that is absolutely not the case. My goodness. 

 

So the NDP government at that time . . . Apparently they don‟t 

want to hear what the NDP government did at that time, Mr. 

Speaker, because the volume is being turned up a bit. But you 

know what, there‟s so much more that I could say that the NDP 

government did at that time, so I think I‟ll just keep elaborating 

some more. 

 

The NDP government at that time provided low-income 

workers, which included artists, with better access to health 

benefits like prescription drugs, eye exams, and chiropractic 

services. The NDP government at that time, as the NDP 

opposition at this time, recognizes the struggle of the artists to 

have the same advantages of other workers in this province and 

in this country and will do its utmost to ensure that changes take 

place to ensure that they have those advantages going forward. 

 

As you can hear, Mr. Speaker, they have all sorts of interesting 

revisionary stories as to why the legislation needed to be pulled 

in the eleventh hour of May 2007. Of course those are 

interesting revisionary stories, and I‟m sure at some point 

before I finish my political career somebody will explain to me 

the actual truth as to what happened that evening as to the 

nefarious goings-on. 

 

Now as for where the Sask Party is going with this legislation, 

as I said, these are some welcome changes. These are some 

baby steps. It‟s unfortunate that the legislation isn‟t more 

comprehensive in terms of what it needs to do, what it could do. 

And those changes are still able to take place, Mr. Speaker, if 

the Sask Party government is courageous enough to do so when 

of course the Bill goes to committee and we get to have a good 

discussion about some of those changes that should be made, 

amendments that should be made. 

 

And I‟m sure that if the Sask Party government doesn‟t want to 

believe what the NDP opposition has to say on the issue, all 

they have to do is ask people within the arts community. And 

people in the arts community would be only too willing to 

provide that information for them, as would the Ministry of 

Tourism, Culture under the new minister, because they certainly 

have record of all the consultations that took place. 

 

So this Bill is oriented as a individual entrepreneur bill of rights 

and unfortunately ignores provisions that set out a collective 

bargaining structure. And it‟s unfortunate that the Sask Party 

government felt that this was an omission that was all right to 

have. Now the New Democrats, of course, are committed to 

addressing the pocketbook issues facing artists and to provide 

artists and cultural workers with the respect they deserve. The 

Sask Party claims it supports arts and culture, but they don‟t 

respect artists and cultural workers for their contributions to our 

economy and our communities. Unfortunately one can see that 

with, like I said, the omission to the Bill and some of the other 

omissions to the Bill. 

 

The ministerial advisory committee on the status of the artist, of 

which Patrick Close was a member of — as a matter of fact 

there were two committees set up, and Patrick Close was 

actually a member of both of those — laid out a number of 

concerns and a number of desires in terms of the wish list that 

they would like to see going forward. And those were all 

presented in the original status of the artist Act which was 

initiated in the fall of 2007. What we have here now, 

unfortunately, is a watered down version of the old Bill, and it‟s 

renamed in the hopes that people won‟t notice it, quite frankly. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there is so much more to be said but 

unfortunately there‟s so many other Bills that we still need to go 

through, and seeing that we‟re getting to a later hour here and 

there‟s still a hefty agenda ahead of us, I‟ll just conclude my 

remarks by saying the Sask Party government seems to want to 

do absolutely nothing that would lend legitimacy or assist 

workers in the pursuit of their Charter rights to engage in free 

collective bargaining, as we see from the omission in this 

legislation. 

 

I am pleased with the baby-step steps that are going forward 

and look forward to ongoing discussions with the Sask Party 

government as to the amendments that this NDP opposition 

would like to see presented in the legislation in the committee. 

 



2026 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 2009 

So at this time, Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Walsh Acres has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 68, The Arts 

Professions Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 51 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 51 — The 

Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 

rise today to provide comment on Bill 51, The Provincial Court 

Amendment Act. Bill 51 in principle is designed to carry out two 

discernible objectives: number one, enforce professional 

accountability and transparency with the extension of 

investigative powers; and number two, to provide 

administrative clarity related to the valuation of pensions upon 

breakdown of a judge‟s spousal relationship. 

 

There was legislation similar to this in the works while we were 

in government, Mr. Speaker, and while we support this 

legislation in general, we‟re not ruling out amendments as it 

does contain some clauses that had not been discussed while we 

had it under consideration. 

 

It‟s my intention, Mr. Speaker, to briefly comment on these two 

discernible objectives. Number one. First, Bill 51 provides for 

the extension of authority of the Saskatchewan Judicial Council 

to conduct an investigation into allegations of professional 

misconduct for a period of two years after a judge has either 

tendered a resignation or retired. Currently under The 

Provincial Court Act, 1998, the court only has jurisdiction over 

current judges. 

 

So if allegations are made of misconduct not related to criminal 

wrongdoing, investigation can be avoided through resignation 

or retirement. If criminal issues were the nature of the 

misconduct, then the investigation already would go to the 

police regardless of resignation or retirement. This Bill gives 

the Saskatchewan Judicial Council jurisdiction over judges for 

two years after retirement or resignation so judges could no 

longer avoid investigations of misconduct by resigning from the 

bench. However the Bill provides for no sanctions beyond 

removal from the bench and therefore accomplishes little of real 

substance in terms of disciplining judges found guilty of 

misconduct. 

 

The second objective of Bill 51 relates to providing further 

administrative direction to the judges‟ pension plan 

administrator when a judge‟s pension is divided upon the 

breakdown of a spousal relationship. Bill 51 specifically places 

a requirement on the judges‟ pension plan administrator to 

divide the pension plan upon an interspousal agreement or court 

order and further that this portion will go to an RRSP 

[Registered Retirement Savings Plan] or similar type of savings 

plan. Also, if the interspousal agreement is filed only by the 

spouse of the judge, the administrator will provide notice to the 

judge and an opportunity to object. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this matter clarity is of the utmost importance 

when it comes to provisions relating to pensions, benefits, and 

remuneration. So, Mr. Speaker, it is my advice to the House that 

these matters receive appropriate scrutiny in committee to 

ensure that the direction is advisable. 

 

In recognition of the legislation again that we have on the 

agenda today, I now move that we adjourn debate on Bill 51, 

The Provincial Court Amendment Act. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Dewdney has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 51, The Provincial 

Court Amendment Act, 2008. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 61 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Hutchinson that Bill No. 61 — The 

Local Government Election Amendment Act, 2008 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gives 

me a great deal of pleasure to enter into this debate. It‟s the 

debate on local government elections and the amendment Act as 

proposed by this government. 

 

It gives me a great deal of pleasure, Mr. Speaker, because it 

causes me the opportunity to reflect on experiences of the past, 

and I might say the long past — not most recent past but the 

long past. And that was way back in the days when I had the 

opportunity of sitting on a local government as the councillor 

for division 5 of the RM [rural municipality] of Clayton, No. 

333. And I can relate to some of the experiences that‟s outlined 

by the minister in his comments on this Bill and second reading 

comments on this Bill. And there is certainly the opportunity to 

look into the Bills and to modernize the election process of 

local governments. I think that from our own experiences in the 

past that that is something that‟s probably long overdue. 

 

And I could see that the SARM . . . This is another thing, Mr. 

Speaker, that I find quite interesting: that in local governments, 

whether it be the rural municipalities or the urban municipality 

or the school boards, they all have a different process for 

elections. And yet what we‟re doing is electing local people to 

do the governing of the various jurisdictions for us — and we‟re 

asking them to do a fine job — but yet we don‟t have any 

consistency. And I find that a bit strange. 

 



March 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2027 

And I think that the recommendations put forward by the 

minister on this Bill, Bill 61, move in that direction — to bring 

some consistency to the election process and to bring some 

predictability, I guess you would say, to the process and also 

maybe even efficiencies, as I see them. And I would certainly 

strongly support that because there‟s a number of rules and 

regulations that govern the operations of, the election operations 

of rural municipalities and urban municipalities that are really 

resulting in inefficiencies. 

 

And I see that the SARM, the Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association, has asked for these amendments to 

allow councillors to stand as candidates in by-elections for 

mayors or reeves without resigning their council positions. 

 

Without the amendment, if an election were to be held and 

several councillors wanted to run for the mayor or for the 

reeve‟s position, they would all have to resign their council 

position. This would then create really a problem for the council 

itself to be able to continue to operate, having lost quorum. The 

municipalities would then be unable really to conduct their 

business and during that by-election period and during the 

second by-elections to fill the council positions. And that really 

is perhaps an extreme case, but it also is a real case of instances 

in Saskatchewan that such occurrences could take place. 

 

I would say that most recently the need to modernize our 

electoral process is very evident. In rural municipalities for 

example when I was a councillor, the municipal term was two 

years. So every two years a councillor was up for election. Now 

in the rural municipality case, the reeve was also up every two 

years, and his election or her election would take place at the 

same time as the odd-division elections. And even-division 

elections would take place without the reeve election. So that if 

you were a councillor for, say, an even-numbered division, 

halfway through your term, you would have to make the 

decision of whether or not you want to seek the reeve‟s 

position. If you do, you‟d have to resign your council position 

to seek the reeve election. 

 

[16:15] 

 

Now if you were not successful or were successful in retaining 

the reeve or being elected to the reeve‟s position, a vacancy 

would then occur at the council level of which a by-election 

would have to be held to fill that position, and that position 

would be filled for, in most cases, less than a year. 

 

That‟s quite expensive and I mean it‟s, I suppose in relative 

terms, not a huge amount of money but if you look at the 

municipalities and the amount of money they‟d have to, you 

know, and the process they‟d have to go through to fill that 

by-election, it actually is fairly expensive. And for what reason? 

To fill that position for a few months. 

 

So I think that the suggestions by the minister here to move 

forward on having the terms expanded to reflect more the terms 

of provincial governments and federal governments — a 

four-year term — and to make the necessary changes to permit 

councillors to seek other council positions without having to 

resign their seat, I think is a worthwhile one. 

 

Just this past year, in fact last fall, was municipal elections in 

the RM of Clayton and the reeve position came available. And 

here‟s just one example of what I‟m talking about, Mr. Speaker. 

The reeve position came open and one councillor had decided 

that his division was an odd-numbered division, so his term was 

automatically up. So he decided he wasn‟t going to seek 

re-election as a councillor, but he was going to run for the 

reeve‟s position. 

 

Another councillor from an even-numbered division decided 

that they too would seek the reeve‟s position, but they made 

that decision after the normal electoral process of notification of 

vacancies and therefore they had to resign their seat in order to 

seek the reeve‟s position. They were successful, therefore 

creating a vacancy in this particular division which had to be 

filled with a by-election. Being that the by-election was taking 

place at a little later date than the reeve election, of course that 

meant that the new person elected would serve for less than a 

year and have to be back into the electoral process. 

 

So I believe that it‟s time that we take a close look at some of 

the recommendations that are coming forward in this Bill and 

look at the real need to identify ways and means that we can 

improve upon the electoral process. 

 

And it‟s my experience that if you talk to the people on the 

front line, the councillors for the rural municipalities or the 

urban municipality councillors, they‟re the folks that are dealing 

with these issues on a day-by-day basis. These are the folks that 

are dealing with these issues right upfront and, quite frankly, 

they‟re the ones that‟ll have the solutions too. 

 

So I think there‟s a real need to ensure that we have, you know, 

a good open process here that allows the urban municipalities, 

the councillors, the reeves, the mayors, the opportunity to have 

their input into what changes that they would like to see made 

in the electoral process, and how those changes should come 

about and how they could affect their operations in a positive 

way. 

 

And I think that this Bill moves in that direction. I think we 

have to be careful that we don‟t act in too much haste. We want 

to make sure that we have all the i‟s dotted and the t‟s crossed 

and we give the opportunity to councillors to have that input 

and to recognize that that input is so very, very valuable. 

 

I just want to bring to your attention and to the attention of the 

Assembly here the importance, the real importance of local 

governments and how local governments serve us in a very 

efficient and effective way. I remember during my term as 

councillor in division 5 of the RM of Clayton, a hamlet in our 

RM — which had not been an organized hamlet — but a hamlet 

who wanted to improve their lot in life by installing a 

pressurized water system to their residents, did so by going 

through a fairly lengthy process of becoming an organized 

hamlet. 

 

And under the rules and regulations of operations of the 

municipalities, an organized hamlet then enjoys the opportunity 

of having its own governance board. And if my memory serves 

me correct, I believe it was a governance board of three people 

who were duly elected by the residents of the organized hamlet. 

They then were able to levy a special levy on their own 

residents. The residents of that hamlet would then receive and 



2028 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 2009 

enjoy a special levy that would raise money that would cover 

the costs of a water system. 

 

And they did that. And, you know, my hat‟s off to them. It‟d 

take a fair amount of leadership for these folks to — and 

initiative — to go out and convince their friends and neighbours 

that, yes, their tax bill would certainly increase a marginal 

amount. But as a result of the increase they would give them the 

powers to financially be able to establish a water system that 

would serve their residents and certainly, you know, certainly 

provide them the luxury, I guess you would say, of having 

running water, but also provide them the opportunity to 

improve their property and to enhance the value of their 

property. 

 

And they did that. They qualified for grants, government grants, 

and took that money, and they established a water system that 

serves the residents of that particular hamlet. They did so by 

establishing themselves as an organized hamlet, electing 

themselves an administration committee, I guess you‟d call it. 

And they‟re governed by the rules and regulations of the local 

government, which simply stated that they would report to the 

local RM. The RM would levy the tax on the residences of that 

hamlet only, collect that tax, and then turn it over to the 

administration committee to administer, and actually did very 

well. 

 

At the same time, Mr. Speaker, there was another hamlet in the 

same RM that did not take the initiative to become organized; 

they simply remained as a hamlet under the jurisdiction of the 

RM. In fact they fell under the jurisdiction of the councillor — 

in this case was myself — and so it was . . . I suppose it‟s an 

opportunity both ways for communities and local government 

leadership to look at ways and means that they can improve the 

lots of their residents and the lives of their residents, and in such 

a way it was done in a co-operative and forthright manner. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think it‟s fair to say that it appears that the 

provisions of this legislation do come from an ongoing process 

that has been developed over many years within the department 

of the Ministry of Municipal Affairs. And where people run into 

problems in local government elections, they‟re the ones that 

can come forward with the ideas of the change and the 

corrections. 

 

And we need to ensure that we have a good dialogue with these 

people right across the province, whether they be from 

municipalities in rural Saskatchewan, and whether that 

municipality be on the east side or the west side or the south 

end of the province; or urban municipalities right across this 

great province of ours, whether they come from large, large 

cities like Regina or Saskatoon, or smaller communities out 

there like Southey, for example, or La Ronge, or any of these 

here communities that play such a major role in our economy 

and our society of the province of Saskatchewan here. 

 

But I think it‟s also very important that we have an open and a 

clear, concise dialogue with the northern municipalities because 

they have a lot of challenges that perhaps aren‟t experienced by 

other municipalities across this great province. Having had the 

opportunity a couple years ago to tour much of northern 

Saskatchewan and really get to meet a lot of the residents of 

northern Saskatchewan first-hand, you quickly recognize that 

one of the huge challenges that they have is the challenges of 

distance. There‟s large, large distances between communities in 

northern Saskatchewan, and these distances can create some 

special challenges, I suppose, for those communities to be able 

to stay in touch with one another, to be able to work 

co-operatively with one another. 

 

And it‟s an interesting experience to have travelled northern 

Saskatchewan and to have taken the time to meet in most cases 

with the local leadership there, the local governance there, 

whether it be the mayor — and usually it was the mayor — and 

the councillors that we would certainly make the opportunity to 

get together with and have a discussion on the issue that we 

were dealing with at that time. But one of the things that was 

quickly recognized was that the distances involved in these 

communities staying in touch and being able to, in some cases, 

share services that mayhap they couldn‟t afford on their own, 

but in a collective manner they could. 

 

And it was neat to have the opportunity to meet with the parent 

organization, I guess you would say, the New North, which is 

the organization that consists of the mayors of all the northern 

communities there, and sit in on their meetings and listen to 

their discussions. And they took the time to share with us — me 

in particular — some of their concerns and their thoughts on the 

challenges that they face in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

I suppose the number one challenge is roads, a lot of roads up 

there that quite frankly I don‟t believe are up to a reasonable 

standard. I think that there certainly needs to be work done on 

those roads, and I think that perhaps not enough attention has 

been paid in the past to the plight of the northern residents and 

the needs of the northern residents. And I would hope that we 

would see the opportunity perhaps through this process, but the 

opportunity somewhere for the northern leadership, the northern 

community leaderships — the mayors, the councillors — to 

have the opportunity to express their wants, their desires, their 

needs to the governing body of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I say roads because probably roads is one of the first things 

that you see because that‟s what you drive on. And I had the 

opportunity of driving up there, mostly in the summer months 

although some winter trips we did make, but mostly in the 

summer months. And some of those roads, Mr. Speaker, were, 

well less than adequate would be probably the way I would 

describe it — less than adequate. 

 

And something that we overlook perhaps in southern 

Saskatchewan here is the fact that we‟re usually served by roads 

leading us at least in two separate directions — if not in four but 

certainly in two separate directions — so that if for one reason 

or another a road in one direction isn‟t passable or isn‟t fit or 

isn‟t very good, we can always get out another way. That‟s an 

option that is not available to communities in northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Northern Saskatchewan, most communities there are served by 

one road. You go in on that road and you come out on that road. 

If anything should happen, as weather-related conditions to that 

road, you‟re stranded or you‟re isolated. And we‟ve seen that 

happen in the past, particularly with spring flooding. 

 

So I think, Mr. Speaker, and when you drive up there in the 



March 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2029 

summertime and you drive on these roads and they‟re for the 

most part gravel roads — and I say gravel rather loosely; I think 

they‟re mostly dust roads — we recognize quickly the real need 

for the northern leadership there to get their message out to the 

government, whether it be through the municipal system or 

through highways system, to address this particular need 

because it‟s a road that serves the greatest resource that we have 

in this province and that‟s the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And if you drive on these roads, you find that these people 

living in these communities are isolated to that one road. If they 

wish to travel out, they travel out on that road. When they travel 

in, they travel in on that road. They have only one way — only 

one way in and one way out. So that road of course is very, very 

important. 

 

But I think, Mr. Speaker, that this is why it is essential that we 

have a good consultation process with the leadership of the 

northern municipalities so that we can give them the 

opportunity to fully express to the officials of government their 

needs as they understand it, their challenges that they are facing. 

And I would hope that this government would be open to 

receiving that. 

 

I would hope this minister, perhaps even through this 

legislation, would find a way to perhaps amend the legislation 

to allow for really a focused, really a focused attention on 

providing the opportunity for northern mayors and the 

representatives of New North to be able to on a regular basis — 

and I‟m saying a couple of times a year — to have that 

opportunity to sit down with the minister and discuss the 

challenges that they‟re facing in northern Saskatchewan. I think 

that would be very worthwhile, not only to the good folks who 

live up there, but also to the government itself to be able to hear 

first-hand from people who are experiencing those difficulties. 

And I think that would be a very, very worthwhile venture and I 

would urge the government to move in that direction. 

 

[16:30] 

 

I think another thing, Mr. Speaker, is that this Bill relates to the 

fact that there is a desire by local level to have many of the rules 

of the local elections be similar or the same as those in the 

provincial elections and in some cases federal elections. And I 

think that‟s only reasonable. I think that consistency is 

important. 

 

I think that you and I and the members in this House who pay a 

lot more attention to the rules of elections and the governance 

of elections and the implementation of elections than probably 

the average person does, and I think you would, if we went out 

and talked to oh, pick 10 people in Saskatchewan and we asked 

them about what they thought about the election process — 

whether it be municipal or whether it be provincial or whether it 

be federal — I think they would say that common sense would 

tell you that they should be consistent. The terms should be of 

the same length. The process used to elect people should be the 

same. And I don‟t think we‟d disagree with that. 

 

It‟s right now quite awkward in the local government process. If 

you look at the rural municipalities, the term of a councillor in 

the RM of Clayton, for example, or any RM in Saskatchewan 

here, is two years. They are elected on a two-year term whereas 

in the urban municipality setting they are elected on a three-year 

term. And then we have a different process again for the 

election of school boards and we have elections at various times 

throughout, throughout our electoral year. 

 

So I think that there‟s a real need for some consistencies to 

bring things into line, some simplification of the electoral 

process, and to encourage more people to get involved in that 

process. 

 

I know that in some cases I‟ve read articles in the paper where 

municipalities, rural municipalities in particular, are finding it 

difficult sometimes to fill vacancies. There seems to be a lack 

of interest in some circles to participate in the local government 

process. And that‟s unfortunate because they do serve a very 

useful purpose and I would like to see perhaps consistency . . . 

Perhaps length of term would be more attractive to somebody 

would really want to get involved and seek a local government 

position simply because they would have the opportunity of 

time to be able to fulfill their ideas, fulfill their mandate to the 

good folks that they asked for support from. And a four-year 

term certainly would give a greater opportunity than a two-year 

term. 

 

Having experienced two-year terms myself as a municipal 

councillor, I know that you spent the first year trying to do 

enough stuff to win the support of the election on the second 

year. So it was an interesting process of which you put yourself 

through, but a four-year term in my opinion would expand the 

opportunity for individuals who found themselves fortunate 

enough to be elected as a councillor and give them the time to 

be able to put together a plan to develop their division in a way 

that would benefit all the people in that division. And I think 

that that‟s quite important, doing so within the framework of the 

RM, and the RM ensuring that whatever was done in a division 

was supportive of the rest of the work being done in an RM. 

 

So I think that there‟s a lot of fairly good stuff in this Bill, Bill 

61, The Local Government Election Amendment Act, 2008. I do 

think though that there is a real need for us to be careful of 

speed in which we move forward on this Bill. And I do believe 

that there is a need for us as the opposition to take a closer look 

at this Bill, and ensure that the provisions of this legislation 

apparently has come from a process that it had developed over 

many years by the Department of Municipal Affairs. 

 

There‟s a real desire at the local level to have many of the rules 

in the local elections to be made similar to that of the provincial 

elections, or in some cases, federal elections. It‟s important that 

we take the time and we spend the time in looking at the 

specific provisions to make sure that we catch all the nuances of 

the suggestions or identify the problems that may arise. We 

have quite a number of people with that experience on this side 

of the House, who have experienced either local government at 

some level, and we may identify areas that we would suggest 

the legislation could be fine-tuned. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I think we need the time to consult 

with the various stakeholders across this province and to get 

feedback from the front-line people. Because I personally 

believe that‟s very important because it‟s the front-line people, 

the front-line people, who deal with the issues on a day-by-day 

basis. These folks are the ones that have identified the 



2030 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 2009 

problems. These are the folks who can identify the solutions. So 

with that, Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to adjourn debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Northeast has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 61, The Local 

Government Election Amendment Act, 2008. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 46 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 46 — The Labour 

Market Commission Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — The members on the other side, Mr. Speaker, 

said they haven‟t had enough yet, so I‟m back on my . . . 

[inaudible] . . . I will attempt, Mr. Speaker, I want to assure the 

members opposite I will do my best to keep them awake, 

although I can‟t guarantee that, but we will certainly do our 

best. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it again is a pleasure for me to rise and to enter 

into this debate on behalf of the fine people of Regina 

Northeast. You travel across this great province of ours, you‟ll 

quickly recognize that there are no finer people in the world 

than Saskatchewan people, and I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, 

there are no finer people in Saskatchewan than the people in 

Regina Northeast. So I really appreciate the opportunity to . . . 

and the honour it is to represent them and to have the 

opportunity to rise in this House and share with you and the 

members of this House some of the thoughts and the feelings on 

various issues as felt by the good folks out there. 

 

The Saskatchewan Labour Market Commission was formed on 

the basis that labour market planning and coordination is best 

achieved through partnerships between labour, business, 

education and training of students, government and other 

stakeholders to essentially connect all the dots within the 

Saskatchewan labour market. Mr. Speaker, it has worked well. 

 

The Saskatchewan Labour Market Commission will have the 

industry focus on providing advice to Saskatchewan‟s key 

strategic labour market issues. It was built, Mr. Speaker, and 

operates on the principles of co-operation, recognizing that 

bringing all the stakeholders together at one table, so to speak, 

to be able to, on an ongoing basis, discuss the issues that are 

facing the marketplace in Saskatchewan would be nothing but 

beneficial to all the stakeholders. So it would be done on a 

co-operative basis. 

 

It would be done by working together — identifying the issues, 

identifying the concerns, identifying some of the peaks and the 

valleys within the industry, recognizing ways and means of 

levelling off some of the peaks and filling the valleys so that we 

didn‟t have great, wild fluctuations in our marketplace here. 

And it meant nothing but the betterment of the industry. The 

betterment of the industry means the betterment of the 

stakeholders and those involved in industry. 

 

And it was also a forward-thinking tank in some ways. It would 

look forward into the future as much as possible to identify 

upcoming or possible upcoming issues — whether they be 

positive issues or negative issues — but identifying those issues 

so that the industry itself could be ready for it. The industry 

could react and not be caught off guard, but could react to the 

changing climates as they were recognized and head off any 

possible problems that could arise and avoid pitfalls and avoid 

troubles within the industry. The establishment of the 

Saskatchewan Labour Market Commission, which brings 

together labour, business, First Nations and Métis, and the 

social economy, the training systems, and government to 

provide strategic advice to the labour market, as far as trends 

and issues and strategies is concerned. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I just want to take a moment to say that the 

social economy is a term that‟s used here. And the social 

economy means the not-for-profit sector that seeks to enhance 

the social, economic, and environmental conditions of our 

communities and includes a volunteer sector. So it brought 

together the whole gamut, the whole gamut of our society as it 

would reflect upon the marketplace and reflect upon the market 

trends. And it would help by sitting down and having those 

representatives of the various aspects of industry to be able to 

indentify some of the problems that they are facing, some of the 

problems that they foresee in the future, and based on the 

experiences of the past and based on their advice, often policies 

could be adopted to be able to head off any real negative impact 

upon our industries. 

 

And is it an important thing? I think it‟s very important, Mr. 

Speaker. I think it‟s very important that we have that 

communication, that dialogue take place to ensure that we as a 

society in Saskatchewan here benefit from it, to ensure that we 

benefit from having a strong industry. And that strong industry 

can only be obtained by working together in a co-operative 

atmosphere. 

 

And it‟s very important, very important particularly in slow 

times when the economy is slower, when perhaps there isn‟t as 

much activity going on as we would like to see it, where there 

isn‟t as much happening and there isn‟t much employment. It‟s 

very important. But, Mr. Speaker, it is also just as important, 

maybe even more so important, in boom times. In times of a 

strong economy, we need to have that co-operation and 

understanding so that we can avoid any pitfalls, any negativities 

out there that may impact upon the industry that would then in 

turn impact upon the players within that industry, whether it be 

the employer or whether it be the employees, and the off spin of 

that on the social economy, and so on and so forth. 

 

So I think it‟s very important that we maintain that dialogue; we 

maintain it in the strongest method possible. And in order to do 

that you have to have good representation from a wide variety 

of those that are involved in the industry. And that is something 

that, in the past at least, the Saskatchewan Labour Market 

Commission did was it brought about that representation. They 



March 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2031 

brought together those people from a broad, broad sector of our 

economy that played a major role in market developments and 

provided the opportunity to share information with all sectors of 

that industry. 

 

It‟s a little like the role that was played at one point in time by 

the Saskatchewan Construction Panel which I did have the 

pleasure and honour of chairing for a number of years. I believe 

now the member from Weyburn chairs that. I thought that was 

also a very good process because it did similar type stuff. It . . . 

Oh, I see. We have a new Chair over there now. Okay. Well at 

one time the member from Weyburn chaired that, anyway. 

 

But I thought it was a very good process because it brought 

together all the stakeholders. It was done with the best interest 

of the industry. It certainly was not done with the interest of 

somebody competing with somebody else, or getting ahead, or 

even a political umbrella over it. None of that was involved 

because we had people from all political stripes on that 

committee, and they worked together very, very well. They 

worked together very, very well. 

 

And I found it very useful because it identified not only some of 

the pitfalls within the industry and the sharing of information, 

we were able to perhaps in some cases address issues before 

they got away from us. We were able to identify solutions to 

some problems that were brought forward. But it also gave an 

opportunity for new and innovative techniques to be brought to 

the table and be shared by all the participants within the 

industry. So I thought that was a very useful tool, and much 

would be served in the same way by the Labour Market 

Commission. 

 

I think really the Labour Market Commission should be 

expanded, not downsized as this government intends to do. But 

it should be expanded to incorporate more people and more 

aspects of the industry into that continuous discussions and 

continuous identifying issues and problems. There‟s several 

conversion factors that cause the tightening labour market 

conditions including . . . and that‟s something we‟re facing here 

today. We hear on a regular basis of the booming economy 

having caused a shortage of skilled labour. And that‟s part of it, 

there‟s no doubt about it, that‟s part of it. 

 

[16:45] 

 

But as the economy cools off, we still find ourselves facing, in a 

lot of cases, a shortage of skilled labour. And some of that is, 

yes as I said, the strong economy and the strong growth in that 

economy. But also we‟re looking at an aging population. Some 

of us — not you and I, Mr. Speaker, I know — but some of us 

are getting older as time goes by. In the whole process, there‟s a 

huge bubble within a short period of time of baby boomers who 

will be retiring, and that‟s taking a lot of people out of the 

marketplace. But what it‟s also taking out of the marketplace is 

a lot of experience, a lot of knowledge, a lot of skill is coming 

out of that marketplace when we lose that group of people. So 

those are some of the issues that are facing our industry today. 

 

And Saskatchewan is experiencing a shortage of skilled labour 

and qualified labour, a shortage of skilled and qualified labour, 

and most difficulties in finding workers to fill the skilled trades 

and labour category. And of course, our health care concerns 

continue on with a shortage of health care professionals right 

across the piece. Despite the efforts of the minister across the 

way, he‟s come up pretty short on that particular front. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Labour Market Commission serves an 

extremely useful purpose. It‟s a board that has in the past been, 

I believe, it was a 10-person board, is now being reduced to a 

6-person board. And it‟s interesting, Mr. Speaker, the process 

that‟s taken place to cause this reduction. 

 

It had not been one of full and open consultation, but rather it‟s 

been one of stealth. I suppose you would say, was just 

implemented without any real discussion, particularly with 

labour, as to the changes to the makeup of the board. And as a 

result of that we‟re seeing a downsize of the board, down to 

representatives of three and three — three from labour and three 

from the employers. 

 

And that‟s sad, Mr. Speaker, because at a time like this when 

we really need more expertise to identify the issues that are 

facing us, particularly the skilled shortage, the shortage of 

skilled workers would be one of the issues, but there are other 

issues on the horizon. We have less people to call upon, less 

expertise to call upon, and what we‟re seeing is a loss of those 

members from the board. With that loss we‟re seeing a loss of 

knowledge, a loss of experience. We‟re seeing a loss, really, of 

different points of view. And that is very, very alarming to me 

because we need that different points of view in order to 

maintain a balance. We need to maintain a balance within the 

board in order to ensure that as a result of the discussions that 

the board comes up with the best possible policy. It has arrived 

at the best possible policy because they have a difference of 

points of view coming together, discussing the issues, and then 

coming up with an acceptable solution. 

 

Not everybody on that board will get everything they want, but 

what will . . . The opportunity there will be given there for those 

individuals to express their thoughts, their concerns, and be able 

to deliberate to find the best possible solution for the issue at 

hand. 

 

The legislation removes the onus to consult with organizations 

representing business and labour before appointing board 

members. Well who is the government to decide that they know 

better than the organizations such as the chamber of commerce 

or the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour? That‟s, Mr. 

Speaker, a bit alarming when we see the government making 

the assumption that they no longer need to have the input from 

the stakeholders, the front-line people, the people who are 

dealing with the issues each and every day. They no longer 

need that input. They would rather just make that decision on 

their own. 

 

And that I find disappointing, to say the least — just 

disappointing. Because I would hope that in a time like this 

with a strong economy with a need for growth in our 

construction sector particularly, with a growth in our labour 

pool, we would be looking at ways and means to identify how 

we can do this in a co-operative way, rather than being rigid and 

saying well we‟re just not going to listen to you. We‟re going to 

impose upon your industry, our will. The Labour Market 

Commission was an opportunity for business and labour to 

work together to identify issues of concern, to identify solutions 



2032 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 2009 

that would be compatible to all. And that is a bit disappointing 

that the government of the day hasn‟t moved in that direction. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, I understand that the budget of the Labour 

Market Commission has been cut in half from the previous 

year, reducing yet its ability to work, reducing yet its ability to 

work co-operatively with each other, reducing yet its ability to 

recognize the issues and the problems that are facing 

Saskatchewan people on this particular front. And not moving 

forward in a positive and progressive way but actually moving 

backwards and isolating themselves and leaving the inability for 

the stakeholders within the industry, particularly the 

construction industry, to be able to share their concerns and 

their thoughts, their issues, as they identify them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government has a responsibility to help 

Saskatchewan meet the many challenges that come with a 

strong economy. And there are challenges. I mean nobody will 

deny that we all want to live in a society and an economy and in 

a jurisdiction of the province of Saskatchewan in a time of 

prosperity. We want this because this is great. It‟s always great 

to have prosperity. But at the same time, there is the dark side to 

that. There‟s a dark side to a boom, and there is a responsibility 

that government has to address the victims of the boom, the 

victims who find themselves on that dark side. 

 

And I would hope that . . . the Labour Market Commission was 

one of those vehicles that the government could use to help 

identify and address those issues that arise on the dark side of a 

booming economy and could be . . . But certainly when you 

restrict the commission‟s ability to operate — when you restrict 

the commission‟s ability to operate through manpower, 

reducing the number of people on that commission to a mere 

six; cutting their budget in half; reducing their ability once 

again to be able to research and identify issues and identify 

solutions to those issues — you certainly are not, certainly are 

not working to identify those victims who find themselves on 

the dark side of a booming economy. 

 

And that‟s disappointing once again, Mr. Speaker. I‟m 

disappointed to see that the government hasn‟t moved in a more 

positive manner towards assisting those people because all 

people in Saskatchewan are Saskatchewan residents. They all 

deserve to be treated with, you know, with the opportunities 

that a booming economy brings to us. Unfortunately that 

doesn‟t always happen. I mean, I think we would all agree we 

would like to see everybody share in it, and we would like 

everybody to share equally. 

 

And unfortunately it doesn‟t always happen and there needs to 

be systems put into place. And there is a role for government to 

play there — to identify those issues, to identify what needs to 

be done, what the government can be done either through 

themselves or through other agencies to provide the safety nets 

for those people who don‟t fully participate in the booming 

economy of Saskatchewan here. 

 

Saskatchewan is currently experiencing a serious labour 

shortage, and there is a deep gap between what the government 

is doing and what actually needs to be done to address it. 

 

And I think this is just one example of what creates that gap, 

Mr. Speaker, is rather than enhancing a tool . . . And that‟s what 

the Labour Market Commission would be is a tool to be able to 

address some of the shortfalls that we experience in our 

economy here. In order to use this tool effectively, it has to 

have the resources, and what we‟re seeing through this Bill is 

we‟re seeing the stripping away of those resources, stripping 

away of those resources by reducing the manpower, the person 

power on that board. Reducing it from a high I believe of 11 or 

something along that line — I can‟t remember the exact number 

— and seeing it reduced down to six; three representatives from 

the employers and three representatives from labour. And that 

lessens the ability for these individuals to be able to effectively 

do their job. But what really restricts them is by restricting their 

resources of funds, having their budget cut in half restricts their 

ability to go out there in a meaningful way and do the research 

that‟s necessary to do the investigations that are necessary to 

identify the shortfalls within the industry and identify solutions 

for those shortfalls so that the people of Saskatchewan benefit 

from it and not be the losers, but really be the winners. 

 

We have a great deal of respect for the work that has been done 

by the Labour Market Commission in this province. They have 

a long history of doing good, positive work for the people of 

Saskatchewan. And there is, to me, all the reasons . . . If you 

look at that history of the work that they have done since they 

were first formed, if you look at that, the results of the work that 

they have done, you would say that its evidence is obvious, that 

this is an organization or an agency that should be enhanced, 

not reduced. But it should be enhanced because of the quality of 

work it does for the ordinary people of this province, for the 

quality of work it does for the participants within the 

construction industry, for the participants within the labour 

market itself right across this great province. They have a track 

record that‟s unblemished, a track record that we all will be 

quite proud of when we look at the reality of the work that‟s 

being done by this agency and by this commission. 

 

And at first glance you just wonder, why would you cut this 

back? Why would you reduce the number of people on the 

commission? In fact what you think you should do is enhance it 

based on the quality of work. Based on the record that they have 

achieved under their term, you would say it should be enhanced 

and they should be given greater resources, give them more 

people. They should be given more money to ensure that they 

continue to do the quality of work that has stood them so well in 

this great province. 

 

This legislation is based on the government‟s belief that the 

current Labour Market Commission is an impediment to the 

economic growth and this is not the case. It does not impede the 

growth of the marketplace. In fact, Mr. Speaker, it assists in that 

growth. It assists in that growth because it is able to work, bring 

together all the various stakeholders within the industry, bring 

them together in a central location on a regular basis, give them 

the opportunity to discuss the issues of the day that are facing 

the industry. 

 

It has been well established that when this process is 

implemented and when this process is carried out to its fullest, 

it does nothing but benefit the industry. When it benefits the 

industry and causes the industry to grow, it benefits all the 

stakeholders within that industry. So co-operation is truly a 

solution to some of the issues that are facing the industry here 

today. 



March 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2033 

Some of those issues, yes there‟s a shortage of skilled workers. 

We recognize that and by working in opposite directions to try 

to address that issue, we‟re not going to be able to resolve it. 

What we need to do, Mr. Speaker, is work co-operatively in a 

manner to ensure that all the stakeholders, all the stakeholders 

are able to share with each other their issues, to identify the 

pitfalls as they recognize them, to put forward their thoughts on 

what it will take to address those pitfalls to ensure that 

Saskatchewan people and Saskatchewan labour people have the 

strongest labour market available. Because it serves not only the 

individual labourers involved there, Mr. Speaker, but it ensures 

that industry and the chamber of commerce and investors within 

our province here enjoy a strong marketplace. And they, in turn, 

enjoy a return that they would expect to be a fair and reasonable 

return while, at the same time, providing great opportunities for 

the people in this province to be able to live the quality of life 

that they are entitled to. 

 

The Speaker: — It being now 5 p.m., the Assembly will recess 

until 7 p.m. this evening. 

 

[The Assembly recessed until 19:00.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2001 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2001 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2001 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2001 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2001 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2001 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2002 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2002 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Saskatoon Organization Fights Homelessness 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2002 

 Recognition of Saskatchewan Curling Team 

  LeClerc .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2003 

 Recognizing AIDS Saskatoon 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2003 

 Pharmacy Awareness Week 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2003 

 New Facility for Veterans’ Club 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2004 

 Rural Women’s Month in Saskatchewan 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2004 

 Christmas Dinner for Less Fortunate 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2004 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Property Tax Relief 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2005 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2005 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2005 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2005 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2006 

 Energy Costs 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2006 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2007 

 Tuition Fees 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2008 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2008 

 Provincial Park Fees 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2009 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2009 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Saskatchewan Scholarship of Honour 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2010 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2010 

TABLING OF SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2010 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2010 

MOTIONS 

 Leave of Absence 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2011 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 70 — The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2008 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2011 

  Morgan (referral to committee) ............................................................................................................................................. 2012 

 Bill No. 47 — The Pipelines Amendment Act, 2008 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2012 

  Gantefoer (referral to committee) ......................................................................................................................................... 2012 

  



 

 Bill No. 57 — The Land Titles Amendment Act. 2008 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2012 

  Gantefoer (referral to committee) ......................................................................................................................................... 2013 

 Bill No. 65 — The Seizure of Criminal Property Act, 2008 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2013 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2014 

 Bill No. 73 — The University of Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 2008 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2015 

 Bill No. 66 — The Witness Protection Act 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2016 

 Bill No. 67 — The Education Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2)/ 

 Loi n
o
 2 de 2008 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2017 

 Bill No. 71 — The Innovation Saskatchewan Act 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2019 

 Bill No. 74 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (English) Amendment and Repeal Act, 2008 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2020 

 Bill No. 75 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Bilingual) Amendment and Repeal Act, 2008/ 

 Loi corrective (lois bilingues) de 2008 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2021 

 Bill No. 76 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2022 

 Bill No. 68 — The Arts Professions Act/Loi sur les professions artistiques 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2023 

 Bill No. 51 — The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2008 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2026 

 Bill No. 61 — The Local Government Election Amendment Act, 2008 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2026 

 Bill No. 46 — The Labour Market Commission Amendment Act, 2008 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2030 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 


