




















































Hansard: March 17, 2009


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 34A  TUESDAY, MARCH 17, 2009, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2325 

 March 17, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to introduce to you and then through you to all 

members of this Legislative Assembly, someone who is no 

stranger to Saskatchewan, someone who is no stranger actually 

to this Legislative Assembly. They are staff of the consulate 

office, the US [United States] consulate office in Calgary, 

together with the Consul General. 

 

And I’ll introduce all of them if I may. Joining Gwen Jacobson 

from our protocol offices, Michelle Cook from public affairs of 

the US consulate. Danny Fennell has also joined us. He is the 

deputy principal officer. And then Tom Huffaker is here, our 

Consul General from the United States stationed in Calgary, 

and responsible for relations with Alberta, Saskatchewan, and 

the Northwest Territories. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to just point out that Tom has been serving 

in this capacity since 2006 and has served very, very well both 

for, obviously for his citizens — for the citizens of the United 

States of America — but he has been a friend to Western 

Canada. He has been a friend to Saskatchewan and has made 

sure that there has been progress on a number of important files, 

trade issues between our two countries that are particularly 

important to us here in Saskatchewan, and I would say to those 

rest of the residents of Western Canada. 

 

He is on a bit of a farewell tour. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, 

he’s going to be moving on to other things. The good news is 

that Canada gets to keep him. He’s going to be joining CAPP, 

the Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers, and 

performing very important work there. So we’re grateful that 

he’s going to be remaining in Canada, continuing to work on 

very important issues of energy and the environment for the 

entire continent. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it is a chance for us to say today, to Tom, 

thank you for what you have done, representing your country 

here, but also furthering Western Canadian interests in a North 

American context. Mr. Speaker, may I ask that all would join 

with me in welcoming Tom to the Legislative Assembly today, 

and to his staff as well. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On 

behalf of the official opposition, I want to welcome Mr. 

Huffaker to the legislature once again, and to thank him for the 

work that he’s done on behalf of the citizens in the United 

States, but also citizens that live here in the province of 

Saskatchewan. We’ve been mutual beneficiaries because of the 

work that has been done between our respective jurisdictions. 

 

On behalf of the opposition, we want to wish you well in your 

new job with CAPP. CAPP is a group of people that regularly 

meets with members of the legislature, and I think we 

appreciate, as all members of the legislature, having that kind of 

informed discussion. So once again, thank you for your work, 

and good luck. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Wascana Plains. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to rise today 

and introduce to you and through you to the members of the 

Legislative Assembly a constituent of Regina Wascana Plains 

who is here today with her team, seated in the Speaker’s 

gallery. 

 

I’m very pleased to welcome Joyce Tourney, a well-known and 

very successful business person right here in Regina. Although 

she was originally from the Govan area, Joyce has made Regina 

her home since the 1970s and some years afterwards she began 

working with the Re/Max Realty organization. She hasn’t 

looked back since then, Mr. Speaker, and has grown her 

business tremendously, receiving numerous awards which you 

will hear about later. 

 

With Joyce are the members of her team, and I’m happy to 

introduce them to the Legislative Assembly. Please rise as I 

mention your name: Don Tourney, Leanne Tourney, Scott 

Predenchuk, Meriel Gordon, Dianna Malhiot, Nancy Polvi, 

Corrine Boivin-Englund, Natasha Blaisdell, Craig Adam, Debra 

Duncan, Sylvia Sanderson, Elyse Gusway, Regan Tate, Gail 

Herreman, and Kim Mitchell. 

 

I ask the hon. members to join me here today in welcoming the 

Joyce Tourney team. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Kindersley. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 

afternoon we’re joined by some special guests in your gallery, 

representing the Idaho National Laboratory, folks that have 

come to Saskatchewan today. There are three gentlemen, 

Michael Hagood, Harold McFarlane, and J.W. Bill Rogers. 

They all represent the Idaho National Laboratory. 

 

The laboratory does a lot of work with respect to energy and 

environmental sectors, addressing aspects of renewable fossil 

and nuclear energy. They are in Saskatchewan today to do some 

business with the province of Saskatchewan. We’re looking 

forward to collaborating with them, Mr. Speaker, in a number 

of areas of important research in terms of energy supplies for 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

So ladies and gentlemen, and members of the legislature, I’d 

ask you to welcome our special guests from Idaho to 



2326 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2009 

Saskatchewan and to the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure 

to introduce to you and through you to all members of the Hon. 

Assembly, Dr. Tom Porter. Tom works within the office of the 

vice-president research at the University of Saskatchewan. 

Along with his delightful wife, Dr. Sarah Hillis, their daughter 

Maria, and sons, Sam and Ben, they together contribute to our 

community and to our fine province of Saskatchewan. Mr. 

Speaker, I’ll ask all members to join me in welcoming Dr. 

Porter to his Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Toth: — Members, as well it’s my pleasure to 

introduce a group of young people who’ve joined us, sitting in 

the Speaker’s gallery — seven grade 7 and 8 students from 

Cowessess Community Education Centre. They’re joined by 

their teacher, Ann Dusterbeck and Warren Daniels, teacher’s 

assistant. I had the privilege of meeting with them a few short 

moments ago, and I invite members to join with me in 

welcoming these young students to their Legislative Chamber. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Today I 

present a petition calling for wage equity for CBO 

[community-based organization] workers. We know these 

workers in community-based organizations, the result of low 

wages result in high staff turnover and subsequent lack of 

caregiver continuity. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the development and 

implementation of a multi-year funding plan to ensure that 

CBO workers achieve wage equity with employees who 

perform work of equal value in government departments. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And these petitioners, Mr. Speaker, come from a wide range of 

communities throughout the province including Regina, 

Montmartre, Fort Qu’Appelle, Lumsden, Silton, Buena Vista, 

Moosomin, and Pleasantdale, Saskatchewan. 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

pleased today to rise and present a petition in support of a new 

Saskatchewan Hospital in North Battleford. Mr. Speaker, the 

petitioners note that Prairie North Regional Health Authority 

has indicated that construction of a new hospital is a priority 

and has committed the resources to develop preliminary facility 

and site plans. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petitioners ask: 

 

. . . that the Legislative Assembly call upon the 

Government of Saskatchewan to immediately recommit 

funds and resources for the continued development and 

construction of a new Saskatchewan Hospital at North 

Battleford and provide the Prairie North Regional Health 

Authority with the authority necessary to complete this 

essential and much-needed project. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by residents of The 

Battlefords and surrounding area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Before I move on, earlier in the afternoon I 

explained to the students a little bit about how the Assembly 

works, and unfortunately the members haven’t let me down. So 

I’ve asked the members to pay a little more attention as the 

other members are on their feet. 

 

I recognize the member from Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 

stand today and present a petition in support of the expansion of 

the graduate retention program here in Saskatchewan. The 

prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately expand the graduate retention 

program to include master’s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are 

students from the University of Regina and the University of 

Saskatchewan. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions in support of a needed reduction in the portion 

of education property taxes. This is needed by Saskatchewan 

families and business who are particularly affected by the 

impacts of reassessment here in 2009. The petition reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to stop withholding and to provide 

significant, sustainable, long-term property tax relief to 

property owners by 2009 through significantly increasing 

the provincial portion of education funding. 



March 17, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2327 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these are signed by concerned citizens here 

in Regina. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

to repair Highway 135 that runs through Pelican Narrows, 

Saskatchewan. This petition is signed by leadership and 

community members of Pelican Narrows First Nation, the 

village of Pelican Narrows and area. The prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to pave seven kilometres of Highway 135 

through the community of Pelican Narrows, as committed 

on August 24, 2007. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And it is signed by good citizens of Pelican Narrows. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

St. Patrick’s Day 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — Mr. Speaker, today is St. Patrick’s Day, 

don’t you know. It’s on this day that we celebrate the patron 

saint of Ireland. While it’s not an official holiday here in 

Saskatchewan, it is of course widely observed as a time of 

fellowship, merriment, and green beverages. I would like to 

note that I made arrangements at my mother’s nursing home for 

her to be able to watch today’s proceedings, as I myself am 

proud to be of both Irish and Scottish descent, the Irish heritage 

coming from my mother’s side of the family. 

 

Mr. O’Speaker, my great-grandparents emigrated to this 

country from Ireland and settled in Ontario. My grandparents 

chose to go west and were among the early settlers of this 

province. Mr. Speaker, when I think about the trek my 

grandparents made to the Prairies, I am often reminded of a 

specific line from a popular Irish toast, “May the wind be at 

your back.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think this line is relevant not only to the story of 

my grandparents, but also of Saskatchewan today. In this 

province we are looking forward to the future with the wind at 

our backs — just like my grandparents so many years ago. They 

were filled with optimism and anticipation for their future, just 

as we are today in Saskatchewan. 

 

I encourage members of this Assembly to join me in 

recognizing this important day. And I will end with, “May you 

be half an hour in heaven before the devil knows you’re dead.” 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Air Cadets Participate in Interprovincial Exchange 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It gives 

me great pleasure to rise today to recognize the air cadets of 

Moose Jaw’s No. 40 Snowbird Squadron. In February the group 

of young cadets travelled to Pictou County, Nova Scotia for a 

five-day exchange visit with air cadets of the Chisholm Squad 

in Westville. 

 

The excursion was part of an interprovincial exchange program 

developed to allow cadets to gain cultural perspectives by 

visiting peers in other parts of Canada. The group experienced a 

diverse itinerary that emphasized aspects of citizenship and 

cross-cultural exchange. They toured museums, Pier 21 in 

Halifax, and even a maple syrup processing operation. 

 

It was a wonderful opportunity to experience the differences in 

cultural, topography, and history between the Maritimes and the 

Prairies. I know the cadets enjoyed this experience and gained 

much knowledge from their adventure in Nova Scotia. Ryan 

Johnson, commanding officer of the Moose Jaw cadets, saw the 

experience as a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity for the 

participants. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in congratulating 

Cathie McIntosh, commanding officer of the No. 40 Snowbird 

Squadron, and all the cadets who were able to take part in this 

exchange program. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Canadian Oval Sled Dog Championship Derby 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past weekend I 

had the pleasure of attending the 13th annual Canadian Oval 

Sled Dog Championship Derby sponsored by the Candle Lake 

oval sled dogs. The event was held at Minowukaw Beach at 

Candle Lake. 

 

Like last year, I had the pleasure of racing as a dignitary. It was 

a lot of fun holding on to the sleigh, and I recommend it to all 

members if they have not had the experience. It’s a very healthy 

sport that allows you to take in the great outdoors at the same 

time. It was a close one, but I tied Candle Lake Mayor Nick 

Toporowski in the celebrity two-dog race. Those hard-working 

dogs are amazing athletes, and I was lucky to have the chance 

to spend this weekend with them, despite the blizzard 

conditions. 

 

I would like to thank renowned sled dog musher and dog 

breeder Jim Tomkins of Christopher Lake who helped organize 



2328 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2009 

the event. Big thanks also goes out to Stewart and Louise Elliot 

who are two of the volunteers that help make this such a 

successful event. We enjoyed the banquet of stew and biscuits 

prepared by Minowukaw Lodge. And I can’t wait for the 

opportunity to defend my title again next year. So, mush. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Brain Awareness Week 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A mind is a beautiful 

thing and it is so easily taken for granted. Brain Awareness 

Week is an annual celebration that gives us the opportunity to 

focus on what a marvellous thing the brain is and the 

importance of keeping our brains healthy. 

 

Brain Awareness Week began in 1996 and brought together 

diverse groups from academia, government, professional, and 

advocacy groups and united them with a common theme — that 

brain research is the hope for treatments and preventions and 

possibly cures for brain diseases and disorders. It has since 

evolved into a powerful global initiative, and every year 

between March 16 and 22, hundreds of public events and 

activities worldwide bring the excitement of scientific progress 

out of the science and medical lab and into the community. 

 

Brain Awareness Week gives us the chance to focus on the 

impact that brain research can have on our everyday lives and 

on our overall health. During Brain Awareness Week, campaign 

partners, as diverse as they are, share one thing in common — 

the desire to convey the wonders of the brain and nervous 

system and the far-reaching influences and outcomes of 

neuroscience research to the public through exciting and 

innovative activities. These include open days at neuroscience 

laboratories, museum exhibitions, lectures, workshops, and 

displays at malls, libraries, and community centres. 

 

I welcome all members of the Assembly to recognize and take 

note of Brain Awareness Week and its impact on all residents of 

Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, to everyone: protect yourself 

and your families from one of the common causes of brain 

injuries. Wear a bike helmet. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Wascana Plains. 

 

Re/Max Joyce Tourney International Winner 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to rise today 

to recognize a very special achievement of one of Regina 

Wascana Plains constituents, Joyce Tourney, who is here today 

along with her team, whom I introduced all of them earlier. 

 

Joyce wasn’t with Re/Max for long by the time her business 

began to take off. Initially she hired a few staff to help out and 

then more and more came on board as their career began to 

thrive. Her team now numbers 17 people, most of whom you 

see accompanying her today. The team is comprised of eleven 

residential realtors, one commercial realtor, and five 

administrative staff. The Re/Max Joyce Tourney team is well 

known for its professionalism, knowledge, and integrity in 

doing business, and they have received numerous awards at the 

provincial, national, and international level over the years. 

 

But the latest award is the most prestigious, Mr. Speaker. At the 

Re/Max International Convention in Las Vegas on March 4 of 

this year, Joyce Tourney and her team received the top honour 

possible to achieve from Re/Max. The award was presented to 

Joyce for being the number one team in the world against 70 

countries and 100,000 sales associates. The award recognizes 

the highest dollar volume earned by a team within a year. This 

is particularly significant in view of Regina’s size and with 

housing prices that are considered quite low. 

 

Joyce Tourney and her team are representative of the 

outstanding business people and entrepreneurs that 

Saskatchewan produces. Our congratulations to you and your 

team. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

SIGA Wins 2009 National Award in Governance 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 

today to recognize the Saskatchewan Indian Gaming 

Association. Throughout the past few years SIGA 

[Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Association] has been 

recognized across Canada for its excellence in governance, 

hiring practice, and business vision. And February 10, 2009 saw 

SIGA receive the top award for the non-profit sector at the 

Conference Board of Canada/Spencer Stuart 2009 National 

Awards in Governance. 

 

This is a very prestigious award, Mr. Speaker, and this year’s 

victory follows on the heels of a good showing last year by 

SIGA when they lost out to the eventual winner, Mountain 

Equipment Co-op. This award adds nicely to a number of other 

recent achievements by SIGA, such as winning the 

Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce Achievement in Business 

Excellence, being recognized by Maclean’s magazine as one of 

the top 15 employers in Saskatchewan, and for winning the 

2007 SaskBusiness magazine’s Business of the Year Award. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there have been a lot of things said about SIGA in 

this Assembly over the years, so let me add these words of 

congratulations to that record. 

 

For winning the 2009 Conference Board of Canada/Spencer 

Stuart National Award, I ask this House to join me in 

congratulating Chairman Ray Ahenakew and the SIGA board, 

and CEO [chief executive officer] Zane Hansen, and all the 

staff and management at SIGA. 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in First Nations languages.] 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



March 17, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2329 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Provincial Boys’ Curling Championships 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, on March 5, 6, and 7, Carrot 

River was honoured to host the provincial high school boys’ 

curling championships, and I was privileged to attend and speak 

at this occasion. The Saskatchewan High Schools Athletic 

Association event is held annually at different locations 

throughout the province. The competition is a combined effort 

of the provincial SHSAA [Saskatchewan High Schools Athletic 

Association] board and the host high school. 

 

Over 200 people were in attendance for this event, which 

featured 16 boys’ curling teams from high schools across the 

prairies. Coaches, parents, and fans gathered at the Carrot River 

curling rink to cheer on their favourite team. Volunteers from 

the Carrot River junior-senior high school, as well as 

community members, worked together to make this event a 

huge success. These volunteers worked as officials, cooks, 

caterers, greeters, and in many other capacities to ensure the 

enjoyment of all participants. 

 

Each team was an outstanding representative of their high 

school and our province. I would like to applaud the provincial 

champions from Yorkton Regional High School, who defeated 

Biggar 7 to 6 in an extra end. The member from Yorkton is still 

drooling and gloating over this, and is rubbing it in to the 

member from Biggar. Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to 

join with me in congratulating the winning team of Yorkton as 

well as all teams who participated in this event. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Budget Expectations 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, we’ve heard that tomorrow’s budget will contain 

something unexpected in this time of economic growth. To the 

Premier: will he confirm that his budget will mean job losses 

for some of Saskatchewan’s citizens? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we are now only one 

day away from the second budget of this Saskatchewan Party 

government, Mr. Speaker, and all of the answers to all of the 

questions will be provided in the fullness of time tomorrow. 

 

But I can say, Mr. Speaker, that it’s the intention of our 

government to work hard to do everything we can do to 

continue the economic momentum we see that has 

Saskatchewan continuing to grow at a time when literally no 

other province in Canada appears to be headed for a period of 

growth. It’s a plan, Mr. Speaker, for the province to continue its 

economic momentum, to share the benefits of growth with 

Saskatchewan people. Most of all, Mr. Speaker, it is a plan that 

will be achieved within a balanced budget — maybe the only 

one in the Dominion of Canada, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, in a February 27 news release, 

the Minister of Finance said that the Sask Party has tough 

choices ahead of them. Now we’re hearing that one of those 

tough choices is going to be layoffs of public sector employees. 

 

To the Premier: how many Saskatchewan families will be 

devastated by job losses as a result of tomorrow’s budget? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the momentum I spoke of in 

my earlier answer — the momentum of the Saskatchewan 

economy — has meant that at a time, unfortunately, when the 

nation has shed 86,000 jobs in the most recent reporting period 

announced on Friday, the province of Saskatchewan, garnering 

international attention, created 14,000 jobs for the families that 

she’s asking about, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — In terms of the budget going forward, Mr. 

Speaker, I can tell you that there are a couple of major 

campaign platform items that remain outstanding. We’ve 

already kept over 100 election promises in the first 16 months, 

but there’s more work to be done, Mr. Speaker. There’s more 

work to be done with respect to a long-term solution on revenue 

sharing for municipalities, a long-term solution with respect to 

the reliance on property to fund education, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think we’re going to make some progress towards those 

promises as well in the budget tomorrow, done in the context of 

a balanced budget, Mr. Speaker. And I will say this: because of 

the policies of this government, there will be more jobs in 

Saskatchewan in the mid and the long term — not less, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Child Care Spaces 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, in January two child care 

facilities closed here in Regina due to financial reasons and the 

lack of qualified staff. So here we saw 60 child care spaces lost, 

leaving parents scrambling to find suitable child care for their 

children. The Premier talks about maintaining economic 

momentum. Child care supports this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To the minister: with the fiscal resources of this government, 



2330 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2009 

why is the minister choosing to ignore calls from Saskatchewan 

parents asking for more affordable child care spaces? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

as has been reported by the media very extensively, the 

unfortunate incident that occurred here in Regina is something 

that indeed created a problem. But, Mr. Speaker, unlike what 

the member just said where 60 spaces were lost, in fact the 

Ministry of Education has reallocated those spaces. And at the 

Y an additional 60 spaces were provided. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, not only were those 60 spaces reallocated. 

We provided an additional 15 spaces for a total of 75. So, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s not less. Mr. Speaker, that’s not less — 75 is in 

fact more than what the city of Regina had before that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, two facilities close and there’s 

another one that is on the verge of closing. And when you look 

at Saskatoon, facilities up there state — and this is just from 

seven child care facilities in Saskatoon — the number of 

families on the wait-list for spaces is 835. So, Mr. Speaker, the 

15 improvement really doesn’t wash. Child care facilities across 

the province have told us they receive daily calls from parents 

looking for available spaces, and many facilities talk about 

expectant parents looking for spaces already before their 

children are even born. 

 

To the minister: can families expect to see the minister take this 

issue seriously and provide financial support and actual spaces 

for child care in tomorrow’s budget? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

unlike the former government, the NDP [New Democratic 

Party], who did not recognize that there was a need . . . Mr. 

Speaker, I want to ensure that people understand that in 2006, 

the percentage for daycare spaces nationally is 17.2 per cent. 

That’s a 2006 statistic. That is the time of the NDP in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the province of Saskatchewan, licensed spaces 

were available for 5.9 per cent of the children in this province. 

Mr. Speaker, the worst, the worst in all of Canada. 

 

We recognized that when we became government and, Mr. 

Speaker, last year, more or less at this very time, we were proud 

to announce that we were adding 500 new spaces. That 

government, that previous government was the worst in Canada 

and we inherited that record, and, Mr. Speaker, we’re not proud 

of that record and they should not be very proud of that either. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that the 

minister look back in his records. The last term of this 

government: 2,500 new child care spaces created; support for 

early childhood educators; capital grants for daycare spaces — 

we did a lot of work. And, Mr. Speaker, his 500 spaces that he 

announced, he’s announced them twice and done diddly-squat 

to put them in place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they’ve put lots of money into physical 

infrastructure, but they’re totally ignoring human infrastructure. 

 

With Saskatchewan having over 15,000 more women in the 

labour force, month over month, we also have the highest 

attachment of women with children under the age of five 

attached to the workforce. But this government is providing no 

support for working women. 

 

To the minister: does the Sask Party have any long-term plans 

for child care in this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated in my 

answers last year at this time and again during this session that 

we have been in since the fall, Mr. Speaker, there is a chronic 

shortage of daycare spaces. That government did not recognize 

it, Mr. Speaker. And in fact for training opportunities, to allow 

individuals to pursue education, to allow individuals to rejoin 

the workforce . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I know the minister has an adequate voice so 

we can hear him at any time, but it would be appreciated if 

members would just hold themselves back a bit and allow the 

minister to express his response to the question. I recognize the 

Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And in my 

non-agitated voice, I will also indicate, Mr. Speaker, that with 

the addition of 500 spaces last year, we moved to a total of 

9,400 spaces in the entire province of Saskatchewan. When we 

look next door to the east, Mr. Speaker, to Manitoba, they have 

nearly 30,000 child care spaces for a province that’s very 

similar to ours. 

 

Unfortunately the NDP didn’t recognize that for 16 years. 

Because you know what, Mr. Speaker? They were planning for 

decline. They were planning for decline. We’re going to plan 

for growth, Mr. Speaker. And I just tell the member opposite, 

stay tuned to tomorrow. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 



March 17, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2331 

Support for the Forestry Industry 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, with NorSask mill in Meadow 

Lake shutting down this past Sunday, we need to plan for 

forestry more than ever. 

 

Last week the BC [British Columbia] government unveiled its 

long-term plan for forestry. The plan has its critics, but at least 

it has a plan to criticize, unlike here in Saskatchewan. 

 

The member from Batoche has been leading a task force on this 

issue since 2007, but we still haven’t seen this report. To the 

minister: did he ever receive a report on forestry from the 

member from Batoche? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 

all know in the province of Saskatchewan that one of the files 

that’s very, very difficult for the province is the area of forestry. 

There’s no question about it. We certainly understand the 

challenges that there are there. 

 

The forestry industry in Saskatchewan ships the bulk of its 

product, lumber products to the United States for the housing 

market. The housing market in the United States is typically 

about 3 million houses, starts per year. It’s under 500,000 starts 

today and going down rather than up. So as a result of that, it’s 

resulted in closures all over North America. Saskatchewan isn’t 

the only province that’s expecting those kinds of things, 

experiencing those kinds of things. The challenge is to get the 

industry working again. We’re working with the forestry 

companies. You will see a plan coming forward before very 

long. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, last fall the Minister of 

Enterprise and Innovation said that the sector team for forestry 

would have recommendations in a month or so. Several months 

have now passed. To the minister: can he tell us, can he tell this 

House what recommendations the sector team has made and 

whether they haven’t acted upon them? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just to follow up 

on the last question, the fact of the matter is that, as I indicated, 

forestry companies are closing facilities all over North America. 

Weyerhaeuser just closed two more facilities as of yesterday in 

North America. It’s a very challenging industry. 

 

Our plan is to work with the industry as we have been doing. 

We’ve been having very frequent meetings with the forestry 

industry companies. We’ll continue to do that, developing a 

plan to come forward in a very short period of time. But our 

plan will result, I believe, in plants opening in the future, and I 

think you will see that, Mr. Member. 

 

The other thing that we will not do on this side of the House is 

we will not put at risk $100 million of taxpayers’ money into an 

industry that every analyst that’s out there right now knows 

very, very well that if you would have done that, if we would 

have followed through on the NDP plan, that $100 million 

would be gone right now. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party and their friends 

in Ottawa have so far spent less than 5 million to address the 

crisis in forestry. They’ve abandoned an important sector of our 

economy. The families and . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The members from Prince Albert will 

come to order and allow the member from Cumberland to place 

his question. The member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Tomorrow’s budget is an opportunity to 

change direction. To the minister: will he take action in 

tomorrow’s budget to deal with the crisis? Will the Sask Party 

finally step up to the plate and give the forestry workers, their 

families, their communities the help they need? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, through the Community 

Development Trust Fund, the province of Saskatchewan has 

already committed approximately $5 million to a number of 

communities in Saskatchewan, and we will continue to work 

with the communities. We’ll continue to work, as we have, with 

the forestry companies. We believe that we will see a 

turnaround in the industry. It’s a matter of waiting until the 

United States’ housing starts to improve. But we will see an 

improvement into the industry and we’ll continue to work with 

the industry players with respect to it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Tuition Fees 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, in the last few days, students at 

both the University of Regina and the University of 

Saskatchewan have been warned to prepare for an increase in 

tuition fees next fall. The Chair of the University of 

Saskatchewan board of governors said last week that fee hikes 

are “inevitable.” And yesterday, students at the U of R 

[University of Regina] were warned to brace for an increase of 

at least 5 per cent this coming fall depending on the provincial 

budget. 

 



2332 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2009 

So far, all students know about the minister’s tuition 

management system is that they will be paying more. To the 

minister: as a result of tomorrow’s budget, how much more will 

he be forcing students to pay? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the opportunity 

to provide an update. Mr. Speaker, when we talk about tuition 

management, we can talk about operating grants, Mr. Speaker, 

that in our first budget to the universities went up 10 per cent, 

Mr. Speaker. We can then look at additional institutional 

funding, Mr. Speaker, and we can look no further than the 

construction that’s under way in the academic health sciences. 

Members opposite were long on words. We were fast on action 

to get construction under way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, then we can look to student loan programs and 

other student support. Mr. Speaker, we can think about student 

housing, and then the graduate retention program, the most 

aggressive youth retention program in the country, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What I can say is a quote from Andrew Thomson, “. . . 

anywhere that we’ve seen tuition freezes put in across the 

country, they haven’t worked,” Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday a study by the Canadian 

Centre for Policy Alternatives confirmed what students and 

their families already know. Students are facing increased costs 

across the board for housing, transportation, and child care. 

Students know that with the Sask Party in government, they are 

paying more and getting less. 

 

The study estimates that an undergraduate who relocates to 

Regina or Saskatoon to attend university will need more than 

$16,000 a year and it recommends extending the tuition freeze 

and providing more funding in the form of grants and bursaries. 

To the minister: will he accept the recommendations in this 

report or will he choose to hike tuition and force students to pay 

more? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, certainly appreciate another 

question regarding student affordability. In 2005, the federal 

government increased the Canada student loan maximum 

weekly loan limit from $165 a week to two ten. Provinces were 

expected to also increase weekly maximums. 

 

However, the former NDP government was one of only two 

governments across Canada that didn’t do this. In fact, there 

was no increase in provincial loan limits since 1994, Mr. 

Speaker — hardly grounds to talk about student affordability. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Funding for Education 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the political charade that is 

the long-awaited report on education property tax will be 

released tomorrow. Reassessment brings huge implications for 

property owners this year. 

 

To the minister: does the report contain a long-term solution for 

education property tax? Will the solution be implemented in 

tomorrow’s budget? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, for over 16 months now 

this government has been very clear: we need to ensure that 

there is adequate funding for education. We need to ensure that 

there is a balance on how education is funded. And, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s no secret that Saskatchewan property owners 

disproportionately pay the most property tax to fund education 

in all of Canada. Mr. Speaker, we know that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I indicated in the first week of February when I 

received the report from the member from Rosetown, a report 

that has looked extensively, that has done very significant 

numbers of consultations with individuals and associations . . . 

The member has been to speak to people on the School Boards 

Association, on SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 

Association] and SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities], and that report contains a lot of good 

information, Mr. Speaker, that will be very useful in the 

announcements that will be made tomorrow. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, in the town of Battleford, 

the assessed value of property has risen by 53 per cent. 

Homeowners are worried about this and how it will affect the 

grants for their local school division and how much their 

property taxes will have to increase to cover the difference. 

 

To the minister: what is the Sask Party’s long-term plan for 

education property tax? Will homeowners be handed a massive 

increase? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve been very clear on 

what our plan is. In the short term, there was a rebate plan. And, 



March 17, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2333 

Mr. Speaker, last year the province delivered $155 million 

worth of support to property owners, Mr. Speaker — $155 

million. Mr. Speaker, we recognize that the short-term plan was 

rebates. And we made the promise, Mr. Speaker, as we 

campaigned a year and a half ago, as we campaigned, we said 

that there needs to be a long-term solution that people in this 

province can depend on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP campaigned on a promise, one very 

specific sector, maybe one of the largest sectors in terms of 

contributions to this province which is the agricultural sector. 

And you know how much rebate they were going to give 

agricultural owners? None, Mr. Speaker — not one penny. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, that minister’s tired 

rhetoric doesn’t meet the challenges of today. In Regina and 

Saskatoon alone, school boards will lose more than $16 million 

this year through reassessment. Either property owners will be 

hammered with big increases or the Sask Party will need to 

respond through their budget. To the minister: which one is it? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — You know, Mr. Speaker, it’s only going 

to be 24 hours till we hear from the Minister of Finance what 

that report will be. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, for the member to stand and suggest that he 

knows exactly how much money will be delivered by way of 

the foundation operating grant to school divisions, how much 

assessment will be used, and what kind of calculation will be 

used — Mr. Speaker, where’s the member receiving this 

information? He doesn’t even know what amount of money the 

grant will include tomorrow, Mr. Speaker. Will it be less than 

last year? Will it be equal to? Mr. Speaker, he doesn’t know 

that. So I ask him, Mr. Speaker, sit on his seat for another 24 

hours and he’ll get the answer. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — What this member right here knows is, 

if that minister doesn’t come down with a plan that addresses 

the problems, he’s going to have a train wreck coming down the 

pipes here this . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, from the Radville Star, I quote an influential 

columnist: “Let us not forget the Sask Party government has 

had a better opportunity . . .” 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Let me quote an influential columnist in 

the Radville Star: 

 

. . . let us not forget the Sask Party government has had a 

better opportunity to deliver on its promises than any 

first-year government. It’s the government, itself, that 

keeps reminding us how great Saskatchewan is still doing 

. . . 

 

The government may not have a better opportunity to 

lower property taxes . . . 

 

Governing is all about choices. To the minister: what will he 

choose? Will he choose to provide the long-term education 

property tax relief the Sask Party promised, or will he hang 

large increases on Saskatchewan people? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, you know, we’ve heard 

from the NDP in the past how they used to look into a tunnel 

and there was always a light at the end of the tunnel. They 

didn’t realize that in fact the train was coming at them, Mr. 

Speaker. That freight train was released by the NDP because 

they didn’t recognize that education should be a priority, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We’ve seen for seven years of NDP government, Mr. Speaker, 

the funding for infrastructure, for much-needed infrastructure 

for schools, total of $259 million over seven years, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to report to this 

Assembly that in this first year of a Sask Party government, we 

have allocated $259 million to infrastructure. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:15] 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve made it very clear, 

we’ve made it very clear that education is a priority. And I ask 

the member, stay tuned. Sleep tight. Tomorrow you’ll hear the 

message. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Stopgap rebates are not the solution. 

This is where they’re going. Mr. Speaker, from the same 

columnist, I quote: 

 

For reasons that the government has not made clear, 

Krawetz is refusing to release Reiter’s options until after 

the . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. When a person’s on his 

feet, sometimes it’s not always easy for the Speaker to keep 

attuned as well when there is so much commotion going on. 

 

I understand the member is quoting. As I heard it, I missed the 



2334 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2009 

comment about quoting. But I would ask members to allow the 

member to place his question so the Speaker can at least follow 

the question and, when the minister is invited to answer, to hear 

the minister’s response. Minister of Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, from the same column, I 

quote: 

 

For reasons that the government has not made clear, 

Krawetz is refusing to release Reiter’s options until after 

the March 18 budget. 

 

This might suggest that Reiter came up with a very good 

plan to implement permanent property tax relief and — 

for whatever reason — Krawetz and the government is 

choosing not to act on it. Or it might suggest that the 

government doesn’t have any plans for long-term property 

tax relief and will only introduce stopgap measures in the 

budget. 

 

This is a concern for Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. To the 

minister: which is it? Is the Sask Party delaying a long-term 

solution on property tax or have they rejected the report from 

the member? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP have received a number of reports over 

time. I can recall the Scharf-Langlois governance study that 

suggested that there should be a change to how we indeed 

govern in this province. Mr. Speaker, there was the Boughen 

report that suggested that there should be a change in how 

education is funded, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there have been other reports that have been 

done by the different stakeholders in education. The School 

Boards Association had Ernie Dawson do a report for them. The 

LEADS [League of Educational Administrators, Directors and 

Superintendents] association also had a report done. Mr. 

Speaker, all of these reports have been very useful. But you 

know, under the NDP, they sat on a shelf and collected dust, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the report by the MLA [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly] for Rosetown has been very, very informative. It is 

very useful and it has guided us in what we will deliver 

tomorrow, Mr. Speaker. I ask the member to sleep tight and 

stay tuned. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Order. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Investment in Health Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’m pleased to say that our government is keeping our 

promises to strategically invest in Saskatchewan’s health 

infrastructure as part of our ready for growth initiative. Mr. 

Speaker, on February 2, the Premier announced an additional 

$500 million investment in Saskatchewan’s infrastructure to 

provide an economic booster shot for the provincial economy 

during the global economic . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I have endeavoured through the 

Government House Leader to mention to ministers that over the 

past number of weeks, I’ve been hearing ministerial statements 

which actually have not been very clear on new announcements, 

and in fact they’ve been reflecting announcements that the 

public are very well aware of. And I just want to remind 

members and ministers that it’s been the policy that ministerial 

statements are opportunities to announce new initiatives by the 

government. 

 

And if we’re announcing information that’s been already 

announced and is well voiced, that I would consider that as not 

being a ministerial statement. Unless the minister has something 

new to add to health care, I would find the statement not in 

fitting with the responsibility of ministerial statements. 

 

Introduction of Bills. I call members to order. Apparently the 

Speaker was so intent on making sure members were aware of 

ministerial statements that he was ready to move on. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL 

COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Committee on 

Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 

instructed by the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 

Agencies to report Bill No. 82, The Traffic Safety (Volunteer 

Firefighters) Amendment Act without . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Chair of Crown and 

Central Agencies. 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 

82, The Traffic Safety (Volunteer Firefighters) Amendment Act 

without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister Responsible 

for Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this 

Bill and that the Bill be now read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Crown Corporations has 

requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole on Bill No. 82, The Traffic Safety (Volunteer 

Firefighters) Amendment Act without amendment and that the 

Bill be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 



March 17, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2335 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 82 — The Traffic Safety (Volunteer Firefighters) 

Amendment Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move 

that the Bill now be read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 

No. 82, The Traffic Safety (Volunteer Firefighters) Amendment 

Act, without amendment, be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Committee of 

Finance. 

 

The Speaker: — I do now leave the Chair. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Motions for Supply 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I call the committee to order. The 

business before the committee is the supply resolution for 

supplementary estimates. I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

move: 

 

Be it resolved that towards making good the supply 

granted to Her Majesty on account of certain charges and 

expenses of the public service for the fiscal year ending 

March 31, 2009, the sum of $725,960,000 be granted out 

of the General Revenue Fund. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — It has been moved by the minister . . . 

Order. It has been moved by the minister the supply resolution 

be approved as read. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — Carried. I now invite the minister to 

move the resolution be reported to the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — I move that the committee rise and 

that the Chair report that the committee has agreed to a certain 

resolution and ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — The minister has moved that the 

committee rise and that the Chair report that the committee has 

approved to the certain resolution, and asked for leave to sit 

again. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — Carried. 

 

[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of committees. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Committee of 

Finance has agreed to certain resolutions and has instructed to 

me to report the same and ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the resolution be read the first 

time? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

the resolution be now read the first and second time. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First and second reading of the resolution. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Later this day. 

 

The Speaker: — Later this day. Minister of Finance. 

 

APPROPRIATION BILL 

 

Bill No. 81 — The Appropriation Act, 2009 (No. 1) 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move by 

leave of the Assembly that Bill No. 81, The Appropriation Act, 

2009 (No. 1) be now introduced and read the first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved that Bill 

No. 81, The Appropriation Act, 2009 (No. 1) be now introduced 

and read the first time. Is leave of the Assembly granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 



2336 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2009 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? I 

recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By leave of 

the Assembly and under rule 72, subsection 2, I move that the 

Bill be now read a second and third time. 

 

The Speaker: — Is leave of the Assembly granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Moved by the Minister of Finance that Bill 

No. 81, The Appropriation Act, 2009 (No. 1), be now read a 

second and third time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? I recognize the member from Regina Douglas Park. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

just want to say a few words. We on this side of the House will 

be supporting the supplementary estimates. We concur, the 

proposals that are put forward. What we do not agree with is the 

way these expenditures have been characterized by the public 

because we think the way that these expenditures have been 

painted, characterized, by the government would be to mislead 

the public about what the true intention is of these expenditures 

at this point in time. 

 

What needs to be clear for people of Saskatchewan is what the 

government is doing. And what the government is doing is 

taking money out of next year’s budget and putting them into 

this year’s budget. And the reason that they’re doing that is that 

they know that if these funds were in fact included in next 

year’s budget, the government would be running a deficit. And 

that is why the government is not proposing to include these 

funds in next year’s budget. 

 

The Minister of Finance has said, well that’s an unintended 

consequence of what we’re doing. We think that’s the real 

reason why the government is doing, because they know that 

they will run a deficit in next year’s budget if they were to 

proceed, as planned, to expend $1.5 billion in infrastructure in 

next year’s budget. And they can’t do that. 

 

So what’s the solution? The solution is to move it into this 

year’s budget where there’s still lots of money because of high 

oil prices early in the year. Then the question is, well how do 

you characterize it. Well now the government has decided, why 

don’t we call it an economic stimulus, a booster shot for the 

economy because they know how that has worked for their 

federal brothers and sisters when confronted with an issue. Just 

call it something that’s topical, label it as such, and the public 

will buy that. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if this really was intended as an economic 

stimulus, if that was the intent, then surely the government 

would have provided the people of Saskatchewan with some 

clear analysis, some clear figures about the jobs that would be 

created because of this construction and because they’ve 

decided to advance the spending. In fact the government is not 

in a position to do that. They have absolutely no idea what 

additional jobs will be created by advancing these funds at this 

point in time. 

 

They can’t do it in the area of municipalities because they have 

no idea which municipalities will simply take the money and 

say, we’re going to proceed with the projects we were going to 

do in any event, and thank you for your money. 

 

They don’t know in terms of education. Well in education what 

they’re proposing to do is to advance to school boards, by two 

months, money that would be received in any event. Now you 

can argue that’s an important thing in terms of economic 

stimulus, but the government has provided no analysis as to 

what that means at this point in time. 

 

In terms of health, there’s all kinds of funds that are proposed to 

be allocated to nursing homes throughout Saskatchewan, which 

came as a huge surprise to many health districts who indicated 

now they’re going to have to do the work as to exactly what 

they need to do in terms of nursing home construction. And I 

can tell you, based on that process and where the health districts 

are at, it’s going to take those health districts some years to turn 

any shovel on any project. 

 

So there’s a real question here. Is this simply an economic 

stimulus booster shot, as the government said it is, or is this 

simply some sorry attempt by the government to advance 

money into this fiscal year so they won’t run a deficit next 

year? Stay tuned, Mr. Speaker, because tomorrow people can 

answer that question for themselves. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion moved by the Minister of Finance, that Bill No. 81, The 

Appropriation Act, 2009 be now read a second and third time. Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second and third 

reading of this Bill. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 80 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Norris that Bill No. 80 — The 

Construction Industry Labour Relations Amendment Act, 

2009 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 



March 17, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2337 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

speak on this particular Bill, and right off the top I want to 

thank the government for deciding to consult with stakeholders 

in this particular matter. And I understand that we will be 

setting out a clear procedure for doing that, also that there will 

be public hearings so that people in Saskatchewan will have a 

chance to hear from the different perspectives about this 

legislation. 

 

I was disappointed, and I still am disappointed, that these 

consultations didn’t take place prior to the introduction of the 

legislation. And I know that there are many individuals within 

the construction industry and within the society in 

Saskatchewan who do not understand and do not like the 

present method of bringing forward policy in this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people in Saskatchewan are quite used to hearing 

different perspectives on an issue, and providing their advice 

and opinion. What they don’t appreciate is when something is 

brought forward in a way that surprises everyone and actually 

causes some difficulties. 

 

Now in this particular case as it relates to the construction 

industry, there have been many issues over the decades that 

have affected how the construction industry is organized in 

Saskatchewan. And in a time when the economy has been doing 

quite well and there are many construction projects, to do 

something which disrupts or sets out of kilter the way that the 

labour is organized to work with the companies in the 

construction industry is not that helpful. 

 

But what is especially surprising to me, and I know that 

probably for many people in the province, we all received a 

magazine, first edition of a magazine dated spring 2009 called 

Building Saskatchewan — the official publication of the 

Saskatchewan Provincial Building and Construction Trades 

Council. And I was quite surprised to read in this magazine, 

with a nice picture of our Premier, this quote: 

 

Our government believes there’s great strength in numbers 

and the building and construction industry is a prime 

example. By working together we will ensure that the 

prosperity and growth in our province are not just fleeting, 

temporary phenomena but rather permanent fixtures. This 

magazine will provide a direct link to information for all 

members and surrounding communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this magazine was received with this message 

from the Premier of Saskatchewan just a few days before the 

surprise presentation of Bill 80. And I’m not certain if this was 

part of the plan, there was a bit of a way to disguise what was 

happening, or if one side of the operation didn’t know what the 

other side was doing or what was going on. 

 

Then you turn over to the next page and here’s a message from 

the Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

with, once again, this rather familiar photograph. And I’ll quote 

again, quoting the minister: 

 

I recognize the important role of the Saskatchewan 

Provincial Building and Construction Trades Council in 

our province’s development, and compliment it on the 

professional manner in which it represents its union 

members. 

 

I also recognize the key involvement of the Building 

Trades Council in providing labour representatives from 

many industry and government boards and commissions, 

as well as its work fostering healthy and safe working 

conditions for its members. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in here there’s a reference to the professional 

manner in which something is done. I would say, Mr. Speaker, 

that how this Bill was introduced and how it was brought 

forward to the building trades and to the union movement in 

Saskatchewan was not professional at all. In fact, it was the 

exact opposite of that. 

 

And I say that because, in that area where relationships are 

important and need to be developed over the long term, every 

time you stick your finger in somebody’s eye, it causes 

problems for the long term. And, Mr. Speaker, many of us who 

have been in this House for a long time know that how we deal 

with our colleagues in this place on a regular basis either assists 

us or comes back to haunt us. That’s even more so in something 

like the management and labour relations. And, Mr. Speaker, it 

was just a real surprise to get this magazine and to get these 

kinds of comments just days before the surprise of Bill 80. 

 

Now I think it was pretty clear from the initial reaction from the 

media and from a number of other people that, once again, the 

government had stepped the wrong way. And it was fairly 

quickly that they’ve now retreated and said, let’s do some 

consultation; let’s have some discussion; let’s end up with a 

chance to look at this particular legislation here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now I think that when you step into this area, once again I say, 

of relationships and how projects go forward, I think it’s 

important to work with all parties before you make changes. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s where this government has 

failed. It’s not dissimilar to what they did last winter. I thought 

maybe they would have learned a bit in that particular situation 

but obviously it appears that they have not. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what ends up happening is that those 

long-standing chances for people to figure out the give and take 

as they work together and make sure that you have sufficient of 

the skills and of all the people involved to build projects, can be 

then of assistance to the companies that are actually doing the 

projects. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that the project agreements that have 

been put together on various industrial projects or in some of 

the provincial government or the federal-provincial government 

projects have worked very well over the years. And that may 

be, putting the best construction on it, what the Premier and the 

minister were referring to in this magazine. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, you can’t with one hand praise those kind of 

relationships, and the other hand start pulling out all of the 

supports that allow for that kind of a system to happen. Mr. 

Speaker, if there are particular issues or particular problems, I 

think most of us appreciate it when our enemies or friends come 



2338 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2009 

to us directly and talk about that before they start changing the 

rules. Mr. Speaker, that wasn’t done here, and I think it’s going 

to be causing some troubles in the long run. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the issues in Saskatchewan over 

many years, but especially over the last 25 years if I can put it 

that way, has been the steady erosion of how people are trained 

to continue in the trades. And this has been quite a difficult 

process which, with a lot of good work from people from both 

management side and from union side, programs have been put 

in place. I’m not certain how this Bill will affect the 

apprenticeship program. I hope it doesn’t damage a lot of the 

good work that’s been done. But, Mr. Speaker, the kinds of fair 

relationships that have been developed in that area are not 

reflected in how this Bill was brought forward. 

 

Now I think that what happens any time you disrupt the way 

that things have been done for a long time, you end up with 

people that are upset. But when you do that in a way that 

prepares everybody so that they know that what’s going to be 

coming will be even better, then you don’t end up with the same 

kinds of problems. What happened last year is that we’ve ended 

up with Bills 5 and 6, the essential services legislation and the 

legislation around that, have basically created a high level of 

uncertainty in our labour environment here. 

 

And this confrontational approach which has resulted in the 

minister effectively not being all that welcome at most 

gatherings of important workers in our province does not bode 

well for the overall economy of the province. 

 

[14:45] 

 

And it’s uncertain to those of us on this side who is directing 

this, because it appears that the minister often is quite congenial 

and quite able to meet with people when he’s given that chance. 

But there’s no question that the kinds of information and the 

policies that he’s been asked to bring forward don’t even give 

him a chance to have those kinds of conversations. That’s 

unfortunate, because we all pay. But especially the workers in 

Saskatchewan, they’ll be the ones that will pay. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all of the people who are affected by Bill 80 are 

scratching their heads as to why it showed up now. Perhaps 

we’ll get some more answers as we move forward in looking at 

this particular legislation. It’s our hope that we will be able to 

be part of doing some of that. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I would ask that the minister and his staff 

look carefully at this. And if he’s really looking out for the good 

of our economy and for the economy of the province, he may 

want to pull this Bill back and reconsider it after he’s had a 

chance to have a discussion with all the parties that are 

involved. Mr. Speaker, I’d much rather have the positive 

language that was set out in his letter and the Premier’s letter — 

in his letter to the building trades — rather than this particular 

legislation and what kind of disruption it will cause. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that many of my colleagues will want to 

speak on this as well, and I move that we adjourn debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview has 

moved adjournment of debate. 

 

Bill No. 46 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 46 — The Labour 

Market Commission Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 

stand this afternoon and speak to Bill 46, The Labour Market 

Commission Act, Mr. Speaker. In reading this piece of 

legislation and in reading the introductory comments made by 

the minister, the changes that are presented for The Labour 

Market Commission Act, Mr. Speaker, for the Labour Market 

Commission, the changes proposed do raise a number of 

questions for us in the opposition. 

 

The main issue, or one of the main aspects of the changes that 

are proposed through this legislation, is a changing of the 

number of individuals that sit on the Labour Market 

Commission — a move from 19 to 11, Mr. Speaker. So that’s 

one important component, the idea that there will be fewer 

people representing the views and the interests of various 

populations and of various sectors in the Saskatchewan 

economy. 

 

Another change that is an important one to note, Mr. Speaker, is 

how these people will be appointed. And in many of the 

situations, it will be that it’s a cabinet decision, and the cabinet 

is able to determine who is in and who is out. So, Mr. Speaker, 

whenever you’re making these types of changes to an 

organization, it’s important to ask the types of questions like, 

why are these certain people being selected? Should cabinet be 

the group making these decisions? How might that influence 

and determine the type of advice and input that is given about 

the labour market? These are certainly important points. 

 

Here in Saskatchewan, I think all members would agree that the 

interests of the masses of the total population are best served 

when there’s a group of people working together from a variety 

of backgrounds, able to express a variety of views, come from a 

variety of histories and stories and experiences, and in a 

situation where they’re able to freely voice their opinions and 

their needs and concerns, and then to have that information 

come together in one spot where it can be sorted out, and an 

appropriate approach and path going forward can be 

determined. 

 

When we look at the current situation of our province and the 

financial strength that we’ve been experiencing for some time, 

clearly the Labour Market Commission has played a very 

important role in that, Mr. Speaker. And I know we, as the 

official opposition, are very pleased with the recommendations 

that have come from the Labour Market Commission over the 

past months and years — decisions, Mr. Speaker, that have 

positioned us well as a province, as an economy, and positioned 

us well to really, now in a time when we face global economic 

uncertainty, hopefully in a position that we’re well-positioned 



March 17, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2339 

to weather things that may be coming our way on the economic 

front. 

 

But again, any time we’re decreasing the representation on the 

board and changing how individuals on the commission may be 

selected, that does cause us to pause and ask some serious 

questions. 

 

We’ve been of the opinion that the Labour Market Commission 

has played a very important role and a constructive role and a 

role that we can thank them for the great work that they have 

done. These changes that are proposed in this legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, would cause me to have some questions as to whether 

or not the government is of that same view and some questions 

about how these changes could affect the long-term relevance 

and strength and importance of the Labour Market Commission. 

 

What we see in this Act, another change that’s important to 

know, Mr. Speaker, is the rolling in of the Labour Market 

Commission into Enterprise Saskatchewan. Now on a number 

of occasions I’ve had the opportunity to speak about Enterprise 

Saskatchewan, back when the enabling legislation was brought 

in, I guess about a year ago or so, and was able to raise some 

concerns at that time about the approach of Enterprise 

Saskatchewan and the wisdom of going down that path. So 

certainly some of my concerns that I expressed at that time 

would have a great influence on how I would view whether or 

not it’s appropriate to roll the Labour Market Commission into 

or under the apparatus of Enterprise Saskatchewan. 

 

What we see with Enterprise Saskatchewan, we’ve seen talk, 

Mr. Speaker, and we’ve seen the rhetoric has been about the 

suggestion by government members that they were removing 

politics out of the process. But sadly what we’ve seen with 

Enterprise Saskatchewan is actually the opposite has occurred. 

And the changes proposed here in the Labour Market 

Commission are consistent with those concerns about 

Enterprise Saskatchewan. 

 

One case, Mr. Speaker, with Enterprise Saskatchewan, what 

we’ve seen is a willingness to take advice when it’s convenient 

and to ignore advice when it’s convenient — contrary to some 

of the earlier statements that were made about Enterprise 

Saskatchewan, about decisions from that organization being 

binding. One example was the recommendation that Enterprise 

Saskatchewan had about school closures. The recommendation 

that Enterprise Saskatchewan made was not consistent with the 

approach that the Minister of Education chose to pursue. 

 

So if we see instances where the advice of Enterprise 

Saskatchewan is not consistent with what a minister or the 

approach of government in general is on a particular issue, 

certainly that’s a concern when we see it within the Labour 

Market Commission. For example, if there’s a recommendation 

that comes from the Labour Market Commission and it’s passed 

up through the many cascading levels of sectors and committees 

and the convoluted path that it might have to take in order to 

actually be heard, we don’t know, Mr. Speaker, at the end of the 

day whether that’s a decision or a recommendation that 

government will actually listen to. Because from the track 

record we’ve seen before on the issue of school closures, we’ve 

seen them clearly have a preference for ignoring information 

when it’s not convenient, and following it and saying it has no 

government involvement whatsoever when it is convenient. So 

there’s an inconsistency there that is certainly troubling. 

 

Another aspect, Mr. Speaker, that is concerning to me with the 

prospect of rolling the Labour Market Commission into 

Enterprise Saskatchewan is the risk of a decrease in its 

relevance or a decrease in its clout as a stand-alone agency. 

When it’s one of the many, many sector teams that are 

operating within Enterprise Saskatchewan, it’s not clear that to 

me — it hasn’t been expressed to me — that the advice given 

by the Labour Market Commission would indeed be influential, 

that it just wouldn’t be lost in the paper and the multiplying 

sector committees that we see occurring through Enterprise 

Saskatchewan. So to me, it’s not a settling issue to have the 

Labour Market Commission rolled into Enterprise 

Saskatchewan. 

 

We also have to ask ourselves . . . And, Mr. Speaker, this was 

similar to some remarks I made last night about The Trespass to 

Property Act. And that is when changes in legislation are 

brought forward, when the changes are proposed, what is the 

impetus or what is the . . . Where does the need for these 

changes occur, Mr. Speaker? And this happens through a 

process of consultation. Consultation is very important, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s how a government, it’s how an opposition stays in 

touch and in tune with the members of society, the various 

groups, clearly many of the groups that will be present on the 

Labour Market Commission. 

 

So when we see legislation coming forward, Mr. Speaker, 

where all of the representatives of sectors have not been 

contacted, when they have not been consulted, when a decision 

has been made in a unilateral fashion from the top down, Mr. 

Speaker, that too is troubling. And I think it causes a 

questioning public to ask, why this legislation? Why now? Why 

is this the appropriate approach to go in this time? 

 

Because as I mentioned earlier in my comments, Mr. Speaker, 

while there are many aspects of the Saskatchewan economy 

doing well — and there is a particular strength in a national 

context and in a global context — there are certainly serious 

challenges facing us and will continue to face us in the coming 

years as most analysts, economists, and commentators would 

agree with. 

 

So it’s important that when we have an institution like the 

Labour Market Commission that has been serving the province 

well, that has been serving the various sectors represented, has 

been showing some great leadership, some great collaboration, 

have demonstrated that they’re able to listen to a variety and a 

broad spectrum of viewpoints and take that information and 

provide sound recommendations, when we have an organization 

like the Labour Market Commission that has, you know, a good 

example of co-operation and has, in many ways, embodied the 

Saskatchewan spirit of working together, it’s puzzling why the 

decision would be made now in a time of global economic 

uncertainty to roll that into Enterprise Saskatchewan, to shrink 

it and to change how individuals find themselves on the Labour 

Market Commission, Mr. Speaker. 

 

An important aspect, as I mentioned in my comments earlier, 

the Labour Market Commission is made up of a variety of 

groups. So we have business groups; we have labour 



2340 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2009 

organizations. In the past we’ve had members from the social 

economy as well. 

 

On the issue of representation of labour on the Labour Market 

Commission, it’s been the policy and the legislation up until 

this date that the labour representatives, Mr. Speaker, are the 

representatives of the groups that are most representative of the 

labour organizations. So the individuals who would be part of 

an organization that would have the backing of the vast 

majority of labour organizations and be able to speak with a 

degree of, a degree of clarity for an organization that is diverse 

and an organization that does have many types of members, 

represents many types of professions, many types of workers, 

but is able to speak with a clarity that provides assurance to the 

Labour Market Commission that they are indeed speaking for 

the majority, the majority through a representative format. 

 

So when we see a change, Mr. Speaker, in how individuals 

from the labour movement are represented on the Labour 

Market Commission, there are some concerns raised. And it ties 

into my earlier comments about the . . . Where does the impetus 

for the change in the legislation come from? What is the 

reason? Why now? Why these changes? Why this situation? 

And if certain groups have not been consulted to the same 

extent as other groups, that is a concern, Mr. Speaker, because 

the Labour Market Commission has been a group that has been 

an inclusive representative and has been a positive process for 

our province. 

 

A component that we also see changed with this legislation, Bill 

46, the Labour Market Commission, is the elimination of the 

social economy as a representative from the group. So as the 

Labour Market Commission has been shrunk to 11 members 

from 19, as the process for how individuals are selected for the 

Labour Market Commission has been changed as it would now 

be a decision of cabinet, as the input process in these changes 

and the reasoning for these changes has not been open and truly 

transparent — a similar format or a similar approach that we’ve 

seen with other bits of legislation coming forward by the Sask 

Party government — another critical problem that I see with 

this legislation is the elimination of the social economy as a 

group of representatives who would be on the Labour Market 

Commission to provide input. 

 

[15:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we think about the strength of Saskatchewan 

society, when we think about the vibrancy that we have in our 

province, we think of how diverse it is. And we think of how 

many different types of cultural communities, how many 

different types of religious groups, how many different types of 

rural and urban differences we have in the province, how we 

have so many different types of organizations where people are 

involved with the social economy — the areas where perhaps 

they don’t traditionally fall under the business category. They 

perhaps don’t traditionally fall under the category of labour, but 

they fall under a category where there is still a great deal of 

relevance and importance to Saskatchewan people — the social 

economy. 

 

And under this banner there could be a variety of different types 

of organizations and people represented. The one might be 

representatives who are youth who . . . [inaudible] . . . the 

younger segment of society. How might these people involved 

in different community-based organizations, in non-profits, just 

active members in their community, what input might these 

young people have to the Labour Market Commission? What 

input might they have for the type of future that we want to 

have in the province? What input might they have for the types 

of responses needed by government to ensure that 

Saskatchewan is well-positioned in a time of global economic 

uncertainty? So I think it’s important not to overlook this group 

which would fall under the umbrella of the social economy. 

 

So as we shrink the Labour Market Commission from 19 to 11, 

excluding this group could be a potential pitfall and could 

seriously minimize or decrease the importance of the types of 

decisions that are put forward by the Labour Market 

Commission to government to act upon. 

 

So not only now do we have the concern that decisions will be 

fed up through the system through Enterprise Saskatchewan — 

which we don’t know a ton about and we have some serious 

questions about and then where we’ve seen government choose 

to ignore its own advice from Enterprise Saskatchewan — not 

only do we have that problem of dealing with the Labour 

Market Commission within Enterprise Saskatchewan, but we 

now find ourselves in a position where some of the important 

voices and opinions that are needed to ensure that 

Saskatchewan is on stable footing in the years to come, those 

groups aren’t represented. And to me, that’s a troubling issue. 

 

Another group that would be losing representation within the 

changes proposed in Bill 46 would be poverty groups. 

 

So in all times, Mr. Speaker, we as an official opposition 

believe it’s important to hear from and to learn from all 

members of society. That includes the rich. That includes the 

poor. That includes everyone in the middle, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The concerns of poverty groups who advocate for and do great 

work for some of the most marginalized in society and people 

that would be facing barriers to fully participating in the 

economic, cultural, and social aspects of our province, I think, 

Mr. Speaker, it’s important to hear from these groups. I think 

it’s important to have their input because the types of 

discussions that can be had when discussing any given issue 

with a poverty group, the types of perspectives that they bring 

forward are unique. As in the same way as it’s important to hear 

from youth and hear from some of their important perspectives, 

Mr. Speaker, it’s definitely important to hear from poverty 

groups. 

 

So when we see a shrinking of the Labour Market Commission 

from 19 to 11, if these types of groups and these types of 

individuals who would be advocating for those in poverty, if 

those people are excluded from the process of providing 

recommendations to government through the Labour Market 

Commission, to me that’s a problem. And I know many other 

members in this Assembly would share that concern. 

 

Another group, Mr. Speaker, within the social economy that I 

could see as . . . Another group that I would know has certainly 

contributed a great deal to the Labour Market Commission 

would be representation from women’s groups, Mr. Speaker. 

Again, not that some of the representatives on the Labour 



March 17, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2341 

Market Commission would not be women, not that they would 

not know many of the challenges faced by women. But I think 

it’s important, Mr. Speaker, to have clear designation on the 

Labour Market Commission of groups that would identify and 

bring up and speak to women’s issues, women’s groups. 

 

Clearly within our society, Mr. Speaker, there are differences 

that individuals and families face based on gender. There are 

clear differences in how the challenges that one might face as a 

woman in the workforce, how they balance family and work. A 

double standard, Mr. Speaker, that is not fair, that would not 

always be appropriate, but it’s a standard on many issues that 

needs to be addressed and that those concerns need to be 

brought forward by women’s groups. 

 

For example let’s look at the issue of pay equity for similar type 

of payment for similar type of work. To me that would be an 

important issue, one issue that the Labour Market Commission 

would be addressing, would be working into their discussions 

on broader issues. That’s the type of issue, Mr. Speaker, that 

can easily be lost if there’s not someone at the table who has the 

experience and the insight and the knowledge to speak on the 

issue with authority and with clarity. 

 

So in the process of downsizing, if we’re excluding individuals 

like youth, if we’re excluding poverty groups, if we’re 

excluding women’s groups that can speak to very specific 

issues, very specific concerns, that’s a problem because as I 

said before, we in Saskatchewan, we value the diversity in our 

population. We realize that we are stronger by working 

together, and we realize that our future will really be 

determined by how well we incorporate every type of person 

living in Saskatchewan. 

 

Within the social economy, Mr. Speaker, there’s another group 

that I think needs to be identified as how, in my opinion, the 

Labour Market Commission would not be well served by 

excluding individuals from this group — and that’s groups, 

individuals representing persons with disabilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in life there are many different types of situations 

that people find themselves in, whether it’s through birth, 

whether it’s though an accident, whether it’s though a 

circumstance that may be within someone’s control or beyond 

someone’s control, Mr. Speaker. There’s no doubt, no question 

that individuals with disabilities have a tremendous amount to 

contribute to society. 

 

I think back to International Women’s Day which occurred I 

believe it was on Saturday. But on Friday I had the pleasure of 

attending a luncheon put on by a collaboration of a number of 

organizations to celebrate International Women’s Day. And the 

topic, the theme which has occurred every year — I think it was 

the eighth or ninth year running, Mr. Speaker — was 

examining, looking at, and appreciating the contributions of 

women with disabilities to our province. 

 

And some of the stories that were shared that day, Mr. Speaker, 

by the keynote speaker who gave a great motivational talk and 

spoke candidly and honestly, and comments that I found truly 

inspirational. Those types of views and opinions need to be 

expressed around the table, Mr. Speaker, because those people 

are important. 

I know the member from Saskatoon Centre, I believe, did a 

member statement on that function, and mentioned some of the 

people that had the opportunity to speak, mentioned some of the 

people that were recognized as lifetime achievement or 

recognition awards, Mr. Speaker. And it was a great event. And 

I suppose with that luncheon, it was a small example of 

encapsulating actually a number of these groups within the 

social economy. There was a young person, who was a woman, 

speaking on issues for people living with disabilities, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So in my opinion, the types of concerns and the type of insight 

that can be brought forward by people in that situation, it’s very 

important to hear from those folks. It’s very important to have 

their contributions appreciated and to have their contributions 

incorporated into the decision-making process when the Labour 

Market Commission makes recommendations. That would be 

the right approach to follow. 

 

So I’ve touched on a number of issues, Mr. Speaker. I’ve 

touched on how the process of consultation on this issue has 

raised some flags for members in the opposition and members 

in the larger public. How we’re asking ourselves, what is the 

impetus for this legislation? Who asked for it? Whose interests 

are it serving? Who will be the individuals now around the table 

providing advice? The process by which these individuals are 

selected, has it been done in order to ensure that the information 

received is in fact friendly or convenient for government to 

follow and government to listen to? 

 

I’ve also talked about how the new process, as to how the 

Labour Market Commission would be operating, how that’s 

troublesome as to how its placement within Enterprise 

Saskatchewan. How we’ve seen alarming instances already in 

Enterprise Saskatchewan’s short life where advice has been 

given and advice has not been followed. One can think of the 

school closure example. 

 

By rolling the Labour Market Commission into Enterprise 

Saskatchewan, are we placing the Labour Market Commission 

in a position where its bite will be lost, where its relevance will 

be lost, where its influence will be lost? Are we putting it in a 

position where it’s not set up for success, Mr. Speaker, but it’s 

set up for failure? That is a concern. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’ve also talked about how representation on 

the Labour Market Commission is also threatened through the 

process outlined in this piece of legislation, Bill 46. How by in 

reducing the board from 19 to 11, how that may present 

challenges in ensuring that all members from society are heard 

from and ensuring that all members have the opportunity to 

have their opinions and their voices heard and to have their 

input fully realized and implemented into the decision-making 

process. 

 

When we look at the consultation process that has led up to Bill 

46, in my opinion there are a good number of questions and 

concerns that are identified. When we look at the process that’s 

been outlined for how the Labour Market Commission would 

now act, Mr. Speaker, I think there are also grave concerns. 

When we look at the process of representation, how it could 

now be convenient for government to place individuals on the 

commission who would have a default position to say in what 



2342 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2009 

they may want to have to be said — an overly friendly position 

perhaps. 

 

Not advocating an antagonistic position or an adversarial one. 

But I am advocating the position for the Labour Market 

Commission where voices are heard with equality, voices are 

heard with respect, and voices are heard in an honest manner to 

ensure that individuals who are in a place where they have true 

value to bring to a discussion about the future of the labour 

market in Saskatchewan, when those individuals are in a place, 

to truly succeed and to be appreciated. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, those are a few of my thoughts on Bill 46, a 

few of my concerns, and a few of my misgivings about the 

approach outlined in this Bill. I know a number of my 

colleagues from this side have had the opportunity to speak to 

Bill 46, and I’m very pleased to have had the chance to do so 

myself. And I look forward to more comments because I know 

many of my colleagues do have concerns on the issues of 

consultation, proposed process, and proposed representation on 

the Labour Market Commission. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would move that we adjourn debate 

on Bill 46. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Massey Place 

has moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 46. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. And, members, I neglected earlier on 

the adjournment on Bill 80 to ask for your approval of the 

motion. Would the members agree that . . . adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 80? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. Thank you. 

 

Bill No. 79 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 79 — The 

Education Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2)/Loi n
o
 2 de 2009 

modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to rise and offer a number of comments on The 

Education Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2). 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is just a very short Bill, and when you look at 

the copy of the Bill itself that was handed out, it deals with the 

minister having the ability to designate schools of opportunity 

— not the designation per se, but for the minister to extend the 

school’s designation as a school of opportunity for a period not 

exceeding three school years from the date of the original 

designation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, like I say, it’s a fairly short Bill. I know that the 

initial opportunity was for the minister to set a timeline of two 

years in place for a school of opportunity once the application 

had been made and approved, and that there was a number of 

approval processes that had to be gone through even during that 

two-year time. So obviously there has been some concerns 

expressed. 

 

There has been some, I would think, some of the schools that 

are looking at applying for a school of opportunity designation, 

some concern that the length of time it takes to fill out the 

applications, do the work that’s needed to even make an 

application to the minister for the designation of a school of 

opportunity is quite lengthy. So I can see where there would be 

a preference for a three-year designation — even if there is a 

number of reviews that are held throughout that period of time 

— that three years would be more preferable to two. 

 

And I know for a fact that many communities . . . Well the one 

community that I’m actually more familiar with is Chaplin that 

is within the Prairie South School Division, and it’s just west of 

my home community of Moose Jaw. And I know that their 

school has been under review and was designated to close. But I 

also know that the community has put in a great deal of work 

and effort to look at the possibility of Chaplin being designated 

as a school of opportunity. 

 

And I know when I had first met with some folks from Chaplin, 

we had had a discussion on it, and when the minister had passed 

the initial legislation, I had gone and looked on the website to 

see what the legislation stated, how it was laid out. Because the 

folks from Chaplin had told me that they had actually gone out, 

the community had put together funds to go out and hire 

someone to put the application together. So it obviously was a 

fairly detailed amount of information that the minister was 

requiring for the designation to be applied. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what I did today when I was looking — or 

yesterday, I guess — when I was looking at the legislation 

again and knowing that I may have an opportunity to get up and 

make some comments, I actually went onto the website again 

and was looking at some of the information just to refresh my 

memory. And I got a little bit tangled up in the handbook that’s 

posted on the Ministry of Education website. And there’s a 

number of topics in there that caught my eye long before I made 

it to the school of opportunities section. And I guess I wouldn’t 

mind just going a little bit off track, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 

making some comments about the school community councils. 

 

First off I want to say the handbook is laid out very well, and it 

is a benefit to everyone across the province to have the 

information easily accessible on the website. And I know that 

even smaller communities where you may not have access to 

high-speed in your home, there’s always good contact at the 

local library or the regional library. You can always access 

high-speed Internet there, so you can have an opportunity to 

look at some of this documentation if it’s of interest to you or if 

your community is looking for some information and 

explanations from the Ministry of Education. 

 

So the way it’s laid out, it’s quite easy to get a sampling of the 



March 17, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2343 

information and a quick explanation for the different sections. 

So the handbook is pretty good itself. And I guess the first piece 

that I ran across where it talks about roles and responsibilities, 

and it quite clearly lays out the responsibility and role of the 

minister and the Minister of Education, the board of education, 

but also school community councils. 

 

And that tweaked a few memories, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

because I know there was some concern for various areas from 

various areas when school community councils were first put in 

place. And I know over the last year and a half to two years, on 

a number of occasions, I have had the privilege of meeting with 

school community council members or councils themselves 

right across the province. They have worked very well. And 

they have given communities that access into the education 

system, have given them input into their local schools. And it 

has made a world of difference in many areas for the programs 

that are being run and the support that the staff at the local 

school will receive through this community council. So I’m 

very pleased to see that they have worked out so well. 

 

There was a lot of time and effort that went into making sure 

that there was contact with the education system for the 

communities where the schools are located because we know 

that it is important to have that community connect. But, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, the handbook goes on through a number of 

areas. It talks about school review committees, school staff, 

what happens, or how the staff of the school under review, what 

happens there. Staff of receiving schools, what happens there; 

students, parents, and families, communities. 

 

There’s also a section on long-term planning, transparent and 

open communications which is very important under any of 

these circumstances, because it does take time but it is so 

important to have that open dialogue and communications and 

transparent activities so that families in the communities and the 

communities can feel comfortable with the decisions that are 

being made. And it is important, but it is all laid out quite 

clearly. 

 

It also gives, step by step, the school review process: how the 

division conducts internal reviews, how a board moves to 

review a school, what the motions should be, criteria that’s 

established for review, and what notification must be given to 

the public, and establishment of a school review committee. 

And these are all important steps leading up to the school of 

opportunity and this designation that this new amendment to 

The Education Act is referring to. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, under the school review process in 

the handbook it also speaks to the school review committee 

consults with the community. And it lays out the responsibility 

of not only the board of education, the school review 

committee, but also the responsibilities of the community, and 

feedback to the board of education. So when a motion of 

consideration for school closure or grade discontinuation is put 

forward, there is samples of the information that it should 

contain, what should be done, notification of public, and also 

the information to parents and school community councils. 

 

And this is important, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because I know 

there are a number of communities that are again looking at 

issues of grade discontinuance and school closure. So I know 

they will be interested in the information that’s contained in the 

handbook and how easily it is to access the information, and 

how helpful it will be for them in the issues that they have to 

deal with. 

 

The handbook also goes on to how the board holds meetings of 

electors, public meetings, notification of the public, agenda for 

the meeting of electors, also public representation and 

submissions. 

 

There’s also a section that deals with the transition, looking 

after people and property. And there’s a great deal of upset 

when you have changes in schools, when you will see closures 

or grade discontinuance. Where do the teachers go? How is that 

dealt with? What happens to the buildings themselves? People 

and property are important in this whole piece and they can’t be 

overlooked. So some clear direction as to how that should be 

done. 

 

And then finally we get to the school of opportunity. So it lays 

out what is a school of opportunity. Step one, it has the 

development of a proposal; step two, consideration of proposal 

by minister; step three, evaluation of growth; and step four, 

decision making about the future of the school. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, here we have four short steps that talk 

about a community applying for a designation as a school of 

opportunity and having various responsibilities to set targets, 

meet those targets, meet those goals, and meet the criteria that’s 

laid out by the ministry to maintain their school as a school of 

opportunity. 

 

And when you look at the handbook, it is some very simple and 

straightforward information. It tells you what a school of 

opportunity is, timelines that need to be met, and gives you 

some key points about the school of opportunity process and 

what those key points are. So it’s not very long; it’s maybe 

about six pages that it lays out. And it gives you a fairly 

detailed flow chart that shows you the steps they’re taking, what 

may or may not happen, and the flow of the decision making. 

So what we have here in the handbook is about six pages, I 

believe it is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that lays out what needs to be 

done if a community is applying for designation as a school of 

opportunity in their area. 

 

And a school of opportunity really is a school that may have a 

designation of grade discontinuation or be slated for closure. 

And if the community can make the case that there is a need for 

their school to remain open, that there is opportunity in their 

community for growth and for more students and families to 

relocate there, there is an opportunity for the minister to provide 

the school of opportunity designation. And it provides funding 

on top of the regular school division budget, operating grant, 

that will keep that school open for a period of years. 

 

But now there is a number of . . . And that’s what we’re dealing 

with today, how many years is maximum that it may stay open, 

unless it moves into the criteria that proves it to be a viable 

school within that division. 

 

But I have to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I went on to the 

handbook just to give myself a bit of a overview and a refresher 

course on what exactly a school of opportunity was, it looks 



2344 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2009 

pretty simple and straightforward when you look at the 

information that’s contained in the handbook. But I have to 

warn people, it is just an overview. It’s by no means a detailed 

requirement of what’s needed for an application to the minister 

to receive the designation of a school of opportunity and that 

extra funding, and hope for the community that their education 

centre will stay in that community. 

 

In the handbook, there is . . . a little more detailed on figure 6. 

And it gives you the minimum contents of a proposal for 

designation as a school of opportunity. And while it’s all 

contained on one page, telling you what the community must 

put forward to the Minister of Education for him to have a look, 

he or she to have a look at the proposal and to make a decision 

on the designation, there are some very clear targets that have to 

be met. 

 

So first off, what you need to do, a community has to put 

forward the grade configuration and what the “Proposed grade 

configuration of the school for which the school of opportunity 

designation is requested.” 

 

So what grades will be offered in the school where the proposal 

is being put forward. “[So] the grades . . . [that are] offered may 

be the same as are presently offered or they may be different.” 

 

So it needs to be a decision made by the community; how many 

families are moving in, what age groups the children are, and 

what will the needs be of that school in particular. 

 

But there’s also a requirement for a school profile: 

 

[An] enrollment history of school since January 1, 2006, 

[and it must contain a] five-year projected enrolments and 

the source of this data, number of teaching and 

non-teaching staff at the time of the review, projected 

number of teaching staff based on enrollment projections 

and board policy, information about the physical condition 

of the school, other factors the board of education used in 

reviewing the school — as provided by the board of 

education and the school community council. 

 

So just in that one paragraph, there is a heck a lot of work that’s 

needed for a school of opportunity application to go into the 

ministry. You have to have the enrolment history, five-year 

projected enrolments, the data has to be verified and 

documented, dealing with your staff — non-teaching staff, 

teaching staff — projected number based on enrolment 

projections, board policy, physical condition of the school. So 

we’re talking about an assessment of the building and a great 

deal of work compiling with your community projected 

enrolments and population numbers for your community. There 

also has to be in the school profile current peer group size by 

grade and by gender, average classroom size, cultural and 

recreational activities, and course offerings by grade as 

provided by the school. 

 

[15:30] 

 

So as we start reading this one-page assessment or a kind of 

outline of what’s needed in your application to be a school of 

opportunity and be designated hopefully as a school of 

opportunity, there needs to be a great deal of work done. There 

also has to be a list of businesses and employers, so what you 

need to do is, throughout the community you need to list your 

businesses and employers, including their addresses, a 

description of the primary business of each, and a profile of the 

workforce of each. 

 

So I’m not even halfway down the page yet, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and we can see that to apply for a designation as a 

school of opportunity, communities need to have a great deal of 

work done, and they need to do a great deal of planning to be 

able to compile all this information. And it’s not just works by 

an individual. It includes the whole community. 

 

There also needs to be future plans and opportunities for 

business and employers in the community. So what you have to 

do is, with the support of your business community, there has 

be an identification of actual business expansion plans, 

identification of the forces driving business expansion, 

identification of the risks associated with the business 

expansion. 

 

So we’re not only talking about the school and the assessment 

that goes with the building and the staff and the students, but 

also we start looking at more detailed information that is 

required by the ministry from the business community and the 

community at large, also projected expansion of the workforce 

and any projected change in the profile of the workforce, 

projected timelines for expansion of the workforce, and 

projected impact of workforce expansion on the number of 

pupils enrolled in the school. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as you can see, working through this 

very short, one-page criteria, an overview of what’s needed for 

a designation as a school of opportunity, you can only imagine 

the work that’s involved and how more involved the process 

becomes as we just work our way through the various sections. 

 

The next section asks for a summary of the strategic plan for the 

municipalities of the school division. So now we’re expanding 

the information that’s needed; we’re expanding the work that’s 

needed. 

 

“Description of business and community partnerships that will 

enhance and sustain growth in the community and that will 

maintain a healthy community.” So again we’re moving 

beyond the school itself and the families and the students that 

are there. We are moving beyond into the business community. 

Now we are talking about healthy community and what that 

entails — recreational activities, and it . . . recreational, 

entertainment. 

 

It just goes on and on. “Municipal infrastructure plans and 

initiatives to support and enhance growth in the community.” 

 

That’s also, you need a strategic plan, a summary of the 

strategic plan, and “Financing arrangements that [will] support 

full implementation of the plans and initiatives outlined . . . 

above.” So we’re not just asking for what-if. We need to have 

concrete plans that have detail and figures attached to them. 

 

Also the next requirement is benefits of business expansion 

plans to the school. So then we need to get into more detail. 

Once we’ve looked at the businesses that may be expanding 



March 17, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2345 

into the future, we have to look at the “Expected increase in the 

number of preschool and school-aged children in the 

community,” and also a “Rationale as to why the increased 

economic development will result in an increase in the number 

of pupils enrolled in the school by the end of the second school 

year following the year of designation, and beyond.” 

 

So we’re doing projections into the out years. And also you 

need the “Expected increase in the value of the school, 

including a description of the enhanced community and 

business partnerships with the school.” 

 

Then we get on to a little more detail — like this isn’t enough 

detail, we need more — description of the data sources and 

methodology used for all quantitative information in the school 

of opportunity proposal, and a description of the data sources 

and methodology that will be used to report back to the minister 

at 8 and 20 months. 

 

So what we see with that last comment is that even though the 

community has done this much work, there is still a requirement 

where they will need to report back to the minister with updated 

information to see if the goals are being met and if the 

designation will continue at 8 and at 20 months. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you can see why there has been an 

extension requested for the length of designation for a school of 

opportunity when there’s a requirement for the community to 

go into a great deal, a great deal of detailed work and 

information. 

 

But in many cases in these smaller communities, there may not 

be anyone within the community who has the time for sure to 

volunteer to do something like this. And I know of one 

community for sure where they have gone out and the 

community has put together their own resources to hire 

someone to put together the information that’s required. So 

here’s a small community that is trying to save their school in 

their area and maintain its presence in their community and in 

the surrounding area, and they have had to go out and hire 

someone to put together the detail of information that’s required 

by the ministry. 

 

So it is an onerous task. It’s a task that has taken a fair number 

of months for, I know, that community. They have raised the 

money on their own. They have done a number of things in 

their community as fundraisers and support for the school. It’s 

ongoing, and it really speaks well of the community and the 

dedication they have for maintaining a vibrant community for 

not only the people that live right in this town but also in the 

surrounding area. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s one page, a quick overview in the 

handbook of what’s needed to apply for a school of opportunity 

designation. But if you go into the legislation you will also see 

it’s fairly short. It’s only about one page. But the legislation 

also gets into the minister’s responsibilities, and it talks about 

the minister: 

 

In accordance with any terms and conditions that may be 

prescribed in the regulations, the minister may make 

grants to a board of education that is responsible for a 

school of opportunity [this is once the designation has 

been received], in addition to any grant that the minister 

may make to the board of education pursuant to . . . [other 

sections of the Act]. 

 

So if the minister considers it appropriate to do so, he will 

review the designation of a school of opportunity before the 

expiry date of the designation and, according to this new review 

that’s carried out, he may continue the designation of the school 

until the original expiry date or until any new date set by the 

minister that is earlier than the original expiry date. So it really 

is up to the discretion of the minister. And the minister seems to 

have a fair bit of discretion and impact on the decision of the 

school of opportunity. But the minister may also remove the 

designation of the school as a school of opportunity. 

 

So these checkups not . . . Once the original application is 

made, if the designation is received through the minister for the 

school of opportunity, the school also needs to maintain a fair 

bit of information to make sure it is updated, to make sure they 

are on track with plans, and to make sure that they are carrying 

through with all the criteria that’s laid out in the legislation. 

 

And there’s a number of other pieces in the legislation that talks 

about, on expiry or removal of the designation, the minister 

advises the board of education. And, I mean, there’s all kinds of 

things that will happen. But there is an end date in mind with a 

school of opportunity. 

 

So the handbook gives you kind of a quick but fairly intense 

overview of what the process is and the information that’s 

needed, and when you go to the legislation it’s even shorter. 

Well it’s about as long as the criteria that’s laid out in the 

handbook, but it actually covers a number of various topics that 

are outside of the section of the handbook. 

 

And where we go to a fair bit of detail, if you go to the 

regulations in The Education Act, part XIX.4, and you will see 

the “Schools of Opportunity” is a section of detailed regulations 

that offers minimum enrolment, review of designation, the 

designation itself — goes into quite a bit of detail. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s also a calculation of the grants in 

the regulation. That’s been a question I know from a number of 

people that I have spoken to, how the money that will be paid to 

a school that receives the designation, is a school of 

opportunity, what formula is used to calculate the money that 

they will receive to maintain the school for the period of time. 

 

So it’s all laid out; you just have to do a little bit of looking for 

it. But I guess my main point out of all this, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is that when we look at the designation for the school 

of opportunity and extending the possibility of a designation 

from two to three years, there has been a huge amount of work 

that has been put into the effort to even make the application by 

communities, and that work continues with checkups on 

meeting their goals, meeting the criteria that they have put 

forward in their application, and, at any time — by my 

understanding — the designation of a school of opportunity can 

be cancelled if those goals and criteria aren’t met. So, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s a huge amount of work for communities. Like I 

say, the community that I am most aware of has had to hire 

someone to come in and do the application, do the background 

work, to meet all of the criteria that’s laid out in the application. 



2346 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2009 

So when the minister puts forward a piece of legislation that 

speaks to moving the designation or the possibility of 

designation from two to three years, I don’t think there is 

anyone that would be opposed to that. It’s a more appropriate 

time frame for communities to be able to gather the 

information. And once the work’s done, you need to have an 

opportunity for communities to be able to build towards the 

goals and the criteria that they have laid forward. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I don’t have any problems with the proposal 

that’s put forward in Bill 79, but there are still a number of my 

colleagues that I need to speak to to make sure that it’s not a 

problem with anyone else, and a couple of people, a couple 

groups that I have to consult with. So at this time, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I would move adjournment on Bill 79. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — The member has 

moved adjournment on Bill No. 79. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 9 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Gantefoer that Bill No. 9 — The 

Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 

2008 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member from Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to enter into the debate on the Act to amend The 

Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Act. I think this 

one has generated a lot of conversation, a lot of debate in the 

House. I know some of my members feel very strongly about 

some parts of this legislation. And I really welcome the 

opportunity to join in because I have some concerns as well. 

 

Some of the points, clearly there’s a lot of common grounds and 

common understanding that we can agree on, particularly those 

points, and we talked about: 

 

. . . the names of individuals who retired or died during 

the period . . . [that’s covered], the amounts of 

superannuation or other allowances or benefits granted in 

individual cases or any other personal information 

respecting any of those individuals. 

 

But we know and we’ve come to appreciate over the course of 

the past few years the changing economy, particularly when it 

comes to people with pensions, but also those entering the 

workforce. And how does that flow occur naturally and with 

some kind of expectations for those who are receiving pensions, 

that their pensions will be worth the pensions that they thought 

they had and that they could retire in comfort? The expectation 

that they had throughout their working years, that they could 

retire. 

 

[15:45] 

But also those who are entering into the workforce that, when 

they’ve gone through the education systems — the universities, 

SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 

Technology] or whatever — that when they enter the 

workforce, that they could have some expectations that they 

will be getting jobs, that they could support their families and 

do the things that many of us, and particularly in my generation, 

the baby boomer generation, have come to expect whether 

that’s buying a house, buying a house, being able to support a 

family. 

 

And so this clearly has some implications and, you know, we 

have the opportunity to enter into these debates. It’s not so 

much that we think just at this particular time about the 

implications of what’s the written word, but what are the 

long-term implications? What are the unintended consequences 

of a Bill? And particularly this Bill here, when we’re amending 

the superannuation Act, what are the consequences? What are 

the long-term consequences? And clearly we’ve had some very, 

very thorough speeches on those points, and I think that they’re 

very worthwhile that we take some time in considering the 

points that are made. 

 

We can all agree on some of the proposed amendments. Some 

of them are minor. I looked at the one regarding the calculation 

of pension benefits for a spouse. I think we can all agree to that. 

That makes a lot of sense. Sometimes when we put forward 

initial pieces of legislation, we don’t think of some of the things 

that we have to, and here’s an example of that. 

 

But there’s one that is very contentious, and some of it really 

what we can call double-dipping and the whole concept of the 

legalization of double-dipping. And is it really a simple, easy 

way to deal with an issue that really may become very costly? 

And of course the question I have is, does the public support 

that in a civil service that we take a lot of pride in? We take a 

lot of pride in the professional nature of our civil service. We 

want to see a natural growth in that civil service, where young 

people are coming in and they have an expectation that they can 

move through the civil service and reach top management 

positions in a natural, timely way. And if we have a point at the 

end where there tends to be a logjam, where it seems to be 

worthwhile for people who would naturally move into 

retirement but have decided to stay, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is 

a concern. And we think of this as perhaps a fundamental shift 

in public policy. 

 

And has there been the appropriate consultation given to all the 

different sectors within our communities? And one that I would 

say that I would like us to consider at length on this are those 

within the CBO sector, the community-based organizations — 

and you know, Mr. Speaker, I have been raising this issue daily 

through petitions since the beginning of this session — where 

there is a group calling for wage equity for CBO workers. And 

we have that on one hand, a group that we know that is very 

poorly paid, that is looking for wage equity, and on the other 

hand, here we have an Act to amend superannuation and 

allowing for some very, I think, high-paid salaries. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we see something kind of out of sync 

here. We see people who are — both groups of people are — 

providing very important services. But one may be very well 

paid and very costly to the public purse, and another group who 



March 17, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2347 

is also doing some very good work in our communities and are 

notoriously underpaid, and they’re calling for some attention. 

But yet this government seems to be intent on doing one-offs in 

their type of work. 

 

We know that the workers in the CBO sector are traditionally 

underpaid and continue to work in wages that float right around 

the low-income cut-off, and if it wasn’t for the minimum wage 

going up — and, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to be part of the 

government that put those wage increases into place — these 

people would continue to be underpaid. 

 

We know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that within the CBO sector 

there is a high staff turnover. People cannot, cannot see the 

commitment made by the government, the provincial 

government, that their work is valued, and therefore they tend 

to leave. And this has a huge impact, particularly in caregiver 

continuity. It has a huge negative impact on the quality of care 

that clients receive. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, some people may say, well this is not 

connected. Clearly it is. On one hand, you’re putting aside huge 

amounts of money, potentially huge amounts of money, and on 

the other hand, on this other group, you are saying, we don’t 

have the money. Clearly, Mr. Speaker, I think there is a 

connection between the two groups. And we need to talk about 

what are the values, what is the long-term vision for this 

government. 

 

We’ve often asked the question: what are the long-range plans 

for this government? Whether it’s in housing, forestry, terms of 

tuition today, we asked about that. What is the long-range plan? 

These folks don’t seem to have any long-range plans, Mr. 

Speaker. They tend to go along with the flow. 

 

And clearly here is an example — Bill No. 9. What are the 

implications when you allow and you legalize, essentially, 

double-dipping for some of our most highly paid public 

servants? What are the long-term implications of that, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker? And I don’t think this government has thought 

out the implications. They’re just going along with the flow. 

They’ve got some good points in there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

but clearly some represent a huge public policy shift. 

 

And have they gone out and consulted with the communities 

that are affected with this? I don’t think so, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. I don’t think so. They have not considered the 

implications of amending a Bill like this at all. And we have 

some concerns and we have some considerable questions about 

the financial ramifications for taxpayers. And, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, this deserves some very close scrutiny. 

 

We know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we have seen — in fact we 

have seen within this session — some of the other legislation 

that has not been well thought out. And clearly they’ve had to 

go back to their drawing board and say, oops, we have to do a 

redo; we have to do a redo. And I am thinking that this may be 

one of those where they have to do a redo. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, I just want to emphasize the questions 

I have, particularly about the implications for people who are 

looking for work who see a career in the public service, and 

whether that’s within the CBO sector — and hopefully at some 

point as they gather the experience and they think that they see 

themselves having a role within the public sector — whether 

it’s a provincial, federal, or at the municipal level. But we are in 

charge of the provincial level, and clearly we have a 

responsibility to make sure that they can move into this area at a 

natural rate. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the things I do worry about is 

that we should be looking towards young people as the hope for 

tomorrow because these folks come in and they have new ideas. 

They have a vision, and they really want to share. They want to 

grab the opportunity to make this province the most it can truly 

be. And when you have a government that’s looking to reward 

people by allowing them to double dip and to stay in their 

positions, I have some serious questions. And I know many of 

us have some serious questions. 

 

And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that this needs to go back. 

And I would really encourage the government to think about do 

they want to move forward with this whole Bill. 

 

I think the question around double-dipping really begs the 

question about what is the message to young people today when 

they are saying, listen, we’re not going to do a thing for CBOs 

and we’re not . . . in fact actually we eliminated the social 

economy. Can you imagine the expertise that would have come 

out of that that could have benefitted our civil service? But what 

we’re going to do is we’re going to reward those at the top who 

are concerned about their pensions. 

 

And I can understand, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I can clearly 

understand in these trying times. We see the global economy — 

and particularly pensions, the hit they’ve taken — and people 

who may be in their mid-50s, late 50s, thinking about, do I 

really want to stop work? Clearly these people have done some 

very good work and have really done an awful lot for the 

province of Saskatchewan, and we value the work that they 

have done. Without a doubt they have done an awful lot. But 

does that mean they get to do the double-dipping? I don’t think 

so. 

 

We’re very happy to see them stay. I know in teaching, this is 

an issue that quite often I see. And as a former teacher and a 

teacher on leave from the Saskatoon Public School Board, 

we’ve often debated this question about double-dipping. We 

need to see young teachers be able to take their places in the 

classrooms. And with double-dipping, that becomes a problem. 

And so we see teachers who may ask, is Saskatoon or is 

Saskatchewan the place where we see our futures? 

 

Do we want to have that same question happen here in 

Saskatchewan, where we see a clear signal to young people, 

coupled with another couple of other things, and whether it’s a 

graduate tax exemption that they won’t move on, they’re 

saying, we don’t want to see people with master’s or doctorates. 

Clearly they don’t want to see that. They just want people with 

undergraduate degrees. 

 

We see the whole question about housing and affordable 

housing. We see the question about the CBO sector. Now we 

see the elimination of the social economy, that there are some 

real questions that young people may say, is this the place 

where we really truly are valued? Maybe we should be thinking 



2348 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2009 

about other places. And so I am deeply, deeply concerned about 

this, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Again, we don’t see anything really in the explanation notes 

about the kind of consultations that they’ve done. We know that 

the government’s style here is to move and pass legislation, and 

then consult. I don’t understand that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Usually what you do is consult first so everybody’s in 

agreement; they understand the intentions, the implications. 

This government seems to prefer to move legislation forward 

first and then pass it, and then they seem to pick up the pieces 

wherever they may fall. I don’t know what school they went to, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I don’t think this makes any sense at 

all. And so clearly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have some questions. 

 

And of course when we get to committee, I hope that the 

minister responsible is prepared to answer these questions, 

prepared to answer what about . . . What are the signals that 

they are sending to young people who want to enter into the 

public service? Are they really truly valued or are they not? 

 

I don’t think this government has at all considered the 

implications for the CBO sector because we see a couple of 

questions around that. We think that should be a priority, 

especially around wage equity, not around allowing 

double-dipping. Are they going to move on wage equity? And 

clearly for those people in the CBO sector, are they going to 

allow them . . . Are they sending a signal: you know what? We 

don’t really value your work. We’re not going to pay you very 

much. And at the end of the day, it’s not really any point in 

coming into the public service because really, truly, we’ve got a 

logjam at the top because we’re allowing double-dipping. 

We’re allowing people to gather their salaries and we’re 

allowing them to collect their full pensions. 

 

And of course I think at the end of the day, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, the taxpayers clearly would have some questions about 

this, clearly would have some questions because we know and 

we hope that the pensions that people are getting are fair and 

reasonable. 

 

And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think we will definitely have 

some questions because we know that clearly the implications 

of this legislation are not well thought out. And we know that 

within many sectors the whole issue, the whole concept of 

double-dipping, it’s just inherently unfair — inherently unfair 

when we know there are people who are looking for good, good 

work. They’re looking for decent work, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And if this is the message, that there is some chosen few that 

will be able to get, clearly, some significant cash, is that fair? 

Does that meet the test of fairness? Does that meet the test of 

decency? I don’t think so, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And clearly we 

have some questions here. 

 

Clearly we have some points that we agree with, and we would 

be very happy to move that forward. They’re housekeeping. 

 

But this is a major shift in public policy. And I know we’ve 

heard some very good speeches about this, who’ve raised some 

concerns, some real questions about this. And I have some 

questions about whether this government wants to be known as 

the government that allowed the legalized double-dipping in the 

public civil service. 

 

[16:00] 

 

You know, and it is just an irony, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This 

government likes to talk about things they take a lot of pride in. 

I don’t know how they’re going to take a lot of pride in this, and 

I’d be very curious to know how in their message management 

or how they spin this, this’ll come off as a win-win for 

everybody in Saskatchewan. 

 

Clearly not a win-win for taxpayers. Clearly not a win-win for 

young people moving into the public civil service. And clearly, 

Mr. Speaker, I think that, I think at the end of the day when 

people go into superannuation, they look for fairness and 

decency and be treated that way, and clearly many pieces of this 

legislation address those concerns. But double-dipping is not 

one of those that meet the tests of fairness and decency and I 

don’t think so. I don’t think this’ll meet the questions that the 

Saskatchewan taxpayers will have. 

 

So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have some questions that I 

think need to be addressed in committee and I think that we 

need to have . . . I know there are many colleagues, many 

colleagues on this side who will like to enter into this debate. 

And so with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that . . . well I 

will move that we adjourn debate on the Act to amend 

superannuation, the supplementary provisions Act, Bill No. 9. 

Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — The motion before 

the Assembly is to adjourn debate on Bill No. 9, the 

superannuation amendment Act. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 43 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 43 — The 

Trespass to Property Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to first of all 

thank you for recognizing me and allowing me to enter into this 

debate on Bill No. 43, An Act respecting Trespass to Property. 

Mr. Speaker, this is a new piece of legislation, as something 

that we have not seen in the province of Saskatchewan. 

Certainly in my time in the legislature, we have seen elements 

of the Bill in other pieces of legislation, but this certainly is a 

new Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I noted when the Minister of Justice got up to 

speak about the Bill, he talked about the need to put some 

parameters around private property, particularly for those 

people who are farmers and ranchers and others to ensure that 



March 17, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2349 

individuals can’t come on to your property if you have your 

property posted. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as someone who comes from a farm family, I do 

know that there have been a number of times certainly in my 

life when people came on to farm land and pasture land with 

their all-terrain vehicles, their snowmobiles, hunters, and so on. 

And that certainly has presented problems for people in the 

agricultural industry. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think that there may be some unintended 

consequences in this particular piece of legislation. And I know 

that when you’re in public life, there will be times in that public 

life when you may have people in the public that really don’t 

appreciate what you’re doing from a public policy point of 

view. And as someone who’s had picketers outside of my 

constituency office; as someone who’s had people inside my 

constituency office; as someone who’s had people on the steps 

of the legislature protesting the actions of the government of the 

day — it does take you, as a government and a minister, outside 

of your comfort zone. It really does. 

 

I have been at public meetings — I’m thinking one in particular 

— where a decision was made by our government and people 

were extremely upset and they were protesting outside of this 

meeting. And I had to make my way out of a public facility and 

to a car, and I had to go through a group of people who were 

very, very upset, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One of the things that concerns me about this particular piece of 

legislation is that the government, the Sask Party government, 

does not clearly define Crown land and in fact gives itself, in 

regulation, the ability to define Crown land further. Mr. 

Speaker, what I certainly am worried about, as someone who 

lives in a free and democratic country, as someone who lives in 

a democracy, is that it is possible that the government through 

regulation could define Crown land to such an extent that it 

would make it unlawful for people to assemble peacefully to 

protest and show their displeasure at a particular piece of public 

policy. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that is what we want to do in 

this Assembly. I don’t think we want to restrict the ability of 

our citizens to assemble peacefully and together say to members 

of the legislature, say to the government, that they are opposed 

to a particular piece of public policy, a particular law and so on. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, what concerns me about this legislation is 

that the government is giving itself, through regulation, the 

ability to define, enlarge, or restrict the meaning of any word or 

expression that’s used in this Act. And therein lies some of the 

difficulty. They also are giving themselves the ability to 

prescribe Crown land or categories of Crown land to which the 

Act does not apply. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at the moment, the only pieces of Crown land as 

it’s defined in this particular Bill is vacant Crown agricultural 

land, Crown resource land, parkland as defined by The Parks 

Act. Well, Mr. Speaker, it is possible through regulation that the 

government could define this very Legislative Assembly and 

the grounds of this Legislative Assembly as being under the 

auspices of this legislation. 

 

The other thing that is concerning and disconcerting about this 

particular piece of legislation is that the government, through 

regulation, can determine who’s in charge or in possession of 

that Crown land. And we could have a situation where a group 

of people wanted to assemble peacefully at this legislature to 

make their thoughts known on a particular public policy issue 

— possible that the cabinet, through regulation, could designate 

this Assembly as coming under the auspices of this legislation 

and could designate the Sergeant-at-Arms as being someone 

who’s in charge of this place, which would prevent people from 

lawfully assembling. So, Mr. Speaker, I think that this 

legislation goes far beyond anything that a considered person 

would find wise in a free and democratic society, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now we will have the opportunity to question the minister once 

we get into committee. Mr. Speaker, there are a number of 

questions that the minister will have to consider, and one of 

those questions really is, does this legislation give the minister 

and the cabinet the ability to put Crown property — which 

could be sidewalks, could be the legislative grounds, it could be 

streets, it could be roadways — under the auspices of this 

particular piece of legislation that would prevent our citizenry 

of assembling peacefully to indicate to other citizens how they 

feel about a particular piece of legislation or a particular public 

policy? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that’s what we want to do in a 

free and democratic society that we call Canada, Mr. Speaker. 

People should have the right to assemble. They should have the 

right to express their point of view, peacefully of course. And 

they should not have that right inhibited by a piece of 

legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that I have other colleagues that want to 

speak on the legislation. We have more work that we need to do 

in terms of trying to understand the legislation. And so with 

these short comments, I would move adjournment of this 

particular debate. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — The member has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 43. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 68 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Tell that Bill No. 68 — The Arts 

Professions Act/Loi sur les professions artistiques be now read 

a second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Regina Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

honour today and my pleasure today to speak to An Act 

respecting the Arts Professions and the Status of the Artist. And 

I want to start by saying to any artists that ever read this or see 

it or somehow understand that we’re dealing with this, how 

very much they mean to not only myself and my family, but to 



2350 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2009 

all of Saskatchewan people. 

 

Any society without arts, be they any of the myriad of arts that 

there are, that we think of arts, whether it’s painters or whether 

it’s performing arts or whether it’s the visual arts in some form 

or if it’s a craft or if it’s theatre, all of this enhances what life is 

about for a society. All of this makes life very worthwhile. All 

of it in some form provides either a learning opportunity for us 

or an entertainment opportunity for us or something. Sometimes 

it’s just you look at something and you say, that is beautiful or 

that gives me a sense of peace or that troubles me. Sometimes 

that’s what an artist wants to do, is to challenge us to think a bit 

about what it is we’re doing. So as I enter the debate on this 

particular Bill, I want to let all artists know how much we really 

appreciate them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the next thing I want to say about it is we can do 

better here in Saskatchewan than we have done. We have a 

good history but a history that sadly comes in fits and spurts is 

the best way I can describe it. Although we all challenge 

ourselves and challenge each other to do better, but we really 

can do better on behalf of the artistic community of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And we have, speaking of an artistic community . . . You know, 

Mr. Speaker, I was using the Internet to do a little bit of 

research. It’s a great tool. I just punched up visual artists in 

Saskatchewan and there is an amazing list. And you do a 

disclaimer on it right away saying, this is only a tiny sampling 

of the visual artists and other artists that we have in 

Saskatchewan. But it’s amazing and I urge anyone that has 

access to the Internet, get on it and spend a little bit of time 

poking around Saskatchewan arts and Saskatchewan artists, and 

you’ll come away in a very short order with a very real sense of 

what it is that artists mean to Saskatchewan and Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

The list — and I’m not planning to take a long time with the list 

of visual artists — but just to give you a bit of an idea, Mr. 

Speaker, the list included people like Ron Bloore, Eli Bornstein, 

Victor Cicansky, Hans Dommasch, Joe Fafard, Mina Mabel 

Forsythe, Edward William Godwin, and 16 more on that list of 

visual artists alone. And I say that with apologies to the 16 

more. But, Mr. Speaker, with apologies to the hundreds of 

more, maybe thousands of more visual artists that there are in 

Saskatchewan, people that really take pride in what it is they’re 

doing and what they’re creating. 

 

And they take pride whether they’re creating something just for 

themselves or whether they’re creating something perhaps for a 

friend or their family or to hang in their house. I mean, there’s 

all kinds of reasons why people enter into artistic creations. 

Maybe it’s simply an outlet for self, a form of expression that 

also leads to a great sense of worth and relaxation. 

 

[16:15] 

 

But I apologize to the — I’ve named seven artists — I 

apologize to every other artist that I didn’t name because quite 

frankly anyone that pursues any artistic endeavours deserves all 

kinds of support and encouragement from us as individuals and 

as society. 

 

I mean, if we were all politicians, life would be incredibly dull. 

If we were all carpenters — notwithstanding that Jesus was a 

carpenter — but if we were all carpenters, you know, you might 

run out of buildings to build or cupboards to make or furniture 

to make or whatever. And all of those things are necessary and 

are valued. And I’m certainly not trying to undervalue 

carpenters, and I certainly wouldn’t want to undervalue 

politicians, Mr. Speaker, nor any other people in any other walk 

of life. 

 

I read this little short list of visual artists, and I have to tell you, 

Mr. Speaker, that once in my life I’ve been to Washington, DC 

[District of Columbia] — one time. And I was fortunate 

enough, I was blessed to be able to, as part of that experience, I 

went to the Canadian embassy. And there was a group of us, 

and we were to have breakfast with the Canadian ambassador. 

At that time it was Raymond Chrétien, Jean Chrétien’s nephew, 

who has made a stellar career in the foreign service for Canada. 

 

And I want to tell you that even though I’m not a Liberal — and 

I suspect that Raymond Chrétien would potentially be a Liberal 

— I want to tell you I was more than a little impressed with his 

character, with the way he handled and field questions of us, 

and with his professionalism. And he was dealing with 

politicians and people of all stripes, but what an amazing 

person. 

 

And I’ll always remember there was two things about, well 

three things about that experience at the Canadian embassy that 

kind of were surprising for a boy from the Prairies. One, we had 

to wait close to an hour for the ambassador to get there because 

there’d been a bomb threat, and it’s just not something that 

we’re particularly used to here in Saskatchewan. And every 

time I think about it, I thank my lucky stars that my ancestors 

were bright enough to come to this wonderful land and this 

wonderful province and that they were smart enough to help 

make it the province it is where we tend to worry not a lot about 

things like a bomb. But the ambassador Chrétien had to take an 

alternate route to get there. We had decided to wait to have 

breakfast with him because it was a working breakfast and we 

had some questions. 

 

But while we were waiting they said, well why don’t you just 

check out the embassy, and we’ve got a beautiful view out here 

of the White House. So we’re kind of bored. I’m stumbling 

around and I bumped, kicked something on the floor and I 

looked down and said, oh it’s a Fafard. And the staffer that was 

following right behind me says, oh you know art? I said, no I 

don’t know art, but I know Joe. Joe Fafard. And it . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . They’re saying I’m having a hard 

time, and actually I’m not because it was my honour to meet 

Joe Fafard not long before I went to Washington. 

 

And I’ve long admired — as have hundreds of thousands of 

Saskatchewan people and people right across the world — 

admired work that Joe Fafard does. He’s a terrific Canadian. 

He’s an amazing person of talent, and he’s a Saskatchewan 

artist. Not to put too fine a point on it, I’m very, very proud to 

say that I have met Joe Fafard and am very, very proud of the 

work he does, as I am of all of the other artists, Mr. Speaker, in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now Joe Fafard has probably done better than most artists in 



March 17, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2351 

terms of being able to sustain a livelihood or earn a living from 

his work. Too few, too few are the artists that can say that 

they’ve made a living from what it is they do.  

 

And that’s one of the weaknesses in this Bill, Mr. Speaker, the 

Act respecting the arts professionals and the status of the artist. 

One of the weaknesses in this Bill is that it doesn’t go as far as 

it should to help artists to band together to collectively bargain 

to make sure that they’re getting the respect they need in a 

tangible way — that is, financially. To make sure that you don’t 

have — I’ll call it fire sale — but distress sales of artistic 

material; to make sure that when you have an organization like 

government or larger corporations that they not only respect, 

but they support the arts community in meaningful and tangible 

ways, so that it’s not just Joe Fafard, or not just Glen 

Scrimshaw that can make a living. And I could go on and on 

just in visual arts alone, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But we need to find ways to really, really make the next steps 

that are necessary. We had a great start in Saskatchewan. In 

1948 we had . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well you know, 

Mr. Speaker, I hear members opposite moaning, oh 1948, like 

it’s some history. Well if you refuse to learn from history, 

you’ll never make any progress. 

 

In 1948 Saskatchewan set up the first Arts Board in North 

America. That’s the history of 1948. And part of why I feel so 

strongly about it . . . Just for members so you can note, go down 

in the basement and look at the government of 1948. You’ll see 

a picture of my grandmother, Beatrice Trew, there. She was part 

of the group that put together that Arts Board, the very first one 

in North America. And she was proud of that accomplishment 

right to her death. And our family is very proud of that 

accomplishment. And that’s part of why I say, great 

accomplishment. And it wasn’t just the CCF [Co-operative 

Commonwealth Federation] of the day. I mean there was . . . 

The Arts Board has been embraced by, I think, all parties 

subsequent to that. 

 

And so my plea is that all of us can embrace the arts in a 

meaningful way and can help make it so that artists are better 

acknowledged and better recognized, and that they can provide 

even more joy, and even more things for us to see and do and 

feel and taste and experience, in Saskatchewan, and even 

beyond. 

 

As I was doing a little bit of research, another thing . . . It kind 

of expands my knowledge about what arts are. I looked under 

artists and they list carver, ceramics, digital, drawing, film, folk, 

glass, graphic, illustrator, jewellery, mixed media, landscape, 

photographer, portrait, sculptor, textiles, and video, just to name 

a few. I just quickly wrote down about half of the list. 

 

And Mr. Speaker, I’ve talked about the visual arts. I’ve talked 

primarily about painting probably because it’s, as little as I 

know of anything, painting and sculpting is probably the things 

that I think of as artistic first. And I have to apologize, I’ve got 

some family, a family member who was an adjudicated potter, 

and I have some of his pottery. He’s since passed on, but it’s a 

wonderful thing for us to be able to keep. I know I’ve talked 

with various people, other MLAs, and they treasure some of 

these heirlooms or these pieces of history and pieces of valuable 

things from the past. And when I say valuable, it’s hardly a 

retirement fund, but it’s also not a 50 cent or a dollar water 

glass. 

 

I know Saskatchewan has a tremendous history in the arts as 

well in terms of literature. And now I’ve just got to put a plug in 

for my favourite Saskatchewan artist, being Gail Bowen, who’s 

written a great, great Joanne Kilbourn series, wonderful murder 

mystery things. But Gail and her husband Ted are friends of 

mine and friends of ours. And they’ve just really added to the 

vibrancy and the fabric of Saskatchewan, and I look forward to 

that continuing for a long time. I could go to Sharon Butala. I 

could go to other Saskatchewan writers. 

 

And what they all have in common is a desire that we have an 

umbrella that respects artists — an umbrella organization — 

and they want for our society to appreciate arts even more, the 

arts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I keep going back to that people want us or artists 

want us to appreciate the arts more. I think of something that 

happened back in the dirty thirties. They had relief cars at the 

time, and a relief car showed up in Lemsford where my 

grandparents farmed just out of Lemsford. And the way the 

story goes, my grandmother was part of the local community, 

the people that were in charge of making sure that the warm 

winter clothing that arrived in this relief car would get 

distributed in a fair and reasonable manner and that no family 

would wind up being too cold or frozen in the harsh winter at 

that time. 

 

Anyway there was many people gathered and the railcar had 

been spotted. They opened the boxcar door and opened up some 

of the packages, and, to their dismay, it was ballroom dresses; it 

was tuxedos; it was top hats and it was things of that nature, 

items of that nature, which on the bald prairie where the wind 

just blows constantly, there wasn’t much joy for the people who 

saw that. In fact there was some tears because some of the 

families were going to be very, very cold. 

 

My grandmother stepped forward and said, look there’s 

obviously been a terrible mistake, and we’ll look after it. We’ll 

send this car back, and we’ll do our best to get the boxcar of 

warm clothes to come. But there’s one thing that we need, she 

said. We need warm clothes to survive, but we need more. She 

said, we need some fun and we need some joy. And we need a 

reminder that there is a better life, and that there will be a better 

life coming. We need to have a little bit of fun. So what I’m 

going to propose is that every person goes and gets one item 

and . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Member from Regina Coronation 

Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And so what they did is 

they all gathered up one item — the gentlemen for the most part 

tuxedos and top hats and canes and so on, and the women the 

ballroom gowns — and they had a dance at the Lemsford 

community hall that Saturday. And they had a grand time. They 

had a great time, and they just forgot the troubles and the woes 

of the Depression. They forgot that they at times didn’t have 

enough food to eat; they forgot an awful lot. 

 

[16:30] 



2352 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2009 

Anyway it’s a nice story and it’s true. It happened and this is 

what the — no pun intended — this is what the arts community 

can do for us. This is what a little bit of fun, a little bit of joy 

can bring to a Saskatchewan community. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I really wish that we would take the next steps 

and help artists of all . . . Whether they be literary arts, visual 

arts and crafts, electronic recording and media arts, including 

film and video — and we have a growing film and video 

industry here in Saskatchewan — be they performing arts, 

including theatre, opera, music, dance, mime, circus, and 

variety entertainment or any other artistic field that there might 

be, I wish we could find ways to better value these artists and 

help these artists organize themselves and organize through the 

Arts Board and better look after their future. Because any 

society, as I’ve said, that’s worth living in has got a vibrant arts 

community. Saskatchewan has that, but we can do so much 

better. 

 

I have referred to the Arts Board being set up — the first in 

North America — in 1948, earlier in my speech. I don’t want to 

go back to that other than to say, in 1948 the provincial budget 

was such a minute fraction of what it is today. We can do better 

on behalf of our artists. 

 

We can, we should, I even think we must do better, because I 

love this province and I want it to be a province, a future for 

myself, my family, certainly my children who’ve made it home, 

my grandchildren, and I want it to be home for many 

generations. And it can be, Mr. Speaker, if we value the arts to 

the level we should. 

 

I have other colleagues that want to speak to Bill 68, An Act 

Respecting the Arts Professions and the Status of the Artist Bill, 

Mr. Speaker. But for now, I want to thank you and colleagues 

for their attention to this very important matter. And in the 

interests of continuing the debate, I beg leave to adjourn the 

debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Coronation Park 

has moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 68. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Rather than moving on to further 

adjourned debates, I want to just remind the Assembly that His 

Honour is here for Royal Assent. And we’ll just wait a moment 

till His Honour arrives. 

 

ROYAL ASSENT 

 

[At 16:36 His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 

Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent to 

the following Bill.] 

 

His Honour: — Pray be seated. 

 

The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, the Legislative 

Assembly at its present session has passed the Bill which in the 

name of the Assembly I present Your Honour, and to which Bill I 

respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 

 

Clerk: — Your Honour, the Bill is as follows: 

 

Bill No. 82 - The Traffic Safety (Volunteer Firefighters) 

Amendment Act 

 

His Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 

Assembly has voted the supplies required to allow the 

government to defray the expenses of the public service. 

 

In the name of the Assembly I present to Your Honour: 

 

Bill No. 81 - The Appropriation Act, 2009 (No. 1) 

 

to which Bill I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 

 

His Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I thank the Legislative 

Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to this Bill. 

 

[His Honour retired from the Chamber at 16:37.] 

 

The Speaker: — Please be seated. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. This Assembly stands adjourned until 

tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:38.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2325 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2325 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2325 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2325 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2326 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2326 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2326 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2326 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2326 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2326 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2327 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 St. Patrick’s Day 

  Chisholm .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2327 

 Air Cadets Participate in Interprovincial Exchange 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2327 

 Canadian Oval Sled Dog Championship Derby 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2327 

 Brain Awareness Week 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2328 

 Re/Max Joyce Tourney International Winner 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2328 

 SIGA Wins 2009 National Award in Governance 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2328 

 Provincial Boys’ Curling Championships 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2329 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Budget Expectations 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2329 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2329 

 Child Care Spaces 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2329 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2330 

 Support for the Forestry Industry 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2331 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2331 

 Tuition Fees 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2331 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2332 

 Funding for Education 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2332 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2332 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Investment in Health Infrastructure 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2334 

  The Speaker (ruling regarding ministerial statement) ........................................................................................................ 2334 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2334 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 82 — The Traffic Safety (Volunteer Firefighters) Amendment Act 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2335 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 Motions for Supply 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2335 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2335 

 



 

APPROPRIATION BILL 

 Bill No. 81 — The Appropriation Act, 2009 (No. 1) 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2335 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2336 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 80 — The Construction Industry Labour Relations Amendment Act, 2009 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2337 

 Bill No. 46 — The Labour Market Commission Amendment Act, 2008 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2338 

 Bill No. 79 — The Education Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2) 

 Loi n
o
 2 de 2009 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2342 

 Bill No. 9 — The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 2008 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2346 

 Bill No. 43 — The Trespass to Property Act 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2348 

 Bill No. 68 — The Arts Professions Act/Loi sur les professions artistiques 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2349 

ROYAL ASSENT .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2352 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 


