




















































Hansard: October 28, 2009


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 5A  WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 28, 2009, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3285 

 October 28, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you to this Assembly, it’s my privilege to 

introduce in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, a good friend of mine, 

Larry Burechailo from Rosetown. Larry has been a good friend 

for many years and a great supporter in my political career, and 

I’d like to ask the Assembly to please give him a warm 

welcome. 

 

The Speaker: — I’d like to recognize the minister responsible 

for municipal government. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

It’s my pleasure to introduce three gentlemen to the Chamber 

who are no strangers to the Chamber: Mr. Michael Fougere, a 

city councillor here in the city of Regina; and Mr. David Marit, 

the president of SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities]. Great to have them here today. And while I’m 

on my feet, I would like to encourage everybody across the 

province to go out and vote today as it’s municipal election day. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister was absolutely 

correct; neither of these gentlemen are strangers to the House. 

Very pleased to see both of them. A little surprised they have 

got enough time to be languishing around in the gallery on 

election day, but . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh, you’re 

acclaimed. Oh well, I guess that’s the way it’s done, Mr. 

Speaker. You need to be acclaimed. 

 

Anyway, Mr. Speaker, I just want to pass along and join my 

colleague in welcoming them to the House, and look forward to 

seeing them at many, many occasions throughout the next few 

years and thanking them for their contributions to the province. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today, Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present a petition in support of long-term facility in La 

Ronge. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately invest in the planning and 

construction of a long-term care beds in La Ronge. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by the good people of La Ronge and area. I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition in support of fairness for students here in the 

province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately expand the graduate 

retention program to include master’s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals that signed this petition are mostly 

from the good city of Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present yet another petition on behalf of the rural 

residents of Saskatchewan who question why the Sask Party 

government is leaving them behind with respect to providing 

safe and affordable water and who have yet not heard any 

commitment of assistance. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to financially assist the town of Duck 

Lake residents for the good of their health and safety, due 

to the exorbitant water rates that are being forced on them 

by a government agency, and that this government fulfills 

its commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

I present these petitions on behalf of the good residents of Duck 

Lake. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I stand and present a petition 

regarding support for maintaining quality health care services. 

The petition’s about the Government of Saskatchewan realizing 

the value of a full range of professional skills offered by the 

health care providers, and it’s promoted that they address the 

retention and recruitment issues by ensuring safe staffing levels. 

And the petition reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to commit to maintaining quality health 

care services and job security for all public health care 

providers. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petitions are signed by residents from Swift Current, 

Humboldt, Dundurn, and Davidson. I so present. 

 



3286 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2009 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

pleased today to rise and present a petition in support of 

affordable housing in The Battlefords. Mr. Speaker, the 

residents note that the vacancy rate for rental accommodation in 

The Battlefords is very low and the cost of rental 

accommodation is increasing at an alarming rate. The prayer, 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

The petitioners humbly pray that the Legislative Assembly 

may be pleased to call upon the government of 

Saskatchewan to develop an affordable housing program 

that will result in a greater number of quality and 

affordable rental units to be made available to a greater 

number of people throughout The Battlefords, and that 

will implement a process of rent review or rent control to 

better protect tenants in a non-competitive housing 

environment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by residents of North 

Battleford and Yorkton, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions of behalf of concerned residents as it relates to 

the unprecedented mismanagement of their finances. And the 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to start managing our 

provincial finances responsibly and prudently to ensure 

that it does not continue its trend of massive budgetary 

shortfalls, runaway and unsustainable spending, equity 

stripping from our Crowns, and irresponsible revenue 

setting. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by concerned citizens from 

Shaunavon, Kindersley, and Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker. I so 

present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Women’s Cancer Awareness Month 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. October is Women’s 

Cancer Awareness Month. The Canadian Cancer Society 

encourages women to take an active role in maintaining their 

health to reduce their risk of cancer. Women can help reduce 

their chances of getting cancer by making healthy choices every 

day. At least half of all cancers can be prevented by healthy 

living and policies that protect the health of all Canadians. 

 

There are four common cancers in women that can be detected 

early by screening tests or by having signs and symptoms 

checked by your doctor: breast, cervical, colorectal, and skin. 

 

Screening tests can help find cancer at its earliest, most 

treatable stage. When cancer is found early, it is often easier to 

treat. Recognizing symptoms and getting regular checkups also 

help detect cancer early. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we focus a lot of our attention on breast cancer 

this month, and rightly so. However, women need to be aware 

and alert for the three other common and equally as serious 

cancers that can affect them. Our common goal is to beat all 

cancers so no one else dies. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Wearing Pink for Breast Cancer 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour to rise 

in the House today wearing the symbolic pink ribbon for breast 

cancer awareness. Many people across Saskatchewan have been 

impacted by breast cancer, one of the most common cancer 

among women. 

 

I can truly empathize with all those families dealing with the 

loss of a loved one because I too have lost my mother and my 

best friend to breast cancer. We have lost too many mothers, 

grandmothers, daughters, sisters, and neighbours to this illness. 

It may have the power to take away a woman’s health but it will 

never be strong enough to take away her heart, her spirit, and 

her love. We are making progress — early detection, effective 

treatment, innovative research, and endless hope is saving lives. 

We can still do more. 

 

So today like every day, I want to remember my mother and I 

also want to remember all the brave women and also the men 

who have been touched by breast cancer. We wear pink to 

honour them and to honour their courage. We wear pink to 

stand united against this terrible illness. We wear pink because 

we are ready to hope together, to pray together, to endure 

together, and to survive together. We wear pink for all the 

women in our lives we can’t imagine living without. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Affordable Housing Needed in The Battlefords 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. One of the most 

pressing issues in The Battlefords continues to be the lack of 

affordable housing. And I again, through the Legislative 

Assembly, ask that the Saskatchewan Party government devote 

more time, energy, and investment towards this pressing need. 

 

As members will see through this session, I will be presenting 

petitions signed mostly by residents of Killdeer Apartments in 

North Battleford, who this summer were provided notice of a 40 

per cent rent increase to take effect on February the first. Mr. 

Speaker, these people, seniors on fixed income and young 

people in low- to moderate-income jobs, can’t afford the 

increase in rent because there is no virtually no affordable rental 

accommodation in the community. They have no place to go 

and no place to turn. 



October 28, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3287 

The provincial government has told us frequently that there will 

be provincial assistance to increase the number of affordable 

rental units in The Battlefords, but nothing is happening and as 

a result, seniors are thinking about or actually taking steps to 

move out of the community. Students are planning to attend 

North West Regional College and are choosing not to enrol. 

Immigrants recently attracted to the community are bunking up 

in multiples too large to benefit them or our community. And 

young people seeking their first job are choosing to settle 

elsewhere. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of The Battlefords deserve better. They 

deserve better treatment from their landlord. They deserve 

better treatment and more access to additional affordable 

accommodation and they deserve a better response from the 

provincial government. On their behalf I ask the Minister 

Responsible for Housing to act and act quickly. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 

 

Municipal Election Day 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the words of 

Aristotle, “If liberty and [equity] . . . are chiefly to be found in 

democracy, they will be best attained when all persons alike 

share in the government to the utmost.” 

 

It’s municipal election day here in Saskatchewan and it is 

fitting, Mr. Speaker, that we should turn to Aristotle for insight. 

Modern democracy was born during the time that Aristotle 

penned those words. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to 

congratulate and thank the candidates who took the brave steps 

of putting their names forward. Their commitment to improving 

the lives of others is setting a shining example for all of us. It 

may be their first steps on a path that leads them to a seat here 

in this House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to stress the importance of exercising the right to 

vote, I turn to the French philosopher, Voltaire: 

 

So long as the people do not care to exercise their 

freedom, those who wish to tyrannize will do so; for 

tyrants are active and ardent, and will devote themselves 

in the name of any number of gods, religious and 

otherwise, to put shackles upon sleeping men. 

 

Those words were true in the 16th century, Mr. Speaker, and 

those words remain true today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Canadian Fire Chief of the Year 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Prince Albert fire 

chief, Les Karpluk, was recently named Fire Chief of the Year 

by the Canadian Association of Fire Chiefs. Mr. Speaker, this 

award is given out each year to two fire chiefs — one for 

volunteer and one for career fire chiefs. The president of the 

Canadian Association of Fire Chiefs said, “The Chiefs we 

honour this year have both displayed exemplary leadership to 

their staff and outstanding commitment to protecting the safety 

of their communities.” 

 

Chief Karpluk is a 27-year career veteran of fire emergency 

services. He became Prince Albert’s fire chief in 2006 and has a 

staff of 50 people working under his command. 

 

Chief Karpluk was instrumental in founding the Prince Albert 

fire mentoring program. This unique program was set up to help 

youth at risk in our community. Under this program, youth — 

many of whom struggle with social problems and addictions — 

are partnered with firefighters and are exposed to an 

environment of teamwork, determination, trust, safety, and 

family. Chief Karpluk has worked tirelessly to ensure that this 

program works and that it’s reaching at-risk youth. 

 

Chief Karpluk is an exemplary leader both at work and in our 

community, Mr. Speaker. I ask that all members join with me in 

extending our congratulations to Prince Albert fire chief, Les 

Karpluk, this year’s Canadian Fire Chief of the Year. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Meadow Lake. 

 

Meadow Lake Wins Western Canada 

Volleyball Tournament 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, it’s been good news all 

around for the soon-to-be new city of Meadow Lake. Monday it 

was announced that help was on the way for Meadow Lake 

doctors with two new doctors to be soon arriving in the 

community and two more expressing interest in coming to our 

fine city. 

 

And over the weekend my former team, the Meadow Lake 

Carpenter High Spartans, won it all at the Western Canadian 

high school volleyball tournament, defeating the Winnipeg 

Glenlawn Lions two sets to one for the victory. Meadow Lake 

players Cam Leskowski and Gary Kuffert were named to the 

tournament all-star team, with Dean Villeneuve winning the 

award for best defensive player. 

 

Spartans coach and my former math teacher, Gerry Varjassy, 

said of the win: 

 

It’s great. This is history. We look at this as one of the 

classiest tournaments in Saskatchewan. We appreciate the 

invite to it each year. We tell our athletes that we want to 

put on a show. 

 

And put on a show they did, Mr. Speaker, and did Meadow 

Lake very proud in the process. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Apprenticeship Awards 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, last Friday I, along with the 

member from Saskatoon Greystone, attended the ninth annual 

Apprenticeship Awards in Regina. 



3288 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2009 

The Apprenticeship Awards were hosted by the Saskatchewan 

Apprenticeship and Trade Certification Commission and the 

various commission boards to recognize all the apprentices who 

graduated at the top of their class. Awards are presented under 

the major headings of outstanding new journey person, 

apprenticeship commission scholarships and awards, the 

Saskatchewan youth apprenticeship scholarships, as well, Mr. 

Speaker, as honouring their apprenticeship journey person 

industry partners. 

 

There were over 78 awards in all handed out during the evening 

and the names of all honourees appeared in the local 

newspapers the next day. 

 

In 1944, Mr. Speaker, the first apprenticeship Act designated 13 

trades. Today in 2009, we have 47 designated trades, 8,900 

apprentices, and 4,000-plus students enrolled in the 

Saskatchewan youth apprenticeship scholarships. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this year Saskatchewan celebrates 65 years of the 

apprenticeship program and 50 years in the Red Seal program. 

Mr. Speaker, most of these graduates received the Red Seal, and 

it further impressed upon me the importance of the Red Seal 

program and how important it is to maintain the high standard 

of our programs and graduates and to guard against any 

watering down of these standards. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to thank those responsible for the evening: 

master of ceremonies, Hazel Hack; and the board members; 

sponsors; commission board Chair, Garry Kot; and the chief 

executive officer, Joe Black. Thank you. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

H1N1 Pandemic Planning 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. CBC [Canadian 

Broadcasting Corporation] news reported today that there are 

six suspected cases of H1N1 in the University of Saskatchewan 

residences. But students at the U of S [University of 

Saskatchewan] aren’t scheduled to be immunized until 

November 24th, according to the Saskatoon Health Region. 

This raises the question of a pandemic raging across campus for 

a full month before the vaccination can be readily available for 

the faculty and the students. And we already know that younger 

people are at a greater risk for severe complications from 

H1N1. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: in light of this new outbreak, what 

are the government’s contingency plans? Will they be 

scheduling a specific clinic immediately to protect students, 

particularly those that are living in residences, from this latest 

outbreak? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we certainly know that 

H1 is in our province. It started to escalate in British Columbia 

a number of weeks ago. It’s moving across Alberta. It’s 

certainly in Saskatchewan. And we’re seeing our numbers 

across the province increase. There is the example out at 

Wilcox at Notre Dame College with an increase in cases out 

there. And certainly what they did, Mr. Speaker, was 

self-isolate. And that’s what we’re telling all the general public, 

if they’re feeling any ill symptoms, to self-isolate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But what we really rely on more than anything else is the great 

work that our chief medical officer, Moira McKinnon, and our 

assistant medical officer, Dr. Shahab, has been doing on behalf 

of the province. We take our guidance from those experts as to 

where the vaccinations will be, which priority groups will be 

given the vaccination first, and we’re well under way in 

Saskatchewan with our health care providers, Mr. Speaker. I 

think the rollout of the vaccine has been very well handled, 

especially when you compare it to other provinces. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. That’s exactly 

what I’m going to do. I’m going to compare it to other 

provinces. They’ve been able to adjust their plans in light of the 

growing demand for the vaccine. Just yesterday the 

Government of Alberta added 11 new clinics across the 

province to keep up with the growing demand. More than 

51,000 people, including 38,000 members of the public, have 

already been vaccinated. In Winnipeg more than 15,000 people 

had been vaccinated as of 3 p.m. yesterday. 

 

To the minister, Mr. Speaker, though you to the minister: 

outbreaks have started. Other provinces are stepping up their 

vaccination efforts. How many Saskatchewan people have been 

vaccinated to date? And will the department or the ministry be 

adding new clinics to cope with the growing demand for the 

vaccine? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I will absolutely stand 

behind the rollout of the vaccine and the immunization plan 

within our province. I would hope that that member would 

know it’s not the number of clinics that you have; it’s the 

vaccine that you have available to immunize, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the vaccine that we have is rolling out across the 

province. We are immunizing our health care providers first. I 

guess I would ask her to stand in her place and say we should 

change that and start vaccinating the general public and exclude 

our health care workers, if that’s what she’s saying. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I just want to remind members 

that the rules ask members to place their questions through the 

Speaker and not refer directly to individuals. I recognize the 

member from Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think I heard the 

minister say we don’t have enough vaccine to start rolling it 

out. We’re obviously going to be behind other provinces. We’re 

not ready for this obviously. 

 

And it’s already been established, Mr. Speaker, that the 

government has created a lot of confusion around H1N1, but 

now it’s accelerating. The provincial government’s website says 



October 28, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3289 

that children between the ages of six months to five years are a 

high-risk group and that vaccinations will begin November 2nd. 

The Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region’s website states that 

children up to four will be immunized. And I spoke to someone 

today who said they were told by someone in the health region 

that it was six months to one year. 

 

So to the minister: when will he get a handle on this situation 

and provide the correct information to parents so they can make 

good decisions and have some peace of mind around this issue, 

especially for their children? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, our province is 

absolutely no further behind, Mr. Speaker. In fact I think we’re 

leading on this file. 

 

The vaccine is rolled out across the country from the federal 

government, from . . . The Public Health Agency of Canada 

sends out a certain number of vaccine per capita. We’re 

receiving just as much vaccine per capita as any other province. 

 

It’s the rollout within the province that’s the most important, 

Mr. Speaker. We’re rolling that vaccine out as to meet the 

cohort that is available. If we have 2,000 vaccines, Mr. Speaker, 

we don’t want to do what has been done in other provinces . . . 

is invite 5,000 to be vaccinated because 3,000 then are not 

vaccinated when you’ve invited them to the clinic. 

 

Mr. Speaker, each health region rolls out their vaccine plan 

according to the amount of vaccine they have available, Mr. 

Speaker. I think it’s being handled extremely well . . . . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Well the member opposite, the 

members opposite are saying we don’t have enough. That could 

be no further from, absolutely further from the truth, Mr. 

Speaker, because, Mr. Speaker, we’ve received it per capita like 

any other province. This is exactly what I talked about 

yesterday, about fearmongering. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Reimbursement for Travel for Medical Services 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, on November 8th of 2008 . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I ask the members to come to 

order. I ask the member from Saskatoon Nutana to come to 

order. The member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, on November 8th, 2008, the 

Premier responded to a question on the government’s criteria 

for reimbursing out-of-province medical travel in The 

StarPhoenix, and I quote, his response was: “There is right now 

a review underway in our ministry on our policy on 

out-of-province travel and what is reimbursable and what is 

not.” We assumed that that would have all been included in the 

patient-first review, but the report didn’t contain any 

recommendations when it came to out-of-province travel. 

So my question is to the minister: whatever became of the 

review which the Premier referred? Was Mr. Dagnone supposed 

to address this issue and didn’t? And when will we see the 

government’s new criteria? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, yes the member 

opposite is right. We have asked the ministry to look at 

out-of-province travel for medical services. We know that if 

they travel across Canada, those services, we have a reciprocal 

agreement with other provinces. The patient may have to cover 

their travel costs, but their medical costs are covered. 

 

When we look at out of country though, Mr. Speaker, that is a 

different issue, and prior approval is needed before they start 

travelling out of the country for medical services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we committed to doing a review on that. That 

review is still being looked at, Mr. Speaker. It is a very complex 

issue and, Mr. Speaker, the ministry is looking at how we can 

better serve the people of our province. One thing that we are 

doing though, Mr. Speaker, is working on having the proper 

health care professionals within our province, that we can 

supply some of those services right here at home. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I would remind the 

minister that the initial comments made by the Premier were 

almost a year ago, so we would assume that there would be 

some type of information forthcoming. But a policy in this area 

really is sorely needed, and this government really has a habit 

of making decisions about health care based on politics rather 

than on the best advice available. 

 

They charged ahead with essential service rules that they can’t 

meet on a day-to-day business, never mind in a strike. And they 

commissioned a review on the needle exchange, and then 

they’ve ignored its recommendations. They also announced this 

review of out-of-province medical travel, but all they’ve 

actually done is pay the bills of one family that they used as 

political props while they were in opposition. 

 

To the minister: when will he stop playing politics and 

announce the government’s new criteria for reimbursing 

out-of-province medical travel? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier in my 

earlier answer that we are reviewing out-of-county, it’s not 

out-of-province travel. It’s out-of-country travel. I think that is 

the biggest issue, Mr. Speaker. 

 

She said that there is no policy. Well she’s incorrect there 

because the policy that exists today is the policy that existed 

under 16 years of NDP [New Democratic Party] government, 

Mr. Speaker. And if she’s questioning that policy, it’s too bad 

they wouldn’t have questioned it a little bit closer when they 

were in power, Mr. Speaker, because it does have some issues 

that need to be addressed, and that’s why we’re looking at it, 



3290 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2009 

Mr. Speaker. That’s why we’re reviewing it, and I look forward 

to the recommendations that will come forward through the 

Ministry of Health as to what would better serve the people of 

our province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ll go back and check the 

documents, but I’m pretty sure that the Premier’s comments 

were on out-of-province travel, so we need to get a bit of clarity 

here. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party has got an awful lot of 

political mileage out of this issue while they were in opposition, 

and they got to be all things to all people. But now they’re in 

government. They’re hiding behind this . . . I guess it’s a review 

the Premier says, the minister says sometime coming soon. 

Now maybe it’s because their new criteria for reimbursing 

people is the same old story — whatever makes the best 

politics. 

 

So my question to the minister: we know that people who 

appear in Sask Party campaign commercials got reimbursed, but 

what about the rest of the province? When will this government 

announce a new criteria for reimbursing out-of-province 

medical expenses? And what gets covered, what doesn’t, and 

how much longer will Saskatchewan families have to wait? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I find it very 

interesting. The member opposite, by the sounds of that 

question, wants us to change the policy that has been in place 

under their government for 16 years. Mr. Speaker, obviously 

she’s feeling that that isn’t. Now maybe by the sounds coming 

from the opposition side right now, as they’re heckling, then 

maybe they don’t want the policy changed. We don’t know 

where they stand on it. 

 

What I can say is that we weren’t very happy with some of the 

decisions that were made in the past; we wanted to review that 

policy. That review is taking place, Mr. Speaker. And we look 

forward to the findings of that review, Mr. Speaker, because 

there are cases that certainly weren’t covered under the old 

system that we felt should be. And we brought those to this 

Assembly and brought them to the public’s attention, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We want to make sure that those policies . . . [inaudible] . . . 

through the Ministry of Health regarding for the most part 

out-of-country because in-country, interprovincial travel, the 

medical expenses are covered; the travel expenses aren’t.  

 

That’s the way it was under the former government. That’s the 

way it’s under us. 

 

But the out-of-country travel, Mr. Speaker, out-of-country 

services, we’ll certainly be looking at. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Management of Provincial Economy 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Sask Party’s 

fondness for balloons, cakes, and ribbons is well documented, 

and as of course their love for pompoms as well, Mr. Speaker. 

They love the pompoms. 

 

Sadly, Mr. Speaker, we also know of their fondness for axing 

funding for worthy projects, projects like Station 20 West and 

projects like the shrinking that they’re doing at St. Mary 

School, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatoon. 

 

On October 13th, the Minister of Advanced Education attended 

a photo op for the ground breaking ceremony of the E wing of 

the academic health sciences building. Three days later, Mr. 

Speaker — 72 hours after the photo op, Mr. Speaker — the 

government clawed back $32.1 million from the project, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

My question to the minister: why the pulled funding? Why is 

the Sask Party letting down the people of Saskatoon and the 

people of Saskatchewan? 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, thank you very much for the 

opportunity to talk about the significant investments we’re 

making in post-secondary education, especially at the 

University of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we can talk about the progress being made on the 

D wing and now E wings of the academic health science 

building. We can simply say, Mr. Speaker, that the construction 

is proceeding apace, and it came in under budget, saving 

millions of dollars, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What’s that allowed us to do? It’s allowed us to save taxpayers’ 

dollars and it’s allowed us to ensure that we’re going to be 

training more doctors and nurses, providing better health care 

for the people of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m delighted to talk about post-secondary 

education. We have thousands of students receiving excellent 

education in this province, and, Mr. Speaker, helping to move 

this province forward. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

health sciences project is vital to the delivery of health care to 

people here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. The Sask Party 

members opposite would like us to believe that they’re able to 

manage the books. We’ve seen in recent weeks and months, Mr. 

Speaker, that nothing could be further from reality. 

 

This government has proved that it is horrible at managing the 

province’s financial resources. They would like us to believe, 

Mr. Speaker, that somehow, magically, somehow they’ll be 

able to pay for this project as they go along, Mr. Speaker. 



October 28, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3291 

Well the pay-as-you-go approach might be a convenient out for 

the Premier, Mr. Speaker, but for the government that delivered 

a $1.3 billion blunder, Mr. Speaker, it’s a little hard to believe, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

My question to the minister: why won’t he admit that the Sask 

Party is engaged in a shell game? Why won’t he admit, Mr. 

Speaker, that the Sask Party is taking from Peter to pay Paul? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you for the opportunity again to 

speak about our investments regarding post-secondary 

education. We can speak specifically at the University of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, where for 16 years it was ignored 

that new student residences were required, Mr. Speaker. We’re 

moving forward on that, Mr. Speaker. It was ignored, Mr. 

Speaker — announced several times — but no construction 

started on any of the academic health science building, Mr. 

Speaker. We know their track record. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, as construction continues — and I was just 

there on the weekend, Mr. Speaker — as it continues apace, the 

legacy of the NDP is this: they allowed the College of Medicine 

to sit on probation, Mr. Speaker. We’re constructing the 

academic health science building so that never happens again. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the question is not about the value 

of the building. The question is about their inability to manage a 

budget, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, they don’t get it. Mr. 

Speaker, they do not understand that things are not getting 

easier. They’ve blown the billions. The boom is over. Revenue 

is down, and they’re sitting there shell-shocked. They’re asking 

themselves, Mr. Speaker, where did all the money go? They 

don’t know, Mr. Speaker. 

 

My question to the minister: when will he admit it? When will 

he admit he’s messed up the budget, their government has 

messed up the budget, and Saskatchewan people are going to 

have to pay? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I’m a little bit surprised by 

the tone of the member opposite. For over 100 years, the 

University of Saskatchewan has provided top quality education 

to the people of this province. It was added . . . in 1974 to the 

University of Regina, as well a proud legacy at the SIAST 

[Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology] 

campuses — four of them — as well as our regional colleges 

and a collection of affiliated, federated, and one associate 

college, Mr. Speaker. We have more than 70,000 learners 

across our post-secondary skills training system. And, Mr. 

Speaker, to hear the member opposite talk down the proud 

heritage and current excellence that is within that system, Mr. 

Speaker, I find a little bit surprising. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re making progress on advanced education. 

That’s why we just moved forward $117 million of 

infrastructure investments shared through federal and provincial 

initiatives, Mr. Speaker, $150 million since we’ve taken over 

government. It’s a record, Mr. Speaker. It certainly stands in 

sharp contrast to what the members opposite even 

contemplated, never mind . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The minister’s time has elapsed. I recognize 

the member from Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the only thing, the only thing I’m 

talking down, Mr. Speaker, is their ability to manage the budget 

because it is brutal, Mr. Speaker. They cannot manage the 

budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s clear that the finances of the province are in 

disarray, as is the communication among the members opposite. 

The Minister of Health says this is a project. We need it. The 

Minister of Advanced Ed says, oh yes you’re getting the 

project. But then when it comes to the Minister of Finance, he 

says, well guess what, guys? The Premier’s been doing my 

bookkeeping and — guess what? — we’re broke, guys, sorry. 

Project, give me that money back please. 

 

My question . . . Well if the big guns can’t answer this question, 

perhaps some of the new ministers who are itching to answer a 

question can help us out. What’s going on over there? Why 

aren’t you managing the budget properly? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure for 

me to rise and to answer the member’s question. Mr. Speaker, 

over the course of this early session, the question that has been 

asked is, where has the money gone. Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. 

Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I am actually very, very proud of 

detailing where the money has gone. When we took office . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I recognize the Minister 

of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, at the date of September 

30, 2007, the balance in the Growth and Financial Security 

Fund or its predecessor was $1.256 billion. The provincial 

General Revenue Fund debt was $6.8 billion. Those are facts. 

Mr. Speaker, over the course, over the course of our 

government, we have paid off over . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, if the members opposite 

want to hear the answer, we have paid off over $2.6 billion of 

provincial debt. That’s where the money has gone, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, we have a balance of $840 million at the current 

time. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, somewhere in Saskatchewan, there’s 

families battling colorectal cancer. We now provide help for 



3292 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2009 

those families. That’s where the money has gone. We have 

single moms that are trying to make a living and trying to 

improve their education and their housing needs. That’s where 

the money has gone. Mr. Speaker, there’s any number of items 

that we can point to where the money has gone. The money has 

gone to benefit the people of Saskatchewan, as opposed to the 

. . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I just want to remind members, if the 

Speaker is called to his feet to interrupt debate, the Speaker will 

not take the debate away, the moments away, either from the 

question or from the responder. And it’s not the right of the 

members to be questioning the Speaker as to when, decision 

when he calls time or calls order. 

 

I recognize the member from Regina Coronation Park. 

 

Vehicle Insurance Rates 

 

Mr. Trew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the record of the Sask Party 

government on Crowns and affordability is this: they charged 

the highest price for home heating natural gas during last 

winter’s home heating season. They reduced the price of gas, 

and then they jacked up the price of electricity for this summer. 

Now in just four days, the latest Sask Party cash grab is to 

increase Saskatchewan motorists’ auto rates. 

 

To the minister: why are Saskatchewan people always getting 

the short end of your choices? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for SGI. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased that when 

SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance] had an opportunity 

to look at some of the balancing that was required — because 

there hadn’t been anything done since the year 2001 — they 

looked at the various categories, and they determined that there 

was a balancing between one area and another. And we had an 

opportunity to make sure that the right people were paying for 

the right amount. And I’m also very pleased to say that 45 per 

cent of the people in the province actually had a decrease in 

their rates. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think the people of this province are very 

pleased with the service they’re receiving from this 

government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, you know, there’s a lot of families 

in Saskatchewan that are hurting right now, today. 

Saskatchewan people applying for EI [employment insurance] 

benefits in August grew by 8.9 per cent. In the past seven days 

alone, there’s been over 1,100 layoffs of Saskatchewan working 

men and women — 300 at Case New Holland and more than 

800 in the potash industry. 

 

To the minister: how are these and other Saskatchewan families 

supposed to pay for all these Sask Party cash grabs? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I think that 

the question that the member should be asking over there is the 

money that was spent in this province is now going to the 

people of this province. We are no longer deciding to spend 

money that we get and raise in this province, to put it into 

projects outside of our province. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I don’t 

think the people of the province are proud of the fact that $301 

million was spent by the previous government outside the 

boundaries of our province and basically lost to the people of 

this province. 

 

We needed money for health care. We needed money for 

education. We needed money for highways. And where did it 

go? It went to BC [British Columbia]. It went to Channel Lake. 

It went wherever they decided. There was no choices for the 

people in the province. What we have is chosen Saskatchewan 

people outside of our boundaries. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, let’s be clear. What this rate 

increase means for Saskatchewan people . . . an average rate 

increase of four and a half per cent. More than half of all 

Saskatchewan drivers will see rate increases, many of them as 

high as twelve and a half per cent. But there’s still time. The 

Sask Party government can reverse this mean-spirited, latest, 

cash grab rate increase. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: does your government really 

believe that Saskatchewan drivers can afford to pay yet another 

twelve and a half per cent increase right now? How can your 

government possibly be so out of touch, and will . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The rules apply equally to all. The 

member may place his question. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 

Premier: does your government really believe Saskatchewan 

drivers can afford to pay yet another twelve and a half per cent 

increase right now? How can your government be so out of 

touch? Will the Premier do the right thing and just call the 

whole thing off? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, we’re well aware that rate 

increases do occur. In fact in 1999, the now Leader of the 

Opposition called utility rate hikes a fact of life. A fact of life is 

what happens, we have no . . . [inaudible] . . . Mr. Speaker, 

what the members opposite don’t want to acknowledge is that 

our government has made life a lot easier for the people of this 

province. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — It would certainly be appropriate for the 



October 28, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3293 

person asking the question to at least allow the minister to 

respond without interruption. I recognize the minister 

responsible. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think what the 

members opposite don’t want to acknowledge is that our 

government has made life significantly easier for a lot of 

Saskatchewan people. Lower income taxes will see a single 

parent, earning $35,000 a year, with two children, they’re going 

to save $2,800. That same family could benefit from the largest 

reduction in education property tax in the province’s history. 

We’re proud of our record, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — I’ll ask members to come to order so the 

House can proceed. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Wind Power Production 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

rise to inform you and the Assembly about an important 

development by SaskPower and the future of renewable energy 

in Saskatchewan. Today I had the pleasure of announcing two 

new programs which will be introduced by SaskPower which 

will see the corporation more than double its wind power 

production. 

 

The green options plan will see SaskPower purchase up to 175 

megawatts of wind power from one or more independent power 

producers selected though a competitive process. The second 

program, the green options partners program, will see 

SaskPower introduce a standing offer to purchase up to 50 

megawatts of renewable power from the private sector 

developers across Saskatchewan. Up to 25 megawatts of that 

total may come from wind. This expansion of wind power will 

reduce the corporation’s carbon dioxide emissions by 

approximately 225 000 tonnes per year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a significant commitment to renewable 

energy by a province that is already leading the way in this area. 

Currently SaskPower can generate 172 megawatts of wind 

power — about 5 per cent of its capacity — and it’s double the 

national average of 2.3 per cent. Thanks to programs announced 

today, wind power will increase to about 8.5 per cent of 

SaskPower’s total generating capacity. 

 

[14:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, SaskPower’s wind power integration and 

development unit considered a number of operational, 

environmental, and economic factors before determining its 

system could accommodate additional megawatts of wind 

power at this time. SaskPower will continue to proceed 

carefully to fully understand the impact of this new wind 

generation on the provincial electrical system in order to ensure 

reliability for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government is announcing the expansion 

during an unprecedented public discussion about 

Saskatchewan’s energy future. SaskPower is at the centre of 

these discussions. As the Assembly knows, the corporation 

faces a daunting task of replacing aging infrastructure and 

keeping up with the supply-demand picture. During the next 

few years, it must renew aging infrastructure while meeting the 

demands of a growing economy and tougher environmental 

regulations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s a tall order and the corporation is receiving no 

shortage of advice on how to meet the challenges it faces. The 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies has heard 

from a number of presenters with various opinions on how to 

make it happen. 

 

One common theme Saskatchewan residents seem to agree on is 

that secure, sustainable, and affordable and clean power is a 

goal worth pursuing. This is an objective shared by the 

Government of Saskatchewan. With programs like the ones 

introduced today, this government is ensuring SaskPower plans 

for our energy future in an analytical, systemic manner ensuring 

the province has a safe, reliable supply of electricity well into 

the future. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The opposition 

has been urging the Sask Party on this front for the past two 

years. We were once, not long ago, leaders in this province as it 

relates to wind power and in fact other jurisdictions were 

looking to us for some of the technology, some of the capacity 

that we had developed. In very short order under this 

government we’ve become laggards and in big ways, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So the last two years, while this government has been focusing 

on other plans — spending huge resources, $3 million and an 

entire year, an exhaustive process to look at unpractical and 

expensive nuclear options — they could’ve been pursuing on 

this front here. And I guess I’d say at this point in time, we’d be 

at a different stage at this point in time had that government had 

the political leadership and the political will that it should’ve 

had two years ago. In fact we’d be looking about where we 

could be stretching to and where we could be reaching as 

opposed to something very modest, which is eight and a half 

per cent of our grid. 

 

Jurisdictions around the world, Mr. Speaker, and utilities 

around the world are pushing limits on this front and are finding 

all sorts of economic gains within their own communities as a 

result of this. We can look to Idaho or Minnesota down into the 

United States. We can look here in Canada. Even our 

neighbours, Alberta, have advanced on this front. And certainly 

Ontario has put forward an aggressive new strategy that we 

should be watching. So I guess on this front we certainly 

welcome finally, finally this government moving on renewable 

power in this province. 

 

One thing that we are interested in and concerned about is that 

this government, when they look at options for power 

generation, the only option they’re looking at, the sole option is 



3294 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2009 

private purchase agreements — private power, Mr. Speaker. We 

know that SaskPower has served Saskatchewan people and 

communities and families so incredibly well for so many years 

and it should be doing that into the future, Mr. Speaker, so 

we’re going to continue to watch this on this front. I know that 

there’s been partnerships that we’ve struck in the past in a 

pragmatic way about bringing about capacity for specific 

projects. But this government seems be solely focused on one 

generation, and that’s private power. 

 

So we’re going to challenge this government on that front, 

because it’s not always in Saskatchewan people’s best interests. 

And what is in Saskatchewan people’s best interest is to make 

sure we have safe, clean, renewable power here in this province 

and to make sure that SaskPower is strong and viable going into 

the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this announcement should have occurred two 

years ago. That being said, we’ll take it here today. We’re going 

to continue to push and urge this government to move forward. 

Thank you. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

REINSTATEMENT OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 80 — The Construction Industry Labour Relations 

Amendment Act, 2009 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

pursuant to rule 80, Bill No. 80, The Construction Industry Labour 

Relations Amendment Act, 2009 be reinstated to the order paper. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Advanced 

Education, Employment and Labour has moved that, pursuant to 

rule no. 80, Bill No. 80, The Construction Industry Labour 

Relations Amendment Act, 2009 be now reinstated. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by the Hon. Mr. McMorris, seconded 

by Ms. Ross, and the proposed amendment to the main motion 

moved by Mr. Lingenfelter.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Mr. Hart: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

certainly pleased to make a few more comments on the reply to 

the Throne Speech. Last evening the time was short and I have 

a few more comments that I would like to add. 

 

When we reached the adjournment time, I was talking about 

some of the recent developments in the agricultural commodity 

markets. I mentioned China’s latest position on not accepting 

canola seed from any exporter that could not guarantee that it 

was 100 per cent free from blackleg, which is something that’s 

impossible. There isn’t an exporting nation in the world that 

could do that. 

 

I have said that EU [European Union] has placed a 25 per cent 

tariff on durum exports, even though one of their countries, 

Italy’s production is much below average and they will be 

required to import increased supplies of durum. The reason I 

raise these issues is to demonstrate what is happening in the 

international commodity markets this year and in recent years. 

 

At one time, Mr. Speaker, commodity markets would seek a 

price discovery through the traditional fundamentals of supply 

and demand, looking at stocks-to-use ratios, those sorts of 

things. And traders would buy, and sellers and buyers of the 

commodity would use that information to determine a fair price. 

 

It seems as though in recent years a number of changes have 

taken place in the commodity markets. Large funds take 

positions in the markets as hedges against inflation and 

opportunities to generate income for their fund holders, and so 

on. And the traditional, quite often at least in the short term, the 

traditional rules no longer seem to work. And the mechanisms 

don’t seem to work. Quite often things will happen that are by 

and large unexplainable by the fundamentals of the 

marketplace. 

 

And that is true not only for agricultural markets, I believe — 

although that is the area where I have the most experience in — 

but by observing other commodity markets, whether it be oil, 

gas, gold, silver, or potash, I believe the same sort of 

uncertainty and turmoil exists in the world markets today. 

 

We’ve heard a lot of members opposite talking about the 

shortfall in the potash revenue projection that was included in 

this year’s budget. And it seems to me though, I think we need 

to put some things in context. This province is only one of two 

provinces that will have a truly balanced budget at the end of 

this fiscal year. And that is something that we should not take 

lightly if we view what has happened in the world international 

financial markets. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that was driven home to me earlier this year 

when I had the opportunity to attend a two-week seminar in 

Westminster, the 58th Seminar on Parliamentary Practice and 

Procedure at Westminster in London, England. We had at that 

seminar . . . And I believe there’s a few members have in the 

past had the opportunity to attend that seminar. And I must say 

it was certainly a privilege to be able to attend the seminar and 

be part of the delegation representing Saskatchewan at that 

occasion. 

 

But we had presenters, Mr. Speaker, from government, from 

opposition, from the financial industry. And we spent a couple 

of hours one afternoon listening to presenters asking questions 

and having a discussion on the financial crisis that the world at 



October 28, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3295 

that time was in the midst of. And the world is slowly working 

its way out of it. 

 

But it really drives home — at least it did to me — when you 

have former heads of banks, of some of the largest banks in the 

world, tell us that England was a matter of weeks away from a 

complete financial meltdown, and that if it hadn’t have been for 

the major government bailouts that took place in that country 

. . . And England wasn’t the only country that did that. The US 

[United States], I’m sure we all would know about the major 

financial bailouts that the US undertook along with many other 

developed countries around the world. 

 

We in Canada were somewhat fortunate. But our federal 

government had to step up to the plate to ensure that we didn’t 

see this worldwide massive breakdown. So if you view what 

has taken place in Saskatchewan in that context, Mr. Speaker, I 

think we can say that we are very fortunate to be in this 

province, and that the Minister of Finance has done an excellent 

job in managing the financial affairs of this province, Mr. 

Speaker. So let’s put things in context, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Having said that, I would like to address one or two items that 

are contained in this year’s Speech from the Throne. And one of 

them is a renewed commitment to increasing the number of 

child care spaces across this province. And, Mr. Speaker, you 

would think that as a representative of a rural constituency with 

the largest community of barely 850 people that you would 

think that it may not be an issue. Well it is, Mr. Speaker. I have 

had a number of calls to my office about daycare spaces in the 

communities in my constituency. And through the good work 

and with the help of the Minister of Education, we were able to 

provide increased . . . or daycare spaces period, the first of them 

in the community of Strasbourg. 

 

The work is ongoing and it is something that is vitally needed, 

not only in the urban centres but also in the rural centres of our 

province, because it is part of the new infrastructure in a 

modern province. It’s as important as water and sewer and all 

those sorts of things because of the dynamics of the family 

structure where it’s common for both parents to be working. 

And we need quality care for our children. 

 

Another issue that was raised in the Throne Speech is the issue 

of wind power. And we just heard the Minister Responsible for 

SaskPower, the Minister of Energy and Resources, tell us about 

the new initiative that SaskPower is undertaking to increase 

wind power capacity. And the reason I would like to raise this 

issue is because I have a First Nations community in my 

constituency who is very, very interested in wind power. They 

partnered with a major player in the wind power industry and 

they are looking forward to opportunities to participate in this 

industry. 

 

I’d like to tell you a little bit of a story of the Gordon First 

Nation. That happens to be the First Nation that is very 

interested and active in the wind power. During the last election 

campaign — November of 2007 — I was on my way to one of 

the communities in the constituency and my cellphone rang. 

And I have to admit I didn’t stop although there was hardly 

anyone on the road. And it was at that time a band councillor 

phoned and asked and wanted to know what the Saskatchewan 

Party’s position was with First Nations economic development. 

So I explained to him that we were certainly interested in 

partnering with them and creating economic development. And 

he said, well that’s exactly what he was looking at. He says, I’m 

going to vote for you. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Well Ken Sinclair went on to be the chief of the Gordon First 

Nation. So whenever we’re at a public function, he relates that 

story. And most recently I was at a ceremonial signing of a 

treaty land entitlement that they had concluded. And Chief 

Sinclair related the story and he said that he voted for me. And 

so then I was called upon to be the next speaker. So I said to the 

chief and the members present, I said, well I know where one of 

the four votes that I received from your First Nations 

community. And he had, he along with his band members, had 

a great chuckle out of that and we ended up having a good day 

there. 

 

So I am certainly pleased to see the initiative that our 

government has taken on wind power and I know that the 

Gordon First Nation is certainly also pleased. 

 

The last issue that I’d like to speak about very briefly is the 

commitment to lowering the surgical wait times. That was one 

of the main, major planks in our Speech from the Throne, Mr. 

Speaker. And we all, I’m sure, have dealt with constituents who 

have long waits for elective surgery. We know the frustration 

and the pain that they’ve gone through. We’ve seen, in some 

cases, the addiction to painkillers, of morphine and that sort of 

thing — that additional complication that people have to deal 

with. And so I believe when we look at the average surgical 

wait times which in many cases are 12 months, 18 months, 24 

months, to set a goal of a surgical wait time of no longer than 

three months, that’s a pretty bold initiative, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the members opposite, I’ve heard them say that there aren’t 

many new initiatives in the Throne Speech, and so on, but there 

are some major initiatives, Mr. Speaker. And I would conclude 

by saying, Mr. Speaker, that I will be certainly supporting the 

main motion and not supporting the amendment. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Thunder Creek. 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I consider it a great 

honour to be invited to rise in this honourable Assembly to 

reply to the 2009 Speech from the Throne. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this growing province of more than 1 million 

people, only 58 of us enjoy this privilege. And I’m proud to be 

one of them, chosen by the constituents of Thunder Creek to 

represent them in this Assembly. And represent them I will, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some of the members in this Assembly have made great 

personal and financial sacrifices to be here — to be here 

representing the people of the province and their constituencies. 

That doesn’t make us particularly unique, Mr. Speaker, as there 

are many more people out there willing to make similar 

sacrifices in our places. 

 

This privilege of representing our peers is one that we must 



3296 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2009 

earn, Mr. Speaker, and continue to earn. I will continue to 

endeavour to earn the privilege by representing the views of my 

constituents to government, not by representing the views of 

government to my constituents. 

 

I’m proud to be sent to this place by the hard-working, 

independent people of Thunder Creek, who want nothing more 

than responsible and less intrusive government. And they won’t 

support NDP-style, intrusive, big brother government and 

legislation, and they expect that I won’t either, Mr. Speaker. 

They want to be part of a government that is more responsible 

and less intrusive — the kind of government that we promised 

the people of Saskatchewan, and the kind of government, Mr. 

Speaker, that I believe authored this 2009 Speech from the 

Throne. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me touch on a few of the areas that I am 

particularly proud of in this Speech from the Throne, and areas 

that my constituents particularly appreciate. Few, if any, 

constituencies in this province are more agricultural than is 

Thunder Creek. And so, Mr. Speaker, I will begin my specific 

remarks with the direction that this Speech from the Throne sets 

for agriculture and with some of the accomplishments that have 

already been achieved in agriculture by this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is committed to moving forward 

by making support for our agricultural industry a priority 

through reforming crop insurance, support for our cattle and 

hog producers when they were so badly in need of it, and 

improving service to our producers. Mr. Speaker, our 

government believes that agriculture’s contribution to our 

economy is a direct result of the hard work of Saskatchewan 

farmers and ranchers and their families, the constituents of 

Thunder Creek and many, many more. 

 

Saskatchewan farmers and ranchers, Mr. Speaker, are the 

world’s largest exporters of canola, flax, lentils, peas, and 

durum wheat, and have the largest herds of beef cows, bison, 

and elk in Canada. Saskatchewan has made a name for itself as 

a reliable supplier of quality agricultural products, and we can 

thank our producers for that. 

 

We’ve been moving forward on such initiatives as launching a 

review of crop insurance that was focused on ways to improve 

the program from the perspective of our agricultural producers. 

From that review, our government made the largest-ever 

contribution to crop insurance by any Saskatchewan 

government. Our government’s $20 million increase to crop 

insurance brought the program’s budget to $155 million, Mr. 

Speaker. The result of this investment is better coverage and 

lower premiums for our producers. 

 

We are also making sure that our producers have better service 

by moving AgriStability’s head office to Melville and assuming 

responsibility from the federal government for administering 

the program. This new office in Melville will begin operating in 

2010, as it will begin by processing 2009 applications. Moving 

the administration to Saskatchewan will result in approximately 

10 new jobs at the Crop Insurance head office in Melville and 

30 new jobs at Crop Insurance offices throughout rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, bringing AgriStability to Saskatchewan will 

provide our producers with . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I think I need to remind members, well 

I have attempted to . . . But specifically rule 46 and (l) in our 

Rules and Procedures which all members of this Assembly 

worked to establish, says, “Members shall refrain from loud 

private conversations.” I would ask members to observe that 

rule and allow those on their feet to be able to speak. I 

recognize the member from Thunder Creek. 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, bringing AgriStability to 

Saskatchewan will provide our producers with faster, more 

reliable, and more responsive service to assist with moving 

agribusiness in Saskatchewan forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve also taken a more co-operative approach to 

working with the federal government — a breath of fresh air to 

our producers, Mr. Speaker. Our government, with the 

co-operation of the federal government, was able to provide 

$101 million in new provincial funding for the Growing 

Forward agreement with the federal government, investing 152 

million over five years to improve the province’s water 

infrastructure program. 

 

The purpose behind the Growing Forward agreement is to 

support a profitable and innovative agriculture, agri-food and 

agri-based products industry. Mr. Speaker, the Growing 

Forward program is going to help farmers make sound business 

decisions and capture market opportunities and is targeted at 

farmers interested in starting or expanding agribusiness 

ventures or improving their existing business practices. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are moving forward on the agricultural file in 

many ways. Among them, our government invested $71 million 

in the Saskatchewan cattle and hog support program. Under this 

program, ranchers receive $40 per head for beef cows, $20 per 

market hog, and $10 per weanling or feeder pig. This program 

will help ensure that our agricultural economy will continue to 

create opportunities in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

We have also moved forward in responding to long-term 

drought issues in southwest Saskatchewan. Once again, in 

co-operation with the federal government, we have established 

the farm and ranch water infrastructure program in which we 

have invested $29 million, and which program has since been 

expanded province-wide, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This program will support the development of secure water 

sources in Saskatchewan to expand the livestock industry, 

encourage rural economic activity, and mitigate the effects of 

future droughts. The funding will go towards community wells, 

large diameter and small diameter wells on farms and ranches, 

shallow or deep buried pipelines, and dugouts. This program 

will help producers have stable sources of water so that they can 

be more productive and competitive, even in dry times. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is making it easier for farmers to 

expand their operations and to make it easier for them to own 

land. Many will remember when the Minister of Agriculture 

announced last year a new five-year program that provides 

incentives for producers to purchase their leased agricultural 



October 28, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3297 

Crown land. Agricultural Crown land has been sold to 

producers since 1947, but this type of incentive program has 

never before been offered in the province. 

 

This new program offers leases on a sliding scale, Mr. Speaker, 

a sliding scale incentive for purchase, beginning with a 10 per 

cent discount on the sale price of land in the first year, 8 per 

cent discount in the second year, 6 per cent discount in the third 

year, and 4 per cent, Mr. Speaker, in the fourth year, and a 2 per 

cent discount in the fifth year. 

 

This will help create a plan for lasting and permanent economic 

growth for the producer by returning the direction of 

agricultural economy to the people who actually work the land, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Our government provided and continues to support the gopher 

control program, saving thousands of agricultural acres from 

total devastation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And finally on the agricultural file, Mr. Speaker, this 

government has provided the largest property tax reduction on 

farm land in the history of our province, something that has 

been promised, but not delivered, by every premier and every 

government since Tommy Douglas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, societies need strong economies so that they can 

provide a better standard of living and better services to their 

people and so that they can help those less fortunate than many 

of us here today. Our government has delivered more progress 

on the social side in two years than the previous NDP 

government did in 16. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while the NDP and their new leader are looking 

backward, Saskatchewan is continuing to grow, and we’re 

looking forward. Rather than paint a picture of gloom and 

doom, and cheerlead for the recession as those members do, Mr. 

Speaker, our government is making sure that the province’s 

growth benefits everyone. This means keeping Saskatchewan 

affordable, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When we look at affordable housing, we see an area where the 

NDP ignored the problem for years, and we had to act. That’s 

why we created the task force on housing affordability, to make 

sure that affordability keeps pace with our growing economy. 

 

Since the task force tabled its report, we’ve acted on 22 of its 36 

recommendations. For example, the task force showed that 

recipients of income assistance were one of the groups hit 

hardest by the crisis in housing affordability. The previous 

government should have known this, Mr. Speaker, but they did 

not increase shelter allowances once from 1992 to 2005. That’s 

13 years, Mr. Speaker. Our government responded by providing 

over $12 million to adjust shelter rates in the income assistance 

programs and to index shelter allowances at 70 per cent of 

average market rents. 

 

This enhancement immediately benefited over 6,000 

households across this province, Mr. Speaker. For example a 

Saskatoon family with one or two children receiving benefits 

under the SAP [Saskatchewan assistance plan] or TEA 

[transitional employment allowance] programs and the SHRS 

[Saskatchewan housing rental supplement] program saw an 

increase in their shelter allowance of up to $189 a month. A 

single person with a disability saw a monthly increase of up 

$126. 

 

In today’s reality many seniors live on fixed incomes. When 

prices go up, Mr. Speaker, their incomes do not necessarily 

follow suit. Mr. Speaker, that is why we are looking out for 

seniors on fixed incomes. We’ve more than doubled the support 

available to low-income seniors through the seniors’ income 

plan and we’ve doubled the number of seniors that qualify for 

it. 

 

We’re helping people build brighter futures within our growing 

economy by increasing training opportunities and supports for 

people in training. We’ve created the Aboriginal Workforce 

Development Fund, Mr. Speaker. This will support new 

employment initiatives aimed at increasing First Nations and 

Métis participation in the workforce. We increased the 

provincial training allowance in August 2008. Then we did it 

again in March 2009, and to make sure it goes up when your 

cost of living goes up, Mr. Speaker, we’ve also indexed it. 

That’s progress, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:45] 

 

We’ve invested over $75 million into programs for people with 

disabilities, including spending on capital projects like 

$100,000 for the purchase of a property in Langenburg to build 

a group home for individuals with intellectual disabilities. 

 

This also included changes in the way that we calculate support 

payments for people in need. For example we eliminated the 

2008 tax refund from the income calculation for the SAP and 

TEA programs, the new income support program for people 

with disabilities. That means that low-income people with 

disabilities will not be penalized for receiving tax refunds. 

 

We also created an exemption in the way that we calculate 

social assistance rates so that people with disabilities or their 

families can better invest in the registered disability savings 

plan and save for their long-term financial security. 

 

Mr. Speaker, ensuring equal opportunity for all residents of 

Saskatchewan is the foundation of this government, and we’re 

proud to help people with disabilities move forward within our 

growing economy. The best way for us to make sure 

Saskatchewan stays affordable is to let the people of this 

province, especially low-income people, keep more money in 

their own pockets. 

 

We’ve brought in the largest income tax reduction in 

Saskatchewan history, Mr. Speaker. As part of this, we’ve 

increased the basic personal exemption by $4,000 which means, 

Mr. Speaker, that 80,000 low-income people who previously 

paid provincial income tax will not have to pay any this year. 

 

We also introduced a number of new tax credits. Combined, 

these measures will save a family of four over $1,300 each year. 

Mr. Speaker, that means that a typical family of four will get 

better tax exemptions in Saskatchewan than anywhere else in 

Canada. This tax cut will help keep more money in parents’ 

pockets so they can focus more of their time on their children. 

 



3298 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2009 

We’re moving forward on the social front, Mr. Speaker, and 

we’re making sure that the province’s growth benefits everyone 

in Saskatchewan. This is substantially more progress, Mr. 

Speaker, during the two years of our government then the NDP 

made in the 16 years of theirs. And for several of those years, 

Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition was either a cabinet 

minister or a deputy premier. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the past year, Saskatchewan’s population has 

grown by 16,000 people. That represents faster growth than at 

any time since the 1950s. And Saskatchewan continues to have 

the lowest unemployment rate in the country, while Regina and 

Saskatoon both have the lowest unemployment rates among 

major Canadian cities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the debt has been paid down by over 40 per cent 

since the election of our government. And we have instituted 

the largest property and income tax reductions in the history of 

the province, removing over 80,000 low-income people from 

the income tax rolls altogether and reducing taxes for every 

woman and man in the province. 

 

What has changed, Mr. Speaker? Well in the dark old days of 

the NDP, the economy was dominated by government. 

Economic investment decisions were either made or dominated 

by government. In other words, politics played the largest role 

in economic decision making, leading to boondoggles like 

Coachman Insurance that cost taxpayers 16.1 million; Channel 

Lake that cost 15 million; tappedinto.com at 6.7 million; 

Persona at 9.4 million; Navigata at 90 million; NST [NST 

Network Services of Chicago] at $16 million; Clickabid at 1.9 

million; Soft Tracks at 2.2 million; Ag Dealer at 8.9 million; 

Guyana at 2 million; ISC [Information Services Corporation of 

Saskatchewan] at about 120 million; Meadow Lake Pulp at 

about 800 million; mega bingo at 8 million; Broe industries 

ethanol deal, 750,000, and we only got off that lucky because 

absolutely nothing was ever done on that site; Pangaea at 3.5 

million. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the list of the NDP’s politically inspired 

losses of taxpayers’ dollars goes on to total well in excess of $1 

billion. 

 

Our government, Mr. Speaker, has taken the politics out of 

economic development decisions through establishing 

Enterprise Saskatchewan to assume the role of recommending 

those directions to government from their solid base as leaders 

in our economy. No more under this dynamic model will the 

course of least political resistance be the driver for economic 

development, and no more risking billions of taxpayers’ dollars. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s working. And I want to take this opportunity 

to thank the members of the Enterprise Saskatchewan board, the 

sector teams, the strategic issues councils, and the good men 

and women who work in the agency itself and around the 

province in the economic regions who are the boots on the 

ground in all of our economic development projects. That is 

what has changed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is turning this province around 

from have not to have, from lagging to leading, from dismal to 

brilliant. Those members in the NDP said Saskatchewan could 

never do it. And they didn’t want us to succeed, Mr. Speaker. 

But we are succeeding in spite of them, and we will succeed 

regardless of them. And regardless of what kind of personal, 

spite filled, 1970s-style opposition they mount, we will succeed 

because the people of this province are depending on us to 

succeed. And accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting 

this Speech from the Throne. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

rise this afternoon and speak in favour of the amendment to the 

Throne Speech and against the motion of the government. 

 

But before I start with that, I want to congratulate a few people. 

The first person I’d like to congratulate is the member from 

Douglas Park. He is somebody who brings his experience from 

this legislature and from his involvement in Saskatchewan, but 

also his involvement in the business world back to the people of 

Saskatchewan. And so I want to thank the member of Douglas 

Park for making the commitment to the people of 

Saskatchewan. And I know that all Saskatchewan citizens will 

appreciate the kind of advice and the role that he will provide. 

I’d like to say that I have known about and known Dwain for 

over 30 years now, and I think that in everything that he’s done, 

he’s done it with passion. And I think that’s what we’re going 

to see here and I know we’ll all appreciate that. 

 

I’d also like to congratulate the new member from Riversdale, 

and I know that she is also bringing some very unique and 

important gifts to this place. And I’m looking forward to the 

kinds of issues that she brings forward, but also the keen insight 

that she also brings into how to solve the problems of 

Saskatchewan. Because that’s why we all get elected, is to solve 

problems for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

I’d also like to thank Harry Van Mulligen, the former member 

from Douglas Park. I first met Harry almost 30 years ago — I 

think 28 years ago — when he phoned up and said, I want to 

help you, John, deliver meals on wheels to some of the seniors 

in Regina. And I got to know him over the couple of hours that 

we delivered meals that first day and then on subsequent days, 

and I’ve worked with him through thick and thin over many 

years. And I want to just say on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan, thank you very much, Harry, for all the good 

work that you’ve done. 

 

I’d also like to thank the constituents in Lakeview for returning 

me to this legislature for a fourth time and for the kinds of 

advice that they give me. I live here in the neighbourhood of the 

legislature, and much of the information and the insight and the 

perspective that I receive about what’s happening in this place, I 

pick up when I walk the streets of Lakeview, when I go to the 

Golden Mile, when I go to the Southland Mall, when I go into 

the various shops. Because people will stop and tell me how 

important certain things are to them and also how they are 

concerned about many things that are happening. 

 

I also want to thank the members of my family — Linda, 

Ingrid, and Solveig — for their continued support, and also for 

all of my family across the province of Saskatchewan who 

continue to provide guidance and advice. 

 



October 28, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3299 

A couple years ago now — it seems like it’s not that long ago in 

one sense, but it is a while — we had the first Throne Speech of 

this new government. And then subsequently in the spring of 

’08, we had the budget. And at that point, I talked about the 

uneasiness that I was picking up from the people of 

Saskatchewan about the direction of this new government. 

 

And there was a story or an image that I laid out about a bus 

that was going down a road, and it felt as if there wasn’t a 

driver at the wheel. Now I think, Mr. Speaker, that over the last 

three or four months we’ve realized that maybe that image 

wasn’t so far off and that things are in a situation where we’ve 

got a whole bunch of passengers, but we don’t have a driver, we 

don’t have a plan. We have people talking about, well, hope 

here, hope there. But as far as a plan, we don’t have it. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately this Throne Speech, which has 

in its title the whole fact of going forward, doesn’t seem to go 

forward at all. It looks back at many things that have happened 

over the last couple of decades, but there’s very little in this 

Throne Speech that sets out where this government wants to 

take the people of Saskatchewan. And that’s concerning in 

many ways. 

 

So I would say the kind of mood that I’m picking up from the 

people in Saskatchewan this fall, as opposed to last year when 

there was uneasiness, I think the mood I’m picking up this year 

is people are worried. They’re very worried. And they’re 

concerned that the Government of Saskatchewan has not taken 

into their knowledge base the kinds of things that are happening 

around them. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, that there’s a new book that came out 

on October 10th — and many people know I enjoy reading 

books — but there’s a new book that came out on October 10th 

written by a woman called Barbara Ehrenreich. And she’s quite 

a prominent writer and columnist; she writes for a number of 

magazines. This book is called Bright-Sided, and it’s a play on 

the words blindsided. But the book is about the fact that there 

are all these kinds of people who are cheerleaders, who are so 

optimistic that they get bright-sided. They go forward with all 

of these perspectives that are so sunny, so smiley, that all of a 

sudden they’re hit when things don’t go their way. 

 

And I know that there’s an interesting quote that she gave in an 

interview on October the 10th, when this book just was coming 

out. And she was asked: 

 

How does an upbeat workplace serve the interests of the 

corporate world? 

 

Well, I don’t think that it has served them too well! 

Nobody wanted to be the person who came to the boss and 

said, “I’m really worried about our subprime exposure 

with the mortgage company or bank.” And so the culture 

of self-delusion that permeated corporate America fed into 

the financial meltdown in 2008. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that some of what we’re seeing across the 

floor in this House is this self-delusion about where we’re going 

and what we’re doing. 

 

[15:00] 

And I think this is why people in Saskatchewan are very 

worried about what’s going to happen to our province. Because 

we have a whole number of people whose response in question 

period, whose response to reporters at different events is oh, 

things are going really well, have never gone better, when 

there’s a whole number of people within our province who are 

really hurting. 

 

And when you end up with somebody who basically has a 

response to trouble as just, well let’s grin and bear it, let’s cheer 

all the good things — then you know that you’ve got a problem. 

Mr. Speaker, we’re looking for people who have plans, not who 

just sort of cheerlead hope. Because we know that if you don’t 

have appropriate plans, then you’re going to get in trouble. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many of us a few weeks ago were looking forward 

to coming to the session this fall to see and hear the Throne 

Speech. And I guess when I was listening in the Chamber last 

week — or yes, I guess last week — my sense was that what we 

were getting was thin gruel as opposed to a nice cream porridge 

because there was really not much there. Now it might, it might 

allow for our community to continue, but I think, Mr. Speaker, 

that what’s happening here in our community is that there’s a 

whole number of people who have been in a situation where 

they’ve received some very generous opportunities to manage a 

whole amount of money. 

 

It brings me back to some of my previous career as a lawyer in 

private practice and as a mediator. And one of the types of cases 

that I spent a lot of time working on was businesses, farms that 

were in financial trouble, and I provided advice to them. And, 

Mr. Speaker, my sense is that this government is not dissimilar 

to that family business that’s moving on to the next generation, 

where there’s a son who doesn’t quite have the drive, doesn’t 

quite have the ability, doesn’t quite have the skills as the father 

and mother who have built the business, and they’re given a 

business either through an inheritance with a death or through 

some plan of transfer between parents and children. And all of a 

sudden they have control of all this money, and they’re not 

totally certain what to do, but they’re going to pretend like they 

know what they’re doing. 

 

And so all of a sudden you have a situation where they’re 

burning up cash, and more cash is going out the door than is 

coming in the door. And after about 18 months, they end up 

going to their accountant or to their lawyer because some of the 

bankers or some of the creditors or other places are starting to 

say, hey, there’s something not good here. Well that’s the kind 

of situation I used to get involved in on a regular basis, to try to 

sort out what were you going to do with this particular business. 

 

Now I have to say, Mr. Speaker, that there were some times 

when there was no answer because there wasn’t the skill or the 

ability of the people leading the company, the new generation, 

to actually understand how to get themselves out. Other times it 

was possible to fix things. Most often the best course was to get 

rid of that management, whether they were family or not, and 

bring in somebody who actually knew what they were doing. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think we’re getting close to the point where 

the people of Saskatchewan are going to want to have a chance 

to get rid of this self-congratulatory, pompom-bearing, 

cheerleader-type crew and get somebody back in place who 



3300 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2009 

knows how to manage this province. And, Mr. Speaker, that 

ends up being the kind of reason that people are so worried 

about what’s going on right now. And we’re in a situation 

where the financial management seemed to be okay until all of 

a sudden we get a bright sided or blindsided perspective as it 

relates to the revenues of the province. 

 

Now if we’d had a situation where we had a government in 

place that was careful about what kinds of expenditures they’ve 

increased, we might have been in a better position than we are 

now. But it’s not dissimilar to that example I gave of the son or 

daughter who inherits the family business and they increase the 

expenses — whether it’s new cars, new houses, toys, those 

kinds of things — and then all of a sudden realize the cash isn’t 

there. 

 

It’s not dissimilar to that the kind of situation that we’re in now 

because frankly I don’t think the public totally understands that 

there’s been around a 30 per cent increase in the expenditures in 

the budget of the province of Saskatchewan. And it’s the kind 

of increase that surprises many people when you talk about it 

because they expected something better from the crew that were 

elected in November of 2007. 

 

Now unfortunately we’re now in a situation where the 

accountability or the accounting has to take place, and I’m 

hoping for all of us in Saskatchewan that we will get some 

responsibility from the members opposite. And that will not 

happen until they get out of this sunny, bright side, cheerleading 

type of activity and then they get back to providing us with 

clear examples and clear plans as to what they’re going to do 

for the province. Now, Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech I had 

hoped would be that document. Unfortunately it doesn’t do that 

at all, and it’s a sad commentary on the kind of planning that 

comes forward. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, on May 12th in this Chamber, we were 

doing the estimates for the Executive Council and for the 

Premier. And at that evening I asked two questions of the 

Premier, and it’s quite interesting, Mr. Speaker, about those 

questions and what happens here. 

 

The first question, the gist of it was . . . and I won’t go into the 

long Hansard account, but if you want to go and look in 

Hansard you can read that. But the gist of the question is, how 

is this government going to manage the finances of the province 

when they’re spending so much more than what we were able to 

afford? And so I asked them, are you going to take money from 

the Crowns and raise utility rates? Are you going to raise taxes? 

Or are you going to move money from other places to try to 

cover-up the costs that were there? And, Mr. Speaker, I’d have 

to say that the answer that I got then wasn’t very satisfactory 

and, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s even less satisfactory now. 

 

And curiously enough the second question that I asked that 

night was about the whole issue of waiting lists. And, Mr. 

Speaker, and I think I will quote this one because I said I had a 

simple question for the Premier: 

 

Waiting lists in health care for surgery have been a huge 

issue, and on December 2007, the number of people on the 

waiting list was approximately 26,000. And now at 

December 2008, the most recent information on the public 

waiting list, it’s gone up by 1,000 instead of going down. 

Can the Premier explain why, after all the ranting and 

raving about waiting lists and health care and everything 

else, you’ve been in government for 18 months, and the 

waiting lists have gone up? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I went onto the website this morning and 

looked, and the most recent number says — as of June 30th, 

2009 — 27,600 patients are waiting for surgery, 200 more than 

at the end of March. And, Mr. Speaker, when is the September 

30th data going to come into place because it’s supposed to be 

on here every three months? I think that the concern of the 

Premier around this particular information is well-founded but, 

Mr. Speaker, where are the plans? What are they going to do? 

And I think that we have not seen or heard that kind of 

information on that very specific issue. We’ve set out some 

goals. 

 

The other curious thing in the Premier’s response was the fact 

that he attacked the whole point of targets. Now I don’t know 

what setting a three-month time limit in this Throne Speech for 

getting your surgery is, but I think it’s a target. But here, let me 

quote the Premier as he talks about targets and the 

environmental date. And I think he talks about something called 

targetitis. And he says that as a government we were not 

interested in targets or we were trying to set targets. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that this confusion around how the 

government plans to deal with waiting lists, how they plan to 

deal with the finances of the province, how they plan to deal 

with the issues of pulling back money for projects that the local 

people are expecting, all of these things are creating a great deal 

of confusion and, I think, worry. And so, Mr. Speaker, I think 

the word in response to this Throne Speech is to say the people 

are worried. What are your plans? What are you going to do? 

We haven’t seen anything here that’s going to solve that. Let’s 

get some clear ideas and clear options so that we, as the people 

of Saskatchewan, can understand what you’re going to try to 

do. 

 

Now we’ve heard some of this same kind of confusion in 

response to the plans for the H1N1 epidemic that is here in 

North America. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that what everybody wants is to know how 

these people are going to run our government, how they’re 

going to be responsible for the resources that we have, and how 

they are going to set out a plan for the next two years because, 

Mr. Speaker, I think it’s going to be quite clear on November 7, 

2011, that people will be tired of the kind of leadership that 

we’ve seen — or lack of leadership or cheerleading leadership 

or whatever you want to call it — because the public does not 

want to be bright sided. 

 

They don’t want to be in a situation where all of the hard work 

that we’ve all done together over a couple of decades to deal 

with all the problems in the ’80s, none of the people of 

Saskatchewan want to lose that kind of result that we have in 

our economy, in our community. And, Mr. Speaker, we did that 

kind of work all together as a community. And we need to 

know that the members opposite are operating in the same way. 

So far we haven’t seen that, and so I say the response to this 

Throne Speech is increased worry and uneasiness multiplied 



October 28, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3301 

two or three times. So, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to be voting for 

the amendment and against the motion. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture and 

the member from Saltcoats. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I appreciate the opportunity to be able to get up and 

respond to the Throne Speech. But before I start, I just want to 

mention and congratulate the member for Riversdale. I wish her 

many years of good times in the legislature here and wish her 

all the best. 

 

And I’d be remiss if I didn’t mention the Leader of the 

Opposition although on by-election night I’m sure there was a 

time there when the vote was very close that they were looking 

for Harry — where’s Harry? I think we need him — far closer 

than you would think with the leader of a party. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, just before I get into some of the issues I want to 

talk about today, I just want to mention my colleagues on this 

side of the House. Agriculture, Mr. Speaker, as we know is a 

very large portfolio, and it certainly isn’t one that a person can 

rely on information all by yourself. And I really want to 

acknowledge the support that I’ve got from every member on 

this side of the House. I get some very good advice from all the 

rural members — remembering of course, Mr. Speaker, I 

believe we represent every rural riding in the province of 

Saskatchewan. And that’s not by accident; I think that was by 

design by the people of the province. 

 

I also want to thank my urban colleagues in here because 

they’re free with their advice quite often, Mr. Speaker — not 

always heeded, but taken very well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about the constituency of 

Melville-Saltcoats and thank the voters out there for giving me 

the opportunity to represent them again. 

 

But a lot of good things happening out there, Mr. Speaker; Mr. 

Speaker, good things happening right across the province, but I 

think the one thing that I’ve noticed the most in 

Melville-Saltcoats is the optimism that we see out there. And I 

noticed yesterday that my colleague from Canora-Pelly had 

some numbers out where school enrolment is finally starting to 

turn around and come back. I believe that’s the first time in 17 

years we’ve seen that. And for rural Saskatchewan, for all of 

Saskatchewan, that’s probably the most optimistic sign we can 

see, when there’s young families moving back and staying in 

the province and having their kids here and raising their 

families here. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s not only good for this 

year; that’s going to bode well for the future and the long-term 

future of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in my constituency I’m very fortunate to have 

some potash mines, and there’s a couple of mine expansions 

going on out there right now. And we know there’s a bit of 

tough times in the potash industry but we’ve been there before. 

That’s happened on a number of occasions over the years. In 

fact I go back to the years that I worked in the mine at K-1 at 

Esterhazy, and the same thing went on then when they were 

trying to get a contract with possibly China at that time and 

India and some of the other countries that are large importers of 

potash. And we’ll get through this, and when we do we’re 

positioned in an excellent position for this province to go 

forward and potash to play an ever-increasing role in the 

revenues of this province. 

 

I also want to join with my colleague from Yorkton, Mr. 

Speaker. We have two new canola crushing plants going up. 

Louis Dreyfus, Mitsui just started taking canola — bodes well 

for the future of agriculture in that area, especially in the canola 

industry — and Richardson International who is also under 

construction and will be taking canola into the new year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, every community in the Melville-Saltcoats 

constituency, its biggest problem right now is infrastructure. 

And we’ve tried to help them with extra dollars that we, along 

with the federal government, have put into a number of projects 

out there. But it’s a great problem to have. We see every small 

town and even the city of Melville, their biggest concern is 

finding enough places for people to live. And that’s a good sign. 

We haven’t seen that for many, many years in rural 

Saskatchewan but I think it has a little bit to do with the 

optimism we see right across this great province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to take a few minutes today and just talk 

about some of the things we’ve done in agriculture. And you 

know, Mr. Speaker, it was a great opportunity to become 

government because agriculture and rural Saskatchewan had 

been neglected for so long, there were so many things we could 

turn to and start to do. And I want to list off some of them 

today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Really, the NDP left the door open. They kind of opened that 

door by paying no attention to rural Saskatchewan and really 

not caring what happened to agriculture, because of course 

under their watch they really didn’t care if agriculture survived 

because they didn’t really feel that agriculture played an 

important part in this province. And as you and I know, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, one out of every four, one out of every five 

jobs rely on agriculture in this province, even though the oil 

industry is doing well and the potash industry is going to come 

back very shortly and we’re so resource rich in this province 

and so many good things are happening out there. But when the 

buck stops it still comes back to the farm gate. And farm 

families across this province play such a big part in what goes 

on in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yesterday for an example . . . And we’ve worked 

very closely with the industry and SARM and organizations like 

that, Mr. Speaker, but the cattle guys, the cowboys were in here 

yesterday and worked very well with us. We haven’t solved all 

their problems. I would certainly be the first to say that. There’s 

tough times out there in the cattle industry and the hog industry. 

But they were in yesterday. Together we announced a $5 

million voluntary traceability rebate program. 

 

And I’m not totally sold on . . . The federal minister seems to 

think that mandatory traceability is the way to go and we 

disagree on that. We’ve agreed to disagree on that. The minister 

from Alberta thinks that mandatory traceability is the way to go, 

and they’ve done that. So normally we get along very well with 

our colleagues from Alberta, but on this issue we’ve agreed to 



3302 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2009 

disagree. 

 

But having said that, Mr. Speaker, why we did that 

announcement yesterday is that if we don’t position ourselves in 

a good position, if the federal government brings down 

mandatory traceability we’re going to get left behind. And I 

don’t want that to happen to our producers because somewhere 

down the road they may get docked 3, 4, 5 cents a pound 

because we’re not into that program. 

 

So we have to position ourselves for that, and that’s why our 

colleagues, our friends from the cattle industry, were here 

yesterday showing their support for what we were doing. It’s 

voluntary, as I said, Mr. Speaker, so it’s their choice whether 

they take advantage of this program, but it’s there to help them 

and defray some of the costs. 

 

Because as you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and every rural 

MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] on this side of the 

House knows, that when government knows what’s best for us, 

the buck always stops at the farm gate. And it’s the farmer, the 

farm family, that ends up picking up the bill for it, even though 

it was us as government — whether it’s federal, provincial, 

whoever’s in power — brings something forward. The buck 

always stops at the farm gate. And we’re trying to soften that 

blow and not let that happen under our watch, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Another project, Mr. Speaker, and I know the Leader of the 

Opposition will really be interested in this program because last 

year we designed it — the FRWIP [farm and ranch water 

infrastructure program] program for southwest Saskatchewan 

— mainly because they’ve had four or five years of drought. 

And the previous government wouldn’t even mention the word 

drought, let alone do anything about it. So one of the things we 

did is we brought a water program strictly for about 65, 66 RMs 

[rural municipality] in the Southwest. 

 

Now did that solve all our problems with the drought, Mr. 

Speaker? Not at all. But what it did is address some of the water 

issues they’re going to have in the upcoming years. But I’m 

hoping 20, 30 years from now they’re still utilizing some of the 

wells, on-farm wells, the dugouts, and especially, working 

again with SARM, the community wells that we’re drilling out 

there will be there for the next 20, 30, 40 years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I know the Leader of the Opposition would really like to 

congratulate us for that because of course he farms down there. 

I think it was two, three decades ago he represented a seat down 

there; it was somewhere in the last half a century, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The other issue I want to talk about is one of the biggest issues 

in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the education tax 

reduction on farm land, on ag land out there, whether you’re in 

the ranching area where you have thousands and thousands of 

acres you’re ranching, or whether you’re on the grain side. 

 

One of the biggest concerns they’ve had for many years, and I 

know they’ve asked the opposition opposite when they were in 

government. And I remember the previous premier always 

going to SARM and saying, the status quo is not on. And a year 

later he had to go back and say it again because they’d done 

nothing about it. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we haven’t been here two years, and we’ve 

addressed that issue. We haven’t solved it completely, and 

we’re working towards that making it even better, hopefully 

into the new year, but we’ve gone a long ways, Mr. Speaker. In 

many cases, farmers and ranchers are paying about a third of the 

education tax on farm land that they were just a short few years 

ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that again doesn’t solve their problem, but it 

certainly leaves a few more dollars as they go to pay their taxes 

now as we come to the year-end. It’ll leave a few more dollars 

in their pocket and, especially on the livestock side, they 

certainly need that to happen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk for a few minutes about crop 

insurance program. And the member opposite, the Leader of the 

Opposition certainly will remember what I’m talking about 

here. Because if I remember right, in 1992 when the NDP 

cancelled the GRIP [gross revenue insurance program] 

program, he was the deputy premier. Pretty influential position 

to sit in at cabinet, sat at cabinet and must have voted for this 

change. 

 

I think he was farming at the time. And I find that almost 

amazing that he would take part in cutting a program such as 

GRIP. Wasn’t the perfect program, but I’ll tell you, we haven’t 

seen a program come anywhere as near to addressing some of 

the issues since that program was in place. And I’m somewhat 

surprised that the Leader of the Opposition would have voted to 

cancel that program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re going to try . . . And we’ve done, we’ve 

made some changes to crop insurance. In fact some of them 

were made this summer with the drought in the 

Kindersley-Rosetown area. I toured the area with my colleague 

from Kindersley and my colleague from Rosetown, went out 

there and talked to producers. Met with a number of producers 

out there where you couldn’t even see that a crop had been 

seeded, it was so dry. 

 

We made some changes out there, especially knowing that there 

was going to be a feed shortage in the livestock industry, where 

crop insurance could go out and write the crop off and a 

neighbour could come in, and if there was some there, they 

could even bale it up and try and use it for feed. So we kind of 

tried to balance the spectrum there a little bit and help both 

sides of the issue. They were in real tough at that point of the 

year and then they finally started to get a little rain. But it was a 

little bit too late. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I also want to talk about the AgriStability 

transfer. My colleague from Thunder Creek talked about it 

should be an improvement to the programming when we bring 

it from Winnipeg back to Melville. But I was amazed yesterday 

— and I’ve heard the Leader of the Opposition kind of ridicule 

this move — but last night the member for Regina Coronation 

Park laughed right out loud, how stupid of a move this was. He 

said, oh, is this ever going to improve the program, moving it 

from one city to another. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re moving it from the province 

of Manitoba, in Winnipeg, to Melville, Saskatchewan. I would 

say that’s a win for everybody in this province. Number one, 



October 28, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3303 

those employees will be living here in Saskatchewan and 

paying taxes in Saskatchewan. Isn’t that a novel idea after all 

the out-migration we’ve had over the last 16 years, to actually 

want to bring more people back to the province of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to see a lot of people apply for some 

of these jobs with a farm background that actually when my 

colleague from Cypress Hills or anywhere across the province 

phones in to AgriStability, the person on the end of the phone 

might have a clue what you’re talking about. You know, he’ll 

wonder . . . I’ve had the opportunity to have a producer call me 

and say, you know, last year on my AgriStability form I listed 

150 bred heifers. And when they phoned in the next year, they 

got a call from AgriStability and said, well something’s wrong 

here, you didn’t list your bred heifers again. 

 

Wasn’t the fault of the person on the other end of the phone, but 

he’d never seen a farm, had no idea what they were talking 

about. We’re going to change that, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to 

make that part of the program work far better. And for the 

members on that side of the House to ridicule a move like that, 

they better go out and check in rural Saskatchewan, check with 

farmers and ranchers because they like that move of moving 

AgriStability back to Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the hog industry — and Florian Possberg was in 

yesterday when we did the traceability announcement and 

supported that — but the hog industry’s in tough, probably 

tougher shape than any in this whole province right now and 

have tough times. We’ve done the targeted advance, the TAP 

[targeted advance payment] program — 2007, 2008, and now in 

2009 — which gives them an advance on what they would get 

out of the AgriStability program, if they’re in a position to 

receive that. And I think that may help a little bit. 

 

One area, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I know you’re fully aware 

of this and every rural MLA on this side certainly is, it was the 

increase in the wildlife damage compensation out there from 80 

to 100 per cent. And I heard a little criticism from the Leader of 

the Opposition the other day in the media saying, well you 

know, it might be a good thing, and it might be overdue. And I 

think what he was thinking is they should have done it and 

really didn’t have the gusto to actually do it or, you know what, 

put the money towards it. 

 

But he was criticizing me for not getting the federal government 

to cost share in the additional 20 per cent. And I guess I was 

thinking back when he said that, Mr. Speaker, because I know 

exactly what they’d have done on that side of the House. 

They’d have blamed the federal government. We’d still be stuck 

at 80 per cent compensation. 

 

We didn’t do that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. When we saw we 

couldn’t get it cost shared, the province of Saskatchewan, my 

colleagues on this side of the House, and the Premier said, we’ll 

fund it. The province of Saskatchewan will fund it. And we’ll 

do what should be done, and we’ll fund wildlife compensation 

damage to the tune of 100 per cent because everybody should 

pay for the wildlife in this province when they’re doing 

damage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some of the other things we’ve done, we had a 

loan program for the cattle and hog industry shortly after we 

were elected and I was named Minister of Agriculture. We 

actually extended the principal payment for another year to give 

them a little reprieve there when they’re so short of cash out 

there in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, my time’s coming to an end here fairly 

quick. Knowing that, I think within the next while, the Leader 

of the Opposition, being Ag critic, is going to get up and ask us 

some ag questions. But before he gets up and asks them, we just 

want to give him a little refresher course in where he was when 

he was Deputy Premier because, as I said before, pretty high 

profile position to be in and do all these things to rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

But as I said before, they cut the GRIP program. Anybody 

remember what they did to our health care system in rural 

Saskatchewan? They closed 52 hospitals, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Actually that’s not quite right — they closed 53 rural hospitals 

because they closed the Plains out here which was one of the 

best locations for a hospital in the city that rural Saskatchewan 

could access. And you know what the NDP did? They closed it 

on top of it . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And the member 

opposite is right. They did. They ran many deficits in their years 

in government. Of course they borrowed from their — well, 

what did they call it — their rainy day fund, Fiscal Stabilization 

Fund. 

 

And Mr. Speaker, we all know what that fund amounted to. 

That was an operating loan, a line of credit. So every time they 

ran short when they ran a deficit, and they ran a number of 

them, they borrowed money and up went the provincial debt. 

Which is something I’m glad the member opposite reminded 

me of, because we’ve paid down about a third of the debt in the 

first two years, Mr. Speaker, something that members opposite 

never even addressed in 16 years. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, you know, you look at the municipalities right 

across this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I recognize the 

member from Saltcoats. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, and why I’m trying to remind the Leader of the 

Opposition is because he played a big part in what they did to 

rural Saskatchewan and the neglect they had. And, Mr. Speaker, 

I just want to remind him, when he gets up to ask questions, to 

make sure that he’s commending us for what we did because in 

the short two years we’ve tried to fix a lot of holes that they left 

behind. 

 

You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think probably the biggest 

problem the members opposite are going to have is that doom 

and gloom and pessimism is not selling across Saskatchewan, 

whether you live in urban Saskatchewan or rural Saskatchewan. 

When I go home on the weekends, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I see 

optimism out there; I see people working, making a living, 

raising families, and looking to the future, not looking in the 

rear-view mirror. And I think that only bodes well for this 

province. 



3304 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2009 

[15:30] 

 

I think the NDP have a problem come the next election. 

Fearmongering, the pessimism they try to sell out there, the 

doom and gloom — I don’t think it works. And I would say 

after the next election there’ll be less even of them on that side 

of the House and more on this side, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve covered a lot of areas today. I just 

want to say that I will certainly be supporting the Throne 

Speech, and I won’t be supporting the amendment. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Batoche. 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Before I start, 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to make a few comments and thank 

the people that have brought me here. First and foremost on the 

list of course is my wife, Valerie, who’s been at my side and my 

biggest supporter. 

 

I’d also like to thank my CA [constituency assistant], Mary 

Anne Telfer, who’s been more than just a CA. She’s been a 

close friend and confidant, and I thank her for her support. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard a lot lately from the opposition 

asking, what’s the government done for Duck Lake? This is 

what our government is doing for Duck Lake: 66,000 from the 

municipal economic enhancement program; 94,000 in operating 

grants; 375,000 for a new roof on the interpretive centre; 

455,000 to leverage a similar contribution out of the federal 

Building Canada Fund for water reservoir expansion and 

treatment plant upgrade, and 13.5 million for a new school. 

That’s our record on Duck Lake, Mr. Speaker, and I think it’s 

pretty strong. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are talking a lot lately about 

the three recent by-elections but I don’t think they’re seeing the 

big picture. These are NDP strongholds, Mr. Speaker. There 

were supposed to be a cakewalk, but they weren’t. Let’s take a 

closer look at the by-election results, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In 2008 the NDP won a seat in the constituency of Cumberland, 

well short of 200 votes. In just five years their support 

plummeted in the constituency from 69 per cent in 2003 to 50 

per cent in 2008. In that same period our support doubled from 

22 per cent in 2003 to 44 per cent in 2008. They sure are 

building momentum, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Consider Saskatoon Riversdale. In the last by-election the NDP 

won Saskatoon Riversdale by just over 400 votes. Their support 

in Saskatoon Riversdale has decreased from 63 per cent in 2003 

to only 53 per cent in 2009. Our support has grown from 23 per 

cent in 2003 to 42 per cent in 2009. Again we have a steady 

decline, election after election, in their support while ours has 

increased by 83 per cent over the last three elections. Mr. 

Speaker, the momentum is continuing to build. 

 

Now the big one, Mr. Speaker, Regina Douglas Park. The NDP 

hand-picked this riding. They thought it would be an easy win 

for their new boss. Boy, did they get a shock. In the end they 

snuck it out by 502 votes, but a win is a win for now. We’ll see 

in 2011. We’re moving forward in Regina Douglas Park, Mr. 

Speaker. In 2003 we only got 21 per cent of the vote in the 

riding. In 2007 our share rose to 31 per cent. This year we got 

42 per cent. That sounds like momentum, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Do you want to know how the NDP made out this year in 

Regina Douglas Park? I’ll tell you. In 2003 the NDP got over 

5,000 votes in Regina Douglas Park. Again in 2007 they 

received in excess of 5,000 votes. This year, Mr. Speaker, they 

barely got 3,000. Mr. Speaker, the NDP lost 2,000 supporters in 

Regina Douglas Park — in their leader’s riding — in only two 

years of office. We’re moving forward, Mr. Speaker. They’re 

falling back. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the second thing I want to talk about today is 

agriculture. Our government is committed to moving forward 

by making support for agricultural industry a priority. We are 

reforming crop insurance, providing support for cattle and hog 

producers, and improving service to our producers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan farmers and ranchers produce 

nearly half of Canada’s canola; three-quarters of its flax, 

mustard, and peas; and more than 80 per cent of its durum and 

lentils. We also have the second largest beef cow, bison, and elk 

herds in the country. On top of that, Saskatchewan is also one 

of the world’s largest exporters of flax, lentil, peas, and wheat. 

Saskatchewan has made a name for itself as a reliable supplier 

of quality agriculture products, and we can thank our producers 

for that. 

 

Our government has been moving forward with a number of 

initiatives aimed at helping our farmers and ranchers. This 

includes launching a review of crop insurance that was focused 

on ways to improve the program from the farmers’ perspective. 

From that review, our government made the largest ever 

contribution to a crop insurance program by a Saskatchewan 

government. This also includes our government’s $20 million 

increase to the crop insurance program, Mr. Speaker, that 

brought the program’s budget to $155 million. The result of this 

investment is better coverage for producers, and it lowers their 

premiums. 

 

We’re also making sure our producers have better service. This 

starts by moving AgStability head office to Melville and 

assuming responsibility from the federal government for the 

administration of the program. The new office at Melville will 

begin operating in Saskatchewan in 2010 as it starts processing 

applications for 2009. This will result in 100 new jobs at the 

Crop Insurance head office in Melville and 30 new jobs at Crop 

Insurance offices throughout rural Saskatchewan. On top of 

that, bringing AgStability to Saskatchewan will provide our 

producers with more reliable and responsible service to assist 

with moving the agribusiness forward in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve also taken a more co-operative approach to 

working with the federal government. By working together with 

the federal government, we were able to provide 101 million in 

new provincial funding for the new Growing Forward 

agreement with the federal government. Investing 152 million 

over five years to improve the province’s water infrastructure 

program, the funding will come through cash and program 

spending. 

 

The purpose behind the Growing Forward agreement is to 



October 28, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3305 

support a profitable, innovative agriculture, agri-food, and 

ag-based products industry. This program, Mr. Speaker, will 

achieve three strategic outcomes for agriculture in 

Saskatchewan: a competitive and innovative sector, a sector that 

contributes to society’s priorities, and a sector that is proactive 

in making risk management. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Growing Forward program is going to help 

farmers make sound business decisions and capture market 

opportunities, and has targeted farmers interested in starting or 

expanding a new business venture, pursuing a new business 

opportunity or improving your existing business practice. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are moving forward on the agriculture files — 

for example, our government investment of $71 million for the 

Saskatchewan cattle and hog support program. Under the 

program, ranchers receive $40 per head for beef cows, $20 for 

market hogs, and 10 per weanling or feeder hogs. This program 

will help to ensure that our agricultural economy will continue 

to create opportunities in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

We’ve also moved forward in responding to help alleviate 

long-term drought issues in southwest Saskatchewan. Once 

again, in positive co-operation with the federal government, we 

have established farm and ranch water infrastructure programs, 

and we have invested $29 million in it. This program will 

support the development of secure water sources in 

Saskatchewan to expand the livestock industry, encourage rural 

economic activity, and mitigate the effects of future droughts. 

Most important, Mr. Speaker, it will help producers to have a 

stable water source so that they can be productive and 

competitive, even in dry years. 

 

Our government is making it easier for farmers to expand their 

operations and make it easier for them to own land. Many will 

remember when the Minister of Agriculture announced last year 

a new five-year program that provides . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. There’s a number of 

conversations starting to develop. I’m having trouble hearing 

the member. I recognize the member from Batoche. 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Many will remember when the Minister of 

Agriculture announced last year a new five-year program that 

provides incentives for producers to purchase their leased 

agricultural Crown land. Agricultural Crown land has been sold 

to producers since 1947, but this type of incentive program has 

never before been offered in Saskatchewan. The new program 

offers lessees, on a sliding scale, incentives for purchase. This 

will help create a plan for lasting and permanent economic 

growth for the producer by returning the direction of 

agricultural economy to the people who work the land. That’s 

moving forward on agriculture, Mr. Speaker. That’s a couple of 

things that we’re doing on agriculture, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s 

good progress. 

 

We’re really moving forward on agriculture in this province. 

Despite that, the members opposite have tried to portray 

themselves as if they are the best choice for agriculture and 

rural Saskatchewan. Their leader has even appointed himself as 

their Agriculture critic. But you know what, Mr. Speaker? No 

one is going to buy that. No one believes that the member 

opposite would do anything for agriculture or rural 

Saskatchewan if they had the chance. In fact, they had the 

chance for 16 years. And what did they do? I’ll tell you what 

they did. They increased crop insurance premiums, decreased 

crop insurance coverage. They closed 31 rural offices in one 

year — 2004. No support for producers in southwest 

Saskatchewan dealing with consecutive years of drought. No 

commitment to fully fund the CAIS [Canadian agricultural 

income stabilization] program. Taxpayers’ money being used to 

invest in private business, while farmers and ranchers and the 

rest of rural Saskatchewan was ignored. 

 

Compare that to our record, Mr. Speaker. In just two years look 

what we’ve accomplished: decreased premiums and increased 

coverage for crop insurance, increased compensation for 

producers through the wildlife damage compensation program 

from 80 per cent to 100 per cent, improved agricultural 

extension services, new incentives to help Crown land lessees 

purchase their land, the largest education property tax reduction 

in this province’s history, and the largest agricultural budget in 

the province’s history. That’s our record on agriculture and to 

me that sounds like progress. 

 

The final thing that I want to speak about today, Mr. Speaker, is 

the Year of the Métis and Trails of 1885. The Métis Nation of 

Saskatchewan has requested 2010 by designating as the Year of 

the Métis in Saskatchewan. Our government recognizes the 

unique history and culture of the Métis people. And we will 

honour the request by recognizing 2010 as the Year of the Métis 

in Saskatchewan, and by working with the Métis Nation and 

other organizations to honour the Trails of 1885 celebration. 

This will be a really special occasion for the Métis people and 

the province of Saskatchewan. I think Robert Doucette, the 

president of the Métis Nation of Saskatchewan, has summed the 

importance of this event up well. He said: 

 

We are expecting thousands of Métis citizens from across 

the country to join us as we turn a new historic chapter in 

the lives of Métis Citizens, Canadians, and Citizens of the 

great province of Saskatchewan. Reconciliation is 

important to this chapter in history . . . The designation of 

2010 being The Year of the Métis, by the Province of 

Saskatchewan in . . . [this year’s] throne speech marks a 

great chapter in moving forward for the Métis Nation as 

well as The Province [of Saskatchewan]. 

 

The trails of 1885 will commemorate the Northwest Resistance 

of 1885. The resistance is one of the key points in the history of 

the Métis people and the province of Saskatchewan. It is central 

to our collective identity. That’s why it is so important that we 

continue to tell the story of 1885. I’m sure that many of the 

members here today already know the story about 1885, but 

these stories continue to warrant being told nonetheless. The 

members of the Assembly will oblige me if I digress into a bit 

of a history lesson. 

 

After the Red River uprising of 1870, many Métis migrated 

from Manitoba to new communities along the banks of the 

South Saskatchewan River. Not long after that, the Métis found 

that they were again facing the same problems they had in the 

old Red River settlement. 

 



3306 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2009 

[15:45] 

 

Among other things, they feared the loss of their land as new 

surveyors from out east imposed Canadian township systems on 

lot divisions into the Métis’ long, narrow river lots. What this 

meant was that many Métis would lose their access to the river. 

In June 1884, a delegation of Métis led by Gabriel Dumont 

travelled to Montana to persuade the Manitoba resistance 

leader, Louis Riel, to return to the Saskatchewan district to help 

them present their grievances to the Canadian government. 

 

Throughout the summer of 1884, unrest grew. And on March 

18th, 1885, it culminated in Riel’s creation of the provisional 

government of Saskatchewan centred in the community of 

Batoche. On March 26, 1885, in a field near the community of 

Duck Lake, the first shots of the resistance were fired. 

 

Under the command of Inspector Leif Crozier, a force of about 

100 Northwest Mounted Police, and other volunteers from the 

Prince Albert area clashed with Métis forces led by Gabriel 

Dumont. When the smoke cleared, 17 people were dead — 12 

policemen and volunteers, and five Métis, including Isidore 

Dumont, Gabriel’s brother. 

 

The Métis and the district of Saskatchewan were now in open 

conflict. A column of mounted police was hastily dispatched 

northward from Regina to garrison the town of Prince Albert. 

As the first shots of the uprising were being fired, General 

Middleton of the Canadian militia was on his way west to take 

command of the North-West Field Forces, which had 

responsibility for all military activities in Manitoba and the 

North-West Territories. 

 

On April 6th, Middleton and a small force of Westerners, now 

augmented by more infantry, artillery, and cavalry from 

Winnipeg and by Boulton’s Scouts from Russell, Manitoba set 

out from the small town of Fort Qu’Appelle on a 200-mile 

journey northwest to Batoche. 

 

On April 24th, his troops experienced their first taste of battle at 

Fish Creek. The Canadian militia suffered a severe setback at 

the hands of Gabriel Dumont’s sharpshooters. After Fish Creek, 

an even more cautious General Middleton continued his 

advance to the Métis headquarters of Batoche. There he began a 

four-day siege. 

 

On May 12, 1885, the badly outnumbered Métis were finally 

overcome by Middleton’s troop after a short, sharp battle. A 

few days later, Louis Riel surrendered and Gabriel Dumont 

escaped to Montana. 

 

Louis was brought back to Regina where he was tried for 

treason before Judge Hugh Richardson. He was found guilty 

August 1, 1885. On November 16th, Riel was hanged at the 

mounted police barracks in Regina. His body was then taken to 

Winnipeg for burial. 

 

This year, 125 years later, we will move forward by 

remembering Gabriel Dumont, Louis Riel, and their 

contemporaries and by recognizing 2010 as the Year of the 

Métis in Regina and participating in the Trails of 1885 

celebration. 

 

Established in 2008, the Trails of 1885 is a government-led 

initiative that pulls together a variety of sites, festival, and 

events that are linked together by the events of 1885. Spread 

across three provinces, starting in Manitoba, passing through all 

of Saskatchewan, and ending in Alberta, the stories of 1885 will 

be told to visitors from all over Western Canada, in fact the 

world. 

 

For three weeks next summer, Trails of 1885 events and 

celebrations will occur throughout the province of 

Saskatchewan. There are two events I would like to make 

special mention of. 

 

One event that I am personally looking forward to is Back to 

Batoche Days. The celebration began in 1970 and it showcased 

Métis history and culture every year since. It has changed in 

some ways over the years, but in others, it has stayed the same. 

When it began in 1970, everyone slept in army tents. Today 

you’ll see tents and campers and even the occasional teepee. 

There are numbers of different events to take in and enjoy while 

attending the festival, ranging from fiddle music and dancing 

and jigging to hatchet throwing and log carrying. I’m also rather 

partial to the open pit bannock baking contest. 

 

Back to Batoche Days are held every year in July, and all 

people are encouraged to come out and experience the Métis 

culture as it was and as it is today. This year, more than 10,000 

people attended Back to Batoche Days. Next year, to 

commemorate the 125th anniversary of the North-West 

Resistance, the festival has been extended to last a whole week. 

It will run July 18th to 25th. I hope many of the members will 

be able to attend. 

 

In the town of Duck Lake there will programs running all 

summer long. An artist will paint murals to celebrate the 

occasion. When I think of this I am reminded of something 

Louis Riel said just prior to his passing. He said the Métis 

Nation will go to sleep for 100 years and will rise again led by 

their artists. When I enjoy the music of Métis artists like Donny 

Parenteau and Louis Simard, I am inclined to think that he may 

have been correct in his prediction, though perhaps off on the 

date by 25 years. 

 

I eagerly await seeing the Métis Nation rise again in the work of 

its artists. The Duck Lake Interpretive Centre will also 

commemorate the battle of Duck Lake in June, while 

celebrating its own 50th anniversary. 

 

I am pleased to say that our government is contributing 

$375,000 toward repairs of Duck Lake Regional Interpretive 

Centre, which marks the location where the first shots were 

fired in the North-West Resistance. The centre houses more 

than 6,000 artifacts, many of which date back to 1885 and tell 

the story of the resistance from three different perspectives: the 

First Nations, the Métis, and the pioneers. 

 

On a personal level, I deeply appreciate this last fact, the fact 

that approaches the event from all three perspectives. To truly 

appreciate the event of 1885, it’s best that we look at them from 

each other’s perspectives. There is much to be gained when we 

transcend our inclination to attach blessing and blame, to say 

that one side was right, the other side was wrong, and instead to 

review the resistance of 1885 as a clash of cultures — neither 



October 28, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3307 

side better nor worse, and both deeply ingrained into our 

province’s identity.  

 

In light of this, we’re excited to contribute to the preservation of 

Duck Lake Regional Interpretive Centre so that Saskatchewan 

people, and all Canadians for that matter, can learn about and 

celebrate our rich past, and so that we can share our fascinating 

stories with visitors to our province. To know where you’re 

going, you have to know where you’ve been, and by 

remembering the stories of 1885 we are preparing ourselves as 

a province to move forward into a brighter future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, thank you very much for the time. And I will be 

supporting . . . and not supporting the amendment. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Fairview. No — Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — I have to wear a tag. Thank you, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. I’m very happy today to rise and respond to the 

Throne Speech. Before I do that, I’d like to take the opportunity 

to welcome my colleagues from Regina Douglas Park and from 

Saskatoon Riversdale, welcome them to the legislature and 

congratulate them both on their wonderful victories. I’m 

looking forward to working with both of them. I think we’re all 

going to be better for their input and their participation. 

 

Before I also get too far into my remarks, I want to thank my 

family who continue to support me through all of the political 

things that go on and continue to watch and be there when I 

need them. My mother is still a fierce campaigner. Even though 

she’s almost 84 years old, she still goes on the campaign trail. I 

want to thank my husband in particular who puts up with being 

alone a lot and still is very supportive of the things that I do. 

 

And I particularly want to thank the people in Eastview, my 

executive for sure, who continue to work very hard for me and 

for the constituents of Eastview. I want to thank my 

constituency assistant, April Anderson who keeps the office 

running and who works so well for the people of Saskatoon 

Eastview, and does such a good job that makes me look better. I 

also want to thank the people in Eastview who continue to 

support me and who continue to come with their issues, and are 

always, always there with good advice and support. 

 

So the Throne Speech, it’s interesting reading it or even 

listening to it, and the theme of moving forward, I really 

couldn’t see where the theme actually fit into the text of the 

Throne Speech. It was more like even, if it wasn’t moving 

backwards, it was certainly only moving sideways. 

 

And I know my colleague from Moose Jaw Wakamow pointed 

out that there was at least 50 items that were mentioned as 

promises or things to do in this Throne Speech in ’09 that were 

also mentioned in ’08. So they’re either didn’t get done or they 

were just re-promised. So 50, that’s quite a few. And I think she 

said that there was only probably 12 to 15 new ideas, which I’ll 

talk about. 

 

And I think it was interesting, the songs that were sung at the 

Throne Speech, particularly the “Man in the Mirror.” And I’m 

thinking if the government would look at themselves in the 

mirror, who would they see standing with them? Would they 

see the homeless women and children who were turned away 

from the YWCA [Young Women’s Christian Association] in 

Saskatoon, the 3,400 of them? Would they see those people? 

Would they see the health care workers who have been almost a 

year or more without a contract? 

 

Would they see seniors who are unable to afford their rents, 

their medication? Some of them who have come to me and said 

they have now taken to only taking their medication every 

second day because they can’t afford to take it every day. Some 

of them who have come and said they’re sitting in the dark. 

They don’t turn on their lights. Some who have said they don’t 

cook very much any more because they can’t afford the utility. 

Some of them who are selling their grave plots. 

 

I mean, the stories are pretty sad for people who simply can’t 

afford to live in Saskatchewan and really don’t see what 

happened to the boom. It certainly passed them by. And now 

that the boom has been blown by the fiscal mismanagement of 

the Sask Party government, they really don’t have much 

opportunity to celebrate. Anything moving forward for them is 

really not contained in this speech. 

 

We also have nothing — and quite appallingly — nothing that 

mentions people in the North. And I know my colleague from 

Cumberland stands up every day talking about long-term care in 

northern Saskatchewan. There are only 14 beds in La Ronge 

that cover that whole side of the North. That simply isn’t 

enough for seniors living in the North to have comfortable 

accommodation when they need the care that long-term care 

provides. 

 

We need to see more done for people in the North, not just in 

long-term care, but in all the things that they need up there — in 

particular, mental health services. So many things have been 

left slide in the last couple of years, no mention of them. And 

people are feeling quite marginalized and forgotten in the 

North. 

 

I also want to talk about nothing for women. And I find that 

interesting that there was nothing for women in this Throne 

Speech. We don’t even have a status of women secretariat. We 

have a male minister responsible for the Status of Women such 

as the department would be. And I know when . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — The only one in the country. 

 

Ms. Junor: — It is the only one in the country. I know when I 

was at a Commonwealth Women Parliamentarians meeting that 

it was mentioned. I actually didn’t know who was responsible 

for the Status of Women, and it was brought up that it was 

probably the minister of advanced . . . labour, education, 

immigration, whatever else he has in his title. They’ve lumped 

in the Status of Women also. 

 

And I know one of the women MLAs from Quebec was 

appalled. She said that would simply not be done in Quebec. 

That would simply not be accepted, that there was not a woman 

in charge of the Status of Women. So women know this; there’s 

been nothing mentioned about women or women’s issues. It has 

just been deadly silent. 

 

And when we looked at the health care workers who were here 



3308 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2009 

the other day, most of them are women. Most of them are 

women. They came from long-term care facilities, from 

hospitals, from different places where women do the work of 

the health system. Many of them were women. Many of them 

brought their children. Many of them are older women. 

 

And we saw that their issues are not being addressed. They 

don’t feel respected. They don’t feel valued. They certainly 

don’t feel part of the health care team, which is something that 

we have talked about so long, that is so important in the health 

care system that if you want to deliver care differently and you 

want to put the patient first, you have to have a team approach 

so things are not siloed and the patient is shifted or shunted 

from one place to the other without any coordination, 

co-operation, or collaboration. 

 

So we have seen nothing from this government that would deal 

with issues around the collective bargaining, which I think is 

pretty appalling. And I think it sends a very, very chilling 

message to working people, especially in the health system. But 

I mean all working people in Saskatchewan are watching this 

government, came into government saying, came in on the 

mantra that they were going to go to war with the working 

people. And this is something that has been said, outright said, 

war with the working people. 

 

What does that say to all working people in Saskatchewan? Not 

everyone is unionized, but they do work. And the message was, 

we’re going to war with working people. What a message to 

give to people in this province who you are supposedly 

representing. And you are trying to sell this province to other 

provinces and other areas of the world to be the best place to 

come and live and work and raise a family — but not if you’re a 

worker. How does that work out? 

 

[16:00] 

 

And I think it was interesting that the women that were out in 

front of the legislature were first of all denied access to their 

legislature to come in and listen to questions about their issues. 

This is a democracy. Nobody should be turned away. And I 

think, to the credit of the Speaker, they were allowed in and 

they did have a good day watching their issues being brought 

forward. 

 

The 3,400 women and children who were turned away from the 

YWCA in Saskatoon this past year, there’s still a huge issue of 

how women and children are supported. When you talk about 

children living in poverty, they live in families — most of the 

time in single-parent families, and most of those single parents 

are women. And we’re doing nothing for them. 

 

We still have a huge way to go in affordable housing. And 

many of the affordable housing projects that have been 

announced are things that we did when we were in government. 

And the plan is being carried on, and hopefully we need to add 

many, many more so many people will have adequate housing 

and that’s affordable. 

 

And that isn’t just single women with families. That’s single 

women. That is seniors. Seniors cannot afford their rent. We are 

getting many, many stories about seniors who cannot afford 

their rent. They are moving out into less desirable 

accommodations. 

 

Like I said at the beginning of my speech, they are cutting down 

their medications. That is dangerous. When you take your 

medications every second day — they’re prescribed daily — 

that is dangerous. When you’re deciding whether you can 

afford to turn your lights on or you can afford to turn your stove 

on or you can afford to take your meds . . . You can’t afford to 

get your glasses. You can’t afford to get teeth. You’re selling 

your grave plot. 

 

What are we doing to our seniors? What are we doing to our 

seniors? It is shameful. It is not something that I think 

Saskatchewan should be proud of, and I don’t see a mention of 

those issues for seniors. 

 

When we talk about long-term care for seniors, that is an issue. 

We do need to have more long-term care facilities, but that isn’t 

the single most important issue for most seniors. They want to 

talk about affordability. They want to talk about dignity, 

respect, financial security, safety. They want to talk about a lot 

of issues. Long-term care is only one part of an issue that would 

face a senior in this province. 

 

I also want to talk about rural doctors. There was things in the 

Throne Speech in particular about health. Rural doctors, a 

strategy for retaining or recruiting doctors was promised. We 

haven’t seen anything. We’ve heard many, many communities 

in the paper, in the news, talking about how difficult it is to get 

doctors into their communities. That still is something that even 

increasing as we were doing, as we were in government, 

increasing seats in the medical school, we still have not fixed 

how you service rural Saskatchewan. 

 

And for members who propose that they are the ones who 

represent rural Saskatchewan and think the most highly and 

were focusing on rural Saskatchewan issues, they haven’t got 

any answer. And they haven’t done anything about it. And 

when we talk about moving forward, I think most of the moving 

forward is sort of like bobbing and weaving. There doesn’t 

seem to be a lot of actual direction. 

 

And I also want to talk about the focus on health care, and the 

last year that we’ve had . . . Well Tony Dagnone did his report. 

The minister had a year of hiding behind Tony Dagnone. Every 

letter I saw that was copied to me with an issue from a person 

who had a significant or serious health issue and wrote to the 

minister, their response was, thank you for your letter, you 

know, I’m very concerned about your problem, but we’ve got a 

patient-first review in place. And basically that was the end of 

that. 

 

So most people assumed that their issue would be dealt with in 

the patient-first review. Not so. In fact I asked Tony Dagnone if 

he actually got any of the letters that those answers were sent in. 

Did he as the commissioner see any of those letters of people’s 

problems? Not one got to him. So for a whole year, people got 

fobbed off with . . . there’s a patient-first review going on, so 

you just wait and things will be fixed for you. 

 

The commissioner never got a letter, and he never saw any of 

that. And when we talk about his report . . . I felt sorry for him 

the day he released it actually because I don’t think what we 



October 28, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3309 

saw that day was what he submitted. I think he put his heart and 

soul into doing a patient-first review, but I don’t the 

recommendations that we saw — which were so vague and so 

underwhelming — would be what he would like to have seen 

with his name on it. 

 

I think that the department and the minister and the government, 

the government and the minister basically directed the 

department to write what they wanted, and Tony Dagnone was 

left to have to put a good face on it and put out those 16 

recommendations that were really so vague that I think the 

government can probably do nothing. And I think that’s 

basically what they were probably wanting to do. And I think 

that I’m really sorry to see that Tony Dagnone was used that 

way. 

 

I do think that a lot of the things I see in the Throne Speech — 

big, huge promises like the needle exchange program — I can’t 

imagine why you would commission a report and then totally 

disregard the recommendations that were in it. Laurence 

Thompson’s report that the government commissioned to look 

at the needle exchange program said that there was scientific 

consensus that this was the right thing to do, was to have this 

needle exchange program as it is. There was no need based on 

any evidence to actually change the program, to talk about 

capping, to talk about limiting the number of needles. There 

was no evidence. There is no consensus. Their own 

commissioned report says not. The government simply is acting 

on ideology. 

 

There is more of a punitive nature to this than anything else. 

The community that deals with drug addicts and people who 

use drugs, they have said that they are appalled at this. This will 

not help them. It will not help people who are addicted. This 

will not help our HIV/AIDS [human immunodeficiency 

virus/acquired immune deficiency syndrome] rates. This will 

not help our hep C rates. This will be harmful and we will pay 

for this. People who are drug users will also pay because they 

will die if they’re infected. They will die. But the taxpayers will 

pay because it will cost us more as these people can contract 

these diseases and die. It’ll cost us more. But we’re willing to 

do that because there’s an ideology that we should be 

paternalistic and we should be punitive for people who have 

problems with drugs. I really think that’s an unfortunate thing to 

be saying. 

 

And I simply cannot sit down without talking about H1N1. I am 

actually quite . . . I think I’m disappointed, and that’s probably 

the strongest word I’ll use here. But the actual leadership on the 

H1N1 file is extremely disappointing. There are people calling 

daily in droves with questions that simply are not answered. 

And when I asked them, on behalf of the people that call me, 

and ask them, I get insulted in this legislature. I get ridiculed. 

And the minister tries to be flippant. And somehow — I’m not 

sure where he’s trying to hide, but he sure is dancing — I can’t 

see any answer. I asked logical, legitimate questions, and 

there’s no answer. 

 

Frankly he doesn’t have any answers because I don’t think he 

knows the file. I don’t think he knows about it. I don’t think 

he’s paying attention. And I simply don’t think people are 

confident in his leadership on this file. 

 

The calls I get, people are confused. They’re coming into my 

office. Seniors, young moms, people with children who are in 

high-risk groups, people who themselves are high risk — they 

do not have the confidence in the information that they are 

getting. And they’re watching. They’re watching. And these 

aren’t . . . the people are watching and paying attention because 

they want to make good decisions. But the information is so 

contradictory and confusing that it’s impossible from one day to 

the next to decide whether you should or shouldn’t or your 

family should or shouldn’t have the vaccine. 

 

I think the leadership is actually, it actually is stunningly, 

stunningly lacking. So I really think that this is something that 

we’ll continue to ask questions on because people are 

continuing to phone and say, what about, what about, what 

about. 

 

So the job of the opposition is to be the watchdog. It’s to be 

critical of things that are wrong, certainly, but it is also our job 

to put forward solutions. And in September, I had a press 

conference and said here are the things that I think would be 

logical to do. And some of the things the government took it to 

heart and actually started doing, but not all of them. 

 

I know one of the things I talked about was streaming people 

away from emergency rooms because that will overwhelm them 

if everybody with flu symptoms appears in emergency. That 

just won’t work. So I suggested that we talk about some off-site 

or triaging away from the main emergency area to deal with flu 

symptoms. Now I see one of the southern health districts is 

actually doing that. 

 

So these are things that, instead of accusing me of 

fearmongering, I was actually trying to be helpful. And some of 

the things somebody actually paid attention to. The minister 

didn’t get it, but those things, those things that I suggested were 

concrete, real solutions. I’m a registered nurse. And I’m not 

watching this with just a political hat. I’m watching this because 

I’m a nurse. I’m a mother. I’m a grandmother. And I myself 

need a vaccine myself. And so my family, I’m concerned about 

them. 

 

Politics is way down here in what I think about H1N1. But the 

politician in the Minister of Health seems to have overridden 

the actual thinking person who would actually deal with this in 

a constructive way to deal with the people in the province. 

We’re talking real people who have grandchildren, who have 

children, who are asking, what should I do? And nobody has an 

answer. Where should I go next week or is it next week? 

 

I have a father who phoned and said, my son is in the identified 

high risk group. I live in Yorkton. I took my son, they said no, 

he can’t be done this week, but if you drive him to Regina, he 

will be done. What kind of answer is that and what kind of 

service is that from the health system? There has to be some 

consistency. There has to be some consistency of messaging. 

There has to be some consistency of delivery because if you 

live in one health district, you’re going to be disadvantaged 

over if you live in another. I don’t think that’s the 

Saskatchewan way. 

 

And I think the minister, he was curious why he didn’t have any 

questions. Well for the first year he hid behind me and my skirts 



3310 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2009 

about what I didn’t do or what our government didn’t do. The 

first year that’s all he did. Any question he got asked, it was oh 

well you didn’t. 

 

And last year was all behind Tony Dagnone. Well now there’s 

nowhere to hide. And he’s not doing very well out on his own, 

out in the open. He’s not doing very well. And I do not have to 

be the judge of that; the public is judging that. I think it’s fairly 

noticeable that it isn’t working, trying to hide behind somebody 

else or something else. It isn’t working for him. 

 

And I also would like to talk about the financial meltdown that 

this government has had. It is affecting everything that happens. 

We have all this talk about potash and where it should be. The 

government was told immediately . . . I remember my colleague 

standing up and saying, this will not work; this is not possible, 

not feasible. But they plowed ahead anyway. And now they get 

to say, oops we made a mistake, my bad. And now put in some 

fiscal changes so that they won’t do it again. 

 

But they’re government. If they do it again — what? — will 

they punish themselves by slapping themselves with a wet 

dollar bill? I mean there doesn’t seem to be any accountability 

which was something that was a theme of the ’08 — I think it 

was the ’08 Throne Speech — accountability transparency. 

Don’t have it, we don’t have it. 

 

There are no answers. People dance around. They put out 

reviews. They commission reports that they do nothing with. 

Frankly we don’t see them. And today the minister was asked 

about another report, the out-of-province funding. He didn’t 

have an answer. He had three different answers about what 

report it could be, so we maybe have three reports. I’m not sure. 

I don’t think he’s actually sure. 

 

But the ability or the possibility of hiding behind a report on 

every issue doesn’t actually fix anything. And for a government 

who thought they should fix everything . . . When they were in 

opposition, they did nothing but promise everything to 

everybody and bragged that they could deliver. Then they get 

into government and get a huge, huge treasury of money and 

acted giddy that they were going to be able to give everything 

to everybody that they promised. 

 

The Minister of Finance . . . someone came into my office and 

told me he was going around saying, we have gobs of money, 

gobs of money. Like, that’s the Minister of Finance. I mean, 

that’s a bit odd. So people in the province thought things were 

pretty good. And when you start giving people everything, of 

course they think things are good. Now things are not good and 

the chickens have come to roost. 

 

We have to look at what we’ve got here and it is not good. It is 

a financial meltdown. There are people who are having money 

taken away from their programs, money that’s been given to 

them already. And I’m not talking about the children’s hospital, 

the academic health sciences, St. Mary School, Station 20. I’m 

talking about small programs that are flying under the radar, 

that people are saying, I had the money; now it’s been taken 

away. 

 

And it’s interesting that those four projects that I mentioned, 

which are fairly large projects, are all happening in Saskatoon: 

Station 20 in Saskatoon, St. Mary School in Saskatoon, 

academic health sciences in Saskatoon, and children’s hospital 

in Saskatoon. Nothing from the Sask Party MLAs when those 

things are cut. I don’t see any commitment to the people in 

Saskatoon. Nothing. They don’t even speak. They don’t even 

speak up. 

 

One of the members over there, the children’s hospital is 

apparently his, not that it mattered that it was announced in the 

’80s and followed up with money from us in the ’90s, and in 

2007 and ’05 and all the dates that we had to show the progress 

of this concept. It didn’t matter. He was taking ownership of it. 

Has he said anything now when the money’s been taken away? 

No. Haven’t heard a word in Saskatoon, haven’t heard a word 

about St. Mary School except from, naturally, the people that 

are going to be serviced by it who are very, very disappointed. 

Somehow or other the enhancements to St. Mary School were 

supposed to make up for the loss of Station 20 programs. Now 

you’re taking away the programs from St. Mary’s too. 

 

[16:15] 

 

So the people in Saskatoon and that area, inner-city area that 

have huge, huge health disparities, they get nothing. They get 

nothing. They’re another group of people standing in the mirror 

looking at the Sask Party going, what about me? I didn’t get 

anything from the boom. 

 

So it doesn’t matter if you think things were wonderful in the 

last two years. It didn’t happen to those people that are standing 

in the mirror of the Sask Party. They didn’t get it. They didn’t 

get the boom. They didn’t get the benefit and they still don’t get 

anything. And when the members opposite go on and on after 

two years in government, when they talk about what we did for 

16 years, people are tired of that. That is over. They can no 

longer stand behind that lame answer and lame heckle, frankly. 

People aren’t interested in that anymore. They’re interested in 

what you did for two years. What did you do for the last two 

years? And frankly, not much. 

 

The Throne Speech looks back and talks about things that were 

done. No vision to move forward. If you’re riding a bike you’re 

probably out of gas, which is definitely what it looks like, and 

you better ride fast because there’s snapping alligators coming 

at you, and those snapping alligators are at your heels because 

you can’t manage the finances. And the people of Saskatchewan 

are the ones that will suffer because you are inadequate. The 

government has not got the financial knowledge or experience 

to lead in this province. And they’ve shown it. They’ve shown 

it. We’ve got the deficit. That is the report card on this 

government’s ability to manage the finances of this province. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will not be supporting the Throne 

Speech. And I will be supporting the amendment. Thank you 

very much. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Sutherland. 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today very 

interested in entering this Throne Speech debate. I would first, 

of course, like to welcome the member from Riversdale. This 

will be her first session after she was elected, and I thought I 



October 28, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3311 

would do two welcomes, but do beauty before age. And so of 

course, welcome to the member from Regina Douglas Park. 

 

My father was very politically active, and I remember listening 

to some political discussions in my home where I grew up, and 

I remember his name coming up now and then. So I’m trying to 

remember, I think it was . . . well in 1982 I had my first-born, 

so it was before — I’m dating myself, but I suppose I’m also 

dating him — been a while. 

 

I would like to talk about my constituency a bit, and first of all I 

would like to thank my CAs, Danielle Velazquez and Judy 

Peddle. Danielle is my full-time CA; Judy helps out. And 

Danielle, if it wasn’t for her, I really would probably lose my 

mind. I’d also like to thank my soulmate, Gary, and of course 

the constituents whom I represent. 

 

This year Sutherland celebrated their 100th birthday. So I was 

very fortunate to go to this event which was held outside on a 

beautiful day, and I’d just like to share some history about 

Sutherland. The village of Sutherland was incorporated on 

August 30, 1909. And when it became a town, it was 1912 

when they reached the population of 1,000. 

 

Sutherland was named after William Charles Sutherland, an 

MLA and the second Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan. He was elected to the first Legislative Assembly 

in the newly formed province of Saskatchewan on December 

13, 1905. His grandson came to the celebrations — his name is 

Ian Sutherland — and brought greetings as well. 

 

Sutherland of course is a railway town and grew because of its 

attachment to the CPR [Canadian Pacific Railway] railway. 

There was a streetcar that ran from 8th Street in Saskatoon to 

now what’s known as 108th Street in Sutherland. The Shore 

Hotel was then located at Central Avenue and 108th Street, also 

known as Stephenson’s Corner. The residents of Sutherland 

rallied for streetcar shelters. They felt that the hotel was not a 

suitable location for women and children to wait, especially 

during the cold winter months. 

 

An interesting fact also is that at that location in 2006, while 

excavating the parking lot, a 25- to 35-year old woman was 

found stuffed in a barrel and well, I guess you don’t jump into a 

barrel and throw yourself down a well, so it’s obviously a 

murder and the clothing analysis dates the murder to have taken 

place between 1910 and 1920. What’s also very interesting is I 

think it was for the first time in the history of the Saskatoon 

Police Service that they used Dr. Ernie Walker to do some 

forensic anthropology work and actually take the skull and 

make a face out of it which was shown on a cable TV network 

as one of the forensic criminal forensic shows. 

 

As you all know, Sutherland residents often refer to themselves 

as being from Sutherland. The small town feel still exists. The 

character of the town of Sutherland continues as does the sense 

of identification. 

 

Another event that took place in Sutherland this year is the 50th 

anniversary of the Ukrainian Parish of the Dormition of the 

Most Holy Mother of God. It was very interesting at the 100th 

celebration and at the 50th Ukrainian celebration, there was a 

lady, her name is Mrs. Husky, she was born and raised in 

Sutherland and she still lives there today by herself, takes care 

of herself, and she’s 98 years old. So that’s quite a life. She 

would have seen some changes. 

 

At the Ukrainian celebration for this church, I spoke and 

brought greetings from the province of Saskatchewan. I made 

mention of the Holodomor legislation. And what’s very, very 

interesting was the pain in people’s eyes and in their posture 

because these are all Ukrainian descendants or have come from 

the Ukraine themselves and that travesty is still very apparent in 

the Ukrainian community. 

 

In the Throne Speech, health care was definitely highlighted. 

And in Saskatoon Sutherland constituency, I have the Royal 

University Hospital, university campus, Cancer Clinic, and 

several large, long-term care nursing homes. I recognize that 

there are issues in health care. And those issues involve surgical 

wait-lists, long-term care bed shortage, addiction services 

fractured and non-functional, staffing issues. Our Minister of 

Health has been handed some big problems. 

 

And the opposition may say that it’s been two years and these 

are our problems. However, this is not true. These problems did 

not start in the last two years, Mr. Speaker. And I would like to 

identify an argument that the opposition used on our Finance 

minister regarding potash. They say, how could you not predict 

the potash price? All the indicators were there. It was an 

uncertain predictability. And the prediction was lowballed as 

much as necessary, given the information at the time. The 

opposition says no, we should have known, the Finance 

minister should have known. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, 16 years ago, a certain percentage of 

Saskatchewan’s population was such that in the year 2000-plus 

we would need more long-term care beds; we would need 

bigger hospitals. So let’s turn that around and use their 

argument against them. They had certain predictability. They 

knew the exact age of people. They knew the exact population, 

so they could easily have predicted the health care needs down 

the road. 

 

With potash there was no predictability. You can’t predict 

behaviour. You can’t predict a volatile market. So, you know, 

the unfairness, the whole logical argument just is silly. But 

given the way they think sometimes, I’m guessing that maybe 

the NDP thought that the entire population of Saskatchewan 

would move with the member from Douglas Park over to 

Calgary, Mr. Speaker. Then we wouldn’t need any long-term 

beds. 

 

I would like to say — and this is a fact — that our Health 

minister, our health care plan is the right way to go and it is 

moving forward. Patient First Review was done, and for the 

first time patients were made as the centre of the investigation. 

Our patients deserve the best care, Mr. Speaker, and that’s what 

our government and our Health minister intends to do. And we 

will support a publicly funded, publicly administered health 

care system with no queue jumping. 

 

I’d like to quote a man that I admire very much, General Colin 

Powell, and what he says in lesson 3 of his leadership 

presentation: 

 



3312 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2009 

Don’t be buffaloed by experts and elites. Experts often 

possess more data than judgment. Elites can become so 

inbred that they produce haemophiliacs who bleed to death 

as soon as they are nicked by the real world. 

 

We are looking at a holistic approach to addictions. For 16 

years it’s been neglected. In the opposition’s tenure it was 

fractured so that treatment is under one department, HIV 

[human immunodeficiency virus] strategy is under a different 

department, and addiction services is under a different 

department. All of those things have to work together, Mr. 

Speaker. They all need to be addressed. 

 

And I’ll explain why because the opposition really doesn’t get 

it. We cannot just treat the HIV issue because we will save 

people from HIV, but they’ll die of their addiction. We need to 

do both, and that is our intention. And that is a solid, correct, 

right way to go. 

 

I think the opposition would rather that people overdose and 

die. That way, they didn’t die of HIV, but they overdosed and 

died of their addiction. Is that acceptable to the Health critic? Is 

that what she wants? No HIV deaths — we’ll only have 

overdoses, and they don’t count. Well that’s just not acceptable. 

 

So we’re going to have a drugs 101 class, and maybe the 

opposition will understand. 

 

Drugs come, as far as being used on the street, in two areas. 

One is a stimulant, one is a depressant. The drugs that can be 

injected into the veins of a person’s body have to be 

water-soluble. The drugs of choice in Saskatchewan are 

cocaine, which is a stimulant; methylphenidate, which is a 

pharmaceutical and a stimulant; and the opioids, morphine, 

hydromorphone. 

 

[16:30] 

 

So what we know is that people get addicted and they use these 

chemicals and they inject them. And how they inject them . . . 

Let’s talk about cocaine, cocaine hydrochloride. It’s a powder, 

it’s water-soluble, it’s what you inject. So they take cocaine, 

they dissolve it in water, they draw it up into a syringe, and they 

inject into their vein. What they also do is they draw up more 

water after the injection. It’s called a wash. And so they get 

more chemical into their veins. 

 

Sometimes, when people are really stoned and sitting around 

using cocaine, I will let my friend use the syringe I just used so 

that person, my friend, can do the wash. So what that means is 

my blood was in the barrel of that syringe, and I’m giving it to 

my friend so he can get the residual cocaine and inject it in 

himself. 

 

The only way to treat that is by education. The only way to 

educate people is to spend time with them and talk to them. And 

that’s what’s lacking in this program, and that’s what we’re 

going to fix. 

 

So let’s talk about crack cocaine. Crack cocaine is cocaine base. 

It’s not water soluble. How you make crack cocaine which is 

smoked — it can’t be injected — is to dissolve cocaine 

hydrochloride in water, heat it, and add baking soda. The 

cocaine molecules bind to the base, it turns into a rock, and you 

smoke it. When you smoke it, Mr. Speaker, it has to be held in a 

steel wool because it’s like mercury. Crack will run away from 

the flame. And it’s more pure than cocaine hydrochloride on the 

street but it doesn’t last as long. You’re smoking more often, 

and people become more violent. 

 

So there is a hypothesis that maybe we should encourage 

people, encourage addicts, rather than injecting cocaine to 

smoke cocaine and then we won’t have to worry as much about 

HIV. They’ve tried it in other provinces. They were providing 

addicts with what’s called a crack kit, a pipe to smoke it with 

and butane lighters — you need a big flame — and what’s 

happened is their violent crimes have increased, and their 

violent crimes have increased as a direct result of more crack 

addicts doing more crime to get more drug. That’s not a 

solution, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The other things that . . . Well let’s talk about methylphenidate. 

Methylphenidate is a stimulant. It’s a pharmaceutical and it’s 

otherwise known as Ritalin and that is used to treat ADHD 

[attention deficit hyperactivity disorder]. And people say well, 

oh, you’re drugging kids. And no, you’re not drugging kids. 

How it works is ADHD is a disorder where the frontal lobe of 

the brain is slow so it doesn’t pick up the stimuli as the child is 

looking in their surroundings — a noisy classroom. In here 

where you got all this stuff going on and you can’t pay 

attention. So some become hyper; some don’t, but it’s attention 

deficit disorder. What the Ritalin does, which is an oral 

medication — or methylphenidate which is the chemical name 

— is it speeds up the frontal lobe of the brain so that the child 

can then sort out the stimuli and keep up with what’s going on. 

So it doesn’t make the child stoned and relax. What it does is 

allow the child to react to the stimuli that he chooses to because 

the frontal lobe of their brain is finally working. 

 

Now that drug is highly used on the street. It’s crushed; it’s 

dissolved and injected. It acts like cocaine when you inject it 

because it’s a stimulant, and so a lot of people were getting 

Ritalin prescriptions falsely. And unfortunately some physicians 

wrote, liberally, prescriptions for Ritalin. And what would 

happen is the drug dealers would have, you know, a certain 

amount of people who would sell their scrips to them every 

month because it’s prescribed by the month. 

 

So what our government did, what this Health minister did, was 

within six months of us taking office, he added Concerta to the 

formulary. And Concerta is methylphenidate in a pill form that 

cannot be crushed, dissolved, and injected. So in other words, 

what we did is we lessened access to a pharmaceutical which is 

abused on the street. 

 

These are the kind of real solutions that will positively affect 

people. We’re not leaving anybody behind. We’re not hurting 

any HIV strategy. We are putting some common sense into this 

place. I will be supporting our Throne Speech and proudly so, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways, the 

member from Rosetown-Elrose. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s a pleasure to be joining in this debate, Mr. 



October 28, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3313 

Speaker. I have some people that I also, as several of the 

members have done previously, would like to acknowledge. 

Several of the members have said it more eloquently than I can, 

the toll being in politics takes on your family. And I want to 

acknowledge my family: my wife Bonnie, my mother Elizabeth 

Reiter in Unity, my sister Laura and her husband Eldon Schwab 

in Wilkie, and my brother Ken and his wife Debbie and my 

nephews Jeremy and Justin in Lloydminster. They’re great kids. 

By some quirk of fate, somehow they do have one flaw. 

They’ve become Edmonton Eskimo fans, Mr. Speaker. But I’m 

working on that. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, before I get into talking about the 

Throne Speech. I should just apologize and tell the story of 

what happened to me this morning. I know I don’t look 

particularly at my best, a little bit dishevelled. When I got . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Mr. Speaker, I have the most 

agreeable colleagues. They’re just fantastic that way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, true story, when I woke up this morning . . . I’m 

staying at a hotel downtown, at the Ramada, a beautiful hotel. 

It’s great. The staff are excellent. My room’s very nice. The 

towels are so thick and fluffy I can hardly get my suitcase 

closed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was in the shower this morning and . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 

are yelling, more, more, but I have to keep this within the 

realms of good taste. I was in the shower this morning and the 

power went out. The power went out. Everything went pitch 

black. Now years ago I was in a photography club and there 

was this test they did in a darkroom where if you couldn’t see 

your hand in front of your eyes . . . It really was like that. It was 

that dark in the hotel. So trying to get dressed in the dark, Mr. 

Speaker, trying to put cufflinks in in the dark, and trying to tie 

your tie by the light of your BlackBerry . . . So, Mr. Speaker, I 

didn’t shave very well by the light of my BlackBerry, so that’s 

why I look as bad as I do today. For those people out there in 

TV land, typically I look a lot more like Brad Pitt than I do this 

morning. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to acknowledge my constituency 

assistant Kathie Parry at home in Rosetown. I don’t know 

whether she’s watching right now or not, but does a lot of good 

work for me there, works hard on behalf of our constituency. 

The staff in the office here, the Minister of Highways office, 

Doug Line, Scott Simpkins, Ashley Anderson, and Karalee 

Croissant also do wonderful work, are always there for me. I 

appreciate that very much. And of course I’d be remiss if I 

didn’t mention actually the constituents of Rosetown-Elrose 

themselves who have given me this just incredible privilege, 

and I’m so honoured to serve in this legislature, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Also as many of our members have done, I would also like to 

welcome the new members to this Assembly, the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. Now I haven’t had the opportunity to 

meet her yet or to have a chat, and I look forward to that 

happening. As a rookie myself I don’t think it would be 

appropriate to offer a lot of advice. All I can come back to is 

what my grandmother told me years ago, is always be careful of 

the company you keep. But I see from her sitting on that side 

I’m already too late with that advice, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I’d also like to of course welcome the member from 

Regina Douglas Park who has been in the Assembly for many 

years previous to this. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud of what this government has done 

in the short few months that we’ve been in government. I 

believe from talking to my constituents and to people around 

this province that this government is tremendously popular. 

People appreciate the hard work that my colleagues have been 

doing. In particular I have to mention my boss, the Premier, 

who does just an incredible job for us and who is so popular 

himself personally and deservedly so. In fact, I have to tell you 

a story about that, Mr. Speaker. This is a true story actually. 

Last winter . . . This one’s serious. Pipe down. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last winter, last winter was a very difficult time 

for me and for my family. My father passed away after a brief 

period of illness and, as you can imagine, it was very difficult 

on all of us, particularly my mother. And at that time the 

Premier . . . When my dad had passed away, the Premier had 

phoned my cellphone and had left a message. I’d missed it. I 

didn’t answer it. And it was an extremely nice message and 

personal, so I won’t get into that. But my mother was feeling 

particularly down and I thought this would cheer her up, so I 

played the message for her and it did, and it was emotional for 

her. 

 

Anyway when that was done, my mom who in our family . . . 

My dad was always the one that was more the practical joker 

than my mom, but she has a little bit of that in her too and she 

said, could you do me a favour? I said, anything, mom. She 

said, the next time you see the Premier could you tell him, 

please, tell him from me that he is my favourite politician ever. 

Yes. So instinctively I said, of course, mom. And then I got 

thinking. I said, mom, you understand that that was before and 

now I’m in politics. I’m a politician too, so I’ll tell him that you 

said that he’s your second favourite politician. And my mom 

kind of smiled and said, no, but if it makes you feel better you 

can tell him he’s one of my top two. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m so proud of how this government is moving 

forward and how it’s responded to the challenges and the 

expectations of Saskatchewan people. The people of 

Saskatchewan told us that they wanted a health care system 

where people would have proper nursing care, and they wanted 

a government that was committed to meeting this need. They 

wanted a government that wasn’t afraid to have ambitious goals 

and also the credibility to deliver on its promises. 

 

When we set a target of 800 nurses, members across the aisle 

were skeptical, Mr. Speaker. They didn’t believe we could 

reach this target. They were continuing to see Saskatchewan as 

a have-not province, doomed forever to live in and out of 

equalization, dependent on other provinces to set the economic 

agenda for our country. 

 

Fortunately, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan had more 

faith than the members opposite. They believe in this province 

as a place to work, live, and raise their families. The population 

of Saskatchewan has now risen at a rate not seen since the ’50s. 

Today, over 16,000 new people call this province home. 

Among these people are some of the 560 registered nurses that 

are now providing health care in communities right across our 



3314 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2009 

province. 

 

I’m proud, Mr. Speaker, of how our government took action 

and provided property tax relief to taxpayers right across this 

province. The members across the aisle were skeptical again. 

For years the people of Saskatchewan were told that someday 

their government would respond to the calls for lower education 

tax. Well, Mr. Speaker, this government answered that call. In 

just two years our government provided the largest reduction in 

education portion of property taxes in this province’s history. 

 

In 2008 the total education property tax paid was $752 million 

after the education property tax credit. In 2009 the total 

education property tax is estimated to be 649. Under the new 

system, Mr. Speaker, education mill rates will be cut and 

capped for the three major property classes of residential, 

commercial, and agriculture. While doing that, this government 

is increasing funding to school divisions by over $240 million 

to ensure the best education for our students. 

 

With this budget, our government is now funding 63 per cent of 

the operating costs of K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12], up 

from 51 per cent last year. It provides savings to the majority of 

property owners while also ensuring fairness across the 

province. Businesses can now invest with confidence in 

Saskatchewan knowing that mill rates are now capped, adding 

certainty to our investment climate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was there for two consecutive SARM 

conventions back a few years ago when the then premier of the 

province, the former leader of the NDP government, spoke to 

the delegates at SARM. And what did he do for two 

consecutive years, Mr. Premier? He told the delegates that the 

status quo was not on. I was there, Mr. Speaker. My friend 

Dave Marit, the president of SARM was there. And what 

happened, Mr. Speaker? Nothing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Agriculture minister very ably mentioned this 

earlier today in his address, and I just think it bears repeating, 

that the NDP made the promise. They didn’t deliver. Mr. 

Speaker, I think the Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and 

Policing will be very pleased to hear me say, they just didn’t get 

around to it. 

 

On debt reduction, Mr. Speaker, I’m proud that when the 

funding was available, our government chose to invest in the 

future by paying down a significant portion of the province’s 

debt. We’ve reduced the government’s debt by $2.7 billion or 

nearly 40 per cent. We had the largest income tax cut in the 

history of our province. Basic personal exemption and the 

spousal exemption were each increased. Mr. Speaker, there is 

now 80,000 low-income taxpayers that are off the tax rolls 

altogether. And the list can go on and on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I also want to highlight for the members what’s happening 

within the Ministry of Highways and Infrastructure. Before I 

get into that, all the good work that’s going on, and I’d be 

remiss if I didn’t mention my predecessor, the member from 

Cypress Hills, who laid the groundwork for so many of the 

good things that are happening, happening now. 

 

I want to read something from, I believe it was yesterday or the 

day before, from Hansard, that the member from Regina 

Northeast who’s the Highways critic, and who’s . . . Actually, 

you know, it’s funny on the sort of the partisan politics that 

sometimes goes on in this building. You can’t help but have 

feelings towards members opposite — sometimes strong, 

sometimes not so much. There’s members there that I’m a little 

bit fond of, and there’s a number that I’m not. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina Northeast is one 

that I can’t help but feel, he actually — and I mean this 

sincerely — he’s a very nice man. He is. He’s less grumpy than 

most over there, and you know, Mr. Speaker, he actually is a 

very nice man. He’s just maybe a bit misguided and he votes 

funny. But other than that, Mr. Speaker, I enjoy him very much. 

 

Now speaking of the voting funny part and being a bit 

misguided, I was listening intently to his speech the other night, 

and I have to quote a couple of things from the speech. It 

started, Mr. Speaker, with the . . . He mentions, and I quote: 

 

I had the opportunity to travel through Saskatchewan a fair 

amount with my colleague from Regina Walsh Acres as 

part of our MLA summer tour. We travelled through five 

or six, I think it was about six, constituencies in the 

province . . . 

 

Now those five or six constituencies, Mr. Speaker, I’m glad to 

hear they did that. And I’m assuming that, unlike when they 

were in government, I think it wasn’t just the constituencies in 

Regina, if I understand that right. It would be out in rural 

Saskatchewan, which I think is great.  

 

He went on to say, “. . . Mr. Speaker, it was a bit of an eye 

opener because I soon discovered that there are a lot of miles 

and roads in this province that are in need of much attention.” It 

gets better: “. . . Mr. Speaker, I know that there’s a number of 

roads that are in a sad state of repair.” That’s great. You see the 

pattern building here. I’m glad to see that they’ve noticed that. 

 

I continue to quote, Mr. Speaker, and he says, “But what’s 

scary, Mr. Speaker, is a number of these roads that are in a sad 

state of repair today have been for some time . . .” 

 

And then my favourite quote, Mr. Speaker, is: 

 

There’s been a number of instances where they just 

couldn’t conceive why their particular road had been left 

out. It had been left out for a while. It’s not just something 

that happened in the last year or two, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

been in need of repair for a number of years . . . 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I couldn’t help but get a kick out of that 

because, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if he checked or talked to 

his colleagues, but this government’s only been in power for 

two years. Those roads that the members opposite are 

continually complaining about didn’t just get in the horrible 

state of affairs that they are overnight. It didn’t all happen in the 

last two years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, transportation is a priority of this government. We 

inherited a massive infrastructure deficit from the former 

government. This government has invested the largest amounts 

of infrastructure funding in history in the last two years. We’ve 

been busy, Mr. Speaker, in all areas of infrastructure 



October 28, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3315 

replacement. We’ve been replacing and upgrading bridges and 

culverts. The ministry has allocated over $44 million to fund 

our bridges and culverts program in the past year. That includes 

$10 million to begin work on the St. Louis bridge, that’s part of 

the government’s investment in new transportation 

infrastructure. 

 

We have also upgraded our primary highways. In fact, this year 

we added an additional 5,000 kilometres of nine-month primary 

weight highways, expanding the length of the system by 50 per 

cent. 

 

We have let the public know our plans, Mr. Speaker. On 

December 3, 2008, we released our five-year rolling plan. 

We’ve committed to this plan and to date have completed over 

3,200 kilometres of road repair in our first two years of 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, talking about the amount of road work that’s been 

done around the province this past summer, I had the good 

fortune to travel all over the province. I spoke to a number of 

events, and in fact once in a while took time to have some fun. 

And I was at a golf tournament and was the guest speaker 

afterwards. And a couple of people, one of whom I knew, 

actually showed up late for the golf tournament. I razzed him a 

little bit about it, and they told me that the reason they were 

late, ironically, was because they got held up by road 

construction. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, after supper when I was speaking, I felt it was 

only appropriate, as Minister of Highways I felt the first thing I 

should do is I mentioned the two people and what had 

happened. And I apologized to them because, Mr. Speaker, I 

did feel like we were responsible for that. I told them I was 

sorry because I had no doubt that that never would have 

happened under an NDP government. 

 

We’ve also moved forward on other policy initiatives such as a 

memorandum of understanding that I signed earlier this month 

with Alberta to harmonize policies and regulations for 

commercial vehicle operations between our two provinces. One 

of the important aspects of our relationship with Alberta is that 

economic activity that goes on in one province doesn’t 

necessarily stop at the border. The people of Lloydminster and 

their outstanding, young MLA, for example, can tell you about 

the extent to which our economies are intertwined. 

 

One of the things we share is a reliance on transportation. Here 

in Saskatchewan virtually all sectors of our economy rely on 

low-cost, safe, and efficient access to transportation systems 

and services. In fact about three-quarters of our provincial gross 

domestic product is derived from exports. 

 

In our province, we’ve made record investments in our highway 

system — $1.2 billion since we came to office, Mr. Speaker. 

We’ve also made new resources available to our urban and our 

rural municipal partners to help them address their own 

infrastructure needs. Everyone understands the importance of 

building and maintaining highways, but the regulatory and 

policy framework under which the transportation system 

operates is often overlooked. Regulation and policy have the 

potential to either encourage or hinder access to efficient and 

safe transportation services. 

I was so pleased that Minister Luke Ouellette of Alberta and 

myself, as minister for this great province, entered into a 

memorandum of understanding that will reduce barriers to trade 

in commercial trucking operations between our two provinces. 

Through this memorandum of understanding, we will work to 

harmonize weights and permit conditions for a variety of 

vehicle configurations, including oversized vehicles. 

 

For example, the turnpike double is a vehicle configuration that 

involves a power unit pulling two trailers. This configuration 

offers both cost savings and environmental benefits, as fewer 

trips are required to transport freight. In Alberta and 

Saskatchewan, turnpike doubles can operate with a permit, but 

permit conditions can vary between the two provinces. 

Harmonization of permit requirements will simplify this. 

 

Another area that was addressed in the MOU [memorandum of 

understanding] is greater co-operation in the enforcement of 

commercial vehicle regulation. Greater co-operation between 

our two provinces and their compliance officers has the 

potential to enhance efficiency without impacting safety on our 

highway system. Examples of areas we’ll be focusing on 

include developing a scheduling system for weigh scales near 

the border to ensure both provinces are not stopping the same 

vehicles. 

 

We’re going to work at developing additional joint inspection 

facilities, building on the success of the existing facility at 

Macklin. We’re going to look at extending Alberta’s partner in 

compliance program to Saskatchewan. Through this program, 

carriers with exemplary performance records can bypass scales 

through a pre-clearance system. We’re also going to look at 

developing a protocol for joint investigations where 

cross-border co-operation would assist in identifying carriers 

whose non-compliance poses a safety risk. 

 

So what does this mean for the people of Saskatchewan? It 

means goods will move more efficiently across the border, 

making them more affordable. And that will help both 

economies. I’d like to add that this MOU is a direct result of our 

respective premiers’ stated intention to improve interprovincial 

co-operation and coordination. 

 

When our government came to office, one of our stated goals 

was to make Saskatchewan a leader in the new West, to be an 

active participant in Western Canadian initiatives that expand 

economic opportunity, improve public services, and enhance 

security for Saskatchewan people. The MOU with Alberta is a 

concrete example of that. In fact the MOU is a direct outcome 

from the first joint Alberta-Saskatchewan cabinet meeting in the 

fall of 2008. 

 

Mr. Speaker, so many exciting things are happening in 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I want the members opposite to 

know that things are going well in this province, and this 

Throne Speech will continue that. Our government will 

continue to move forward and deliver to the people of this 

province. We will move forward with such things as our Patient 

First Review recommendations, where we’ll make sure health 

care in Saskatchewan functions in a cohesive system. Over the 

next four years, our government will reduce surgical wait times 

in Saskatchewan to no longer than three months. For 16 years 

there was no plan to address health care issues such as 



3316 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2009 

long-term care centres for our seniors 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re focusing on many areas — areas such as 

energy where we’ll be looking at all energy options to develop 

an advanced and reliable power system that can accommodate 

future growth in this province, Mr. Speaker. There will be a 

significant commitment to increased wind power. Areas like the 

environment where we will move forward with plans for a new 

environmental regulatory framework.  

 

Areas like education, Mr. Speaker. This government takes 

education very seriously. We’re ensuring that there are the 

schools and resources out there for our students to learn. That’s 

why we’re upgrading and building our infrastructure. We’ve 

invested nearly $300 million in a two-year period. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re moving forward to exceed our goals. Early 

learning and child care spaces by the end of March 2010 will 

total 11,400. Mr. Speaker, we’ll move forward on our continued 

commitment of additional police officers. 

 

And let’s not forget about agriculture, Mr. Speaker. Under the 

great guidance of our minister, we’re moving the AgriStability 

program back to this province, Mr. Speaker. Families will 

benefit from the farm and ranch water infrastructure program. 

It’ll provide $53 million over four years for wells, dugouts, and 

pipelines. We’ve improved the crop insurance program. Mr. 

Speaker, there’s so many great things happening in agriculture 

and all across this great province. I’m so proud to be here. 

 

I just want to close by again saying how proud I am to be a part 

of this government and how we are finally and actually moving 

this province forward. Mr. Speaker, again I’m so proud to be 

the MLA for the Rosetown-Elrose constituency. I thank the 

good people there for the privilege of serving in this legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will not be voting for the amendment, and I will 

very, very proudly be supporting the original motion supporting 

this Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — Being the hour of adjournment, this Assembly 

will stand adjourned until tomorrow morning at 10 a.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3285 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3285 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3285 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3285 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3285 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3285 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3285 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3286 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3286 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Women’s Cancer Awareness Month 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3286 

 Wearing Pink for Breast Cancer 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3286 

 Affordable Housing Needed in The Battlefords 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3286 

 Municipal Election Day 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3287 

 Canadian Fire Chief of the Year 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3287 

 Meadow Lake Wins Western Canada Volleyball Tournament 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3287 

 Apprenticeship Awards 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3287 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 H1N1 Pandemic Planning 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3288 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3288 

 Reimbursement for Travel for Medical Services 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3289 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3289 

 Management of Provincial Economy 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3290 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3290 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3291 

 Vehicle Insurance Rates 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3292 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3292 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Wind Power Production 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3293 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3293 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

REINSTATEMENT OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 80 — The Construction Industry Labour Relations Amendment Act, 2009 

  Norris ................................................................................................................................................................................................. 3294 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3294 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3295 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3298 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3301 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3304 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3307 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3310 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3312 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium Development 

Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

 Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

Government House Leader 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. James Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Capital Commission 


