




















































Hansard: October 21, 2009


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 1A  WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 21, 2009, 2 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3123 

 October 21, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 14:00.] 

 

The Speaker: — Members of the Legislative Assembly, ladies 

and gentlemen, please remain standing for the arrival of the 

Vice Regal party. 

 

[His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the Chamber at 

14:00.] 

 

His Honour: — Please be seated. 

 

SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 

 

Mr. Speaker, members of the Legislative Assembly, honoured 

guests, people of Saskatchewan: 

 

It is my pleasure to welcome you to the Third Session of the 

Twenty-Sixth Legislature. 

 

INTRODUCTION 
 

Albert Einstein, a man who used his prodigious intellect to 

unlock the secrets of the universe, once made this simple but 

elegant observation: 

 

“Life is like riding a bicycle. To keep your balance, you must 

keep moving.” 

 

In 2009, our province has faced the challenge of a global 

economic recession. 

 

Saskatchewan has met this challenge and kept its balance 

because we kept moving – moving forward. 

 

In the past year, Saskatchewan’s population has grown faster 

than at any time since the early 1950s. 

 

Think about that. 

 

In a year where the headlines across Canada and throughout the 

world were all about recession and economic gloom, 

Saskatchewan grew by over 16,000 people – the equivalent of 

adding a new city the size of Yorkton. 

 

Saskatchewan continues to post the lowest unemployment rate 

in the country, while Saskatoon and Regina have the lowest 

unemployment among major Canadian cities. 

 

While Saskatchewan has felt the impact of the recession, today 

there are optimistic signs the recovery is slowly starting to take 

hold. 

 

In the September 2009 edition of its Provincial Outlook, the 

Royal Bank of Canada states the Canadian economy is ―poised 

to return onto a recovery track.‖ 

 

The report concludes next year’s economic recovery is expected 

to be widespread. 

 

All ten Canadian provinces are projected to expand in 2010, 

with western Canada leading the way. 

 

This report anticipates a growth rate of 3.6 per cent in 

Saskatchewan in 2010 and states: 

 

―….This would return the province (Saskatchewan) to the head 

of the pack in terms of provincial growth rates.” (RBC 

Provincial Outlook, September 2009, pg. 4) 

 

My government believes this level of performance is achievable 

and realistic, because of the industrious, resourceful and 

prudent nature of Saskatchewan people. 

 

My government has spent considerable effort in the past year 

maintaining and enhancing Saskatchewan’s economic 

advantage through lower property and income taxes, a massive 

reduction in the provincial debt, and a record investment in 

infrastructure. 

 

This record investment in infrastructure includes $1.2 billion to 

rebuild and repair over 3,200 kilometers of provincial highways 

over the past two years. 

 

DEBT REDUCTION 
 

Since taking office, my government has reduced the province’s 

debt by $2.7 billion, or nearly 40 per cent. 

 

In his 2009 Report ―Understanding the Finances of the 

Government,‖ the Provincial Auditor noted that as a result of 

debt reduction: ―A greater proportion of the Government’s 

revenue was spent providing services instead of paying interest 

charges.” (Provincial Auditor 2009 Report, Volume 2, page 1) 

 

However, this report also pointed to an inherent vulnerability in 

the Saskatchewan economy—a vulnerability that suggests the 

need to change the budgetary process. 

 

This spring, as the recession was taking its toll on government 

revenues all across Canada, my government presented its 

budget. 

 

This document contained a forecast for potash revenues of $1.9 

billion. 

 

The forecast was based on a review of past volume levels, 

recent sales and prices, and on the most up-to-date projections. 

 

This forecast was wrong. 

 

Steps will be taken to modify the budgetary process in the 

future to reduce the impact of wild fluctuations in natural 

resource revenues. 

 

KEEPING OUR BALANCE 
 

While Saskatchewan continues to move forward, my 

government has worked hard to maintain the proper balance 

between growth and ensuring that all Saskatchewan people 

enjoy the benefits of that growth. 

 

Housing and training allowances have been increased. 

 

My government has provided more daycare spaces and more 



3124 Saskatchewan Hansard October 21, 2009 

opportunities for persons with disabilities. 

 

We have increased assistance to low income seniors by 

doubling the Seniors Income Plan benefit and 80,000 low 

income individuals in our province no longer pay any income 

tax at all. 

 

Still, there is more to be done to keep Saskatchewan moving 

forward. 

 

HEALTH 
 

During this session, my government will focus much attention 

on improving our healthcare system. 

 

We will set specific goals and work to achieve those goals. 

 

Upon assuming office, my government was confronted with a 

serious shortage in the health care system. 

 

There were simply not enough nurses to provide the care 

needed for our sick and infirm. 

 

In response to this shortage, my government did what others 

had refused to do. It set a bold, new goal. 

 

That goal was to recruit 800 additional nurses within four years. 

 

Today, my government is pleased to report that we are well on 

our way to achieving this important goal. 

 

As of today, 560 more nurses are working in Saskatchewan than 

when my government assumed office. 

 

70 per cent of our goal has been achieved in less than two years. 

 

My government wishes to congratulate and thank the many 

people who have established new nursing careers throughout 

our province. 

 

The success of the nursing recruitment initiative shows there is 

power in setting bold goals. 

 

Now, it is time to set another ambitious goal in health care. 

 

For many years, there has been a surgical backlog in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

This has created unacceptably long wait times for 

Saskatchewan patients. 

 

My government recently received the final report of the Patient 

First Review, and during this session, we will outline our 

response to the recommendations of this report. 

 

As a result of the excellent work of Mr. Tony Dagnone, and in 

response to the unacceptable surgical backlog, my government 

has set a bold, new goal. 

 

Over the next four years, we will reduce surgical wait times in 

Saskatchewan to no longer than three months. 

 

The plan to achieve this goal will be outlined during this 

session. 

 

Saskatchewan has made significant progress in increasing the 

number of nurses working in our province, but the number of 

physicians in Saskatchewan remains a concern for the people of 

our province and our government. 

 

Saskatchewan has fewer family physicians than the national 

average, fewer specialists and retains fewer of its medical 

graduates. 

 

Our physician recruitment strategy is a partnership with 

regional health authorities, the Saskatchewan Medical 

Association and its physician members, the University of 

Saskatchewan’s College of Medicine and its students, the 

Saskatchewan College of Physicians and Surgeons and 

Saskatchewan communities. 

 

This recruitment strategy will increase the number of physicians 

working in the province and enhance access to health care for 

Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

The main focus of the strategy is to retain our province’s 

medical graduates and residents so the people of Saskatchewan 

benefit from the dollars we spend training doctors in our 

province. 

 

The shortage of long-term care spaces continues to be a concern 

for Saskatchewan seniors and their families. 

 

In recent weeks, the Legislative Secretary to the Minister of 

Health has traveled throughout the province, consulting with 

Saskatchewan people on improving care for seniors. 

 

The results of these talks will form the basis of a plan to 

improve access to long-term care for seniors. 

 

My government will also respond to concerns about the 

province’s needle exchange program. 

 

There is a need to balance harm reduction and improved health 

outcomes with broader concerns for public safety. 

 

Therefore, my government will introduce changes to limit the 

proliferation of needles handed out by needle exchange 

programs. 

 

Ultimately, this program cannot be allowed to function as a 

source of unlimited free needles. 

 

My government will tighten controls around both the numbers 

of needles exchanged and distributed. 

 

We will cap the number of needles given out at any one time, 

thus creating more frequent contact with health professionals, 

which in turn means more frequent opportunity for intervention 

and treatment. 

 

Our goal should not simply be safer drug use. 

 

Our goals should be to reduce drug use, to break the deadly 

cycle of addiction and to better assure the safety of all. 

 



October 21, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3125 

To that end, my government will fulfill its commitment to 

re-establish an independent provincial addictions agency and 

build on the work of the Ministry of Health, regional health 

authorities and their partners to strengthen the current system of 

prevention, education and treatment services. 

 

Tobacco use in Saskatchewan remains too high, particularly 

amongst our young people. 

 

My government has already taken several important steps to 

curb smoking and the harmful effects of second-hand smoke, 

including enacting a ban on smoking in the workplace. 

 

During this session, my government will take further steps to 

protect the health of Saskatchewan people by introducing new 

legislation and a comprehensive new strategy to continue the 

reduction of tobacco use in our province. 

 

Jurisdictions around the world are preparing for a second wave 

of H1N1 influenza. Saskatchewan is well prepared. 

 

Our government has been working and will continue to work 

with regional and local authorities along with First Nations and 

Métis leaders. 

 

Our goal is to ensure the health and safety of the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

EDUCATION 
 

My government recognizes that keeping Saskatchewan moving 

forward requires well-trained and highly educated people. 

 

We must prepare our children to meet the challenges of the 

future. 

 

There is still much truth in the time-honoured proverb: the only 

thing more expensive than education is ignorance. 

 

My government has significantly increased its share of direct 

funding to Saskatchewan schools – shifting the tax burden for 

education funding away from property taxpayers. 

 

My government is also committed to providing high quality 

schools for our students. 

 

To date, nearly $300 million has been invested by my 

government in pre-kindergarten to Grade 12 infrastructure – the 

largest amount ever invested in building and upgrading 

Saskatchewan schools in a two-year period. 

 

This commitment has moved forward a wide range of 

improvements - everything from maintenance and repairs to 

brand new schools. 

 

This funding has resulted in improvements to over 230 schools 

in communities in every part of Saskatchewan. 

 

My government is also moving Saskatchewan forward by 

exceeding its campaign commitment to the provision of early 

learning and childcare opportunities. 

 

In the current fiscal year, over $4 million has been provided for 

the development of 1,000 new licensed childcare spaces. 

 

By the end of March 2010, the number of funded childcare 

spaces will total 11,400. 

 

The quality of care provided to these young children is also 

improving. 

 

As part of a government-wide initiative, community-based 

organizations now have three per cent more funding to recruit 

and retain early childhood educators. 

 

An additional $1.2 million has been added to enhance their 

training. 

 

My government’s commitment to the education system extends 

beyond Grade 12. 

 

In the past two years, my government has made the largest 

investment ever in post-secondary infrastructure projects – over 

$150 million. 

 

More than $18 million was spent on student housing, including 

the first-ever SIAST student housing development at the 

Woodland Campus in Prince Albert and the first new residences 

built at the University of Saskatchewan in over 30 years. 

 

This is an area that had unfortunately suffered from 

considerable neglect in the past. 

 

No longer. 

 

Money is also being earmarked for student loan enhancements. 

The weekly amount students can receive has been increased for 

the first time since 1994. 

 

PUTTING VULNERABLE PEOPLE FIRST 
 

Over the past two years, my government has made significant 

investments towards protecting vulnerable children, foster 

families and supporting extended family caregivers. 

 

In the most recent budget, nearly $25 million was set aside to 

improve the child welfare system. 

 

In the upcoming year, my government will continue this work 

with a thorough review of The Child and Family Services Act 

and The Adoption Act. 

 

My government will also begin implementing a new electronic 

case management system, to provide better monitoring and 

protection of children and youth in its care. 

 

Roughly one year ago, my government announced the single 

largest investment in Saskatchewan history for supporting 

people with intellectual disabilities. 

 

It began as a four-year, $76.9 million initiative to eliminate a 

440-person waitlist for programs. 

 

By the end of this fiscal year, 264 people with intellectual 

disabilities will have received the help they require. 

 



3126 Saskatchewan Hansard October 21, 2009 

That’s 264 more people receiving the services they need to lead 

more fulfilling, independent lives. 

 

This is a clear example of Saskatchewan moving forward. 

 

My government takes considerable pride in being able to report 

this significant progress and thanks the many people who work 

in community-based organizations to improve the lives of 

Saskatchewan people with disabilities. 

 

Since coming to office, my government has also acted to 

address the shortage of low income housing in Saskatchewan. 

Over 500 low income units have opened in the past two years 

with over 500 more currently under construction and another 

600 in the development and planning stages. 

 

JUSTICE AND POLICING 
 

My government is proud of the considerable achievements in 

the last two years in making Saskatchewan a safer place. 

 

Crime rates are falling, but there is more work to do. 

 

This is why my government will continue moving forward 

toward our commitment of an additional 120 police officers. 

 

The past two years have seen the creation of an Internet Child 

Exploitation Unit and the Northern Drug Unit. 

 

The Combined Forces Strategic Unit has been strengthened. 

 

The officers in these units target organized crime activities. 

Their efforts have already led to several high profile arrests. 

 

We will continue working with our neighbouring provinces to 

crack down on the scourge of drug trafficking and other gang 

activities. 

 

My government will also introduce a number of laws that will 

improve safety and protect consumers. 

 

These laws include banning texting and hand-held cell phone 

usage while driving, new ticket sales legislation to protect those 

wishing to attend events and concerts, as well as preventing 

members of a profession from escaping disciplinary 

proceedings by resigning. 

 

AGRICULTURE 
 

My government is committed to moving forward by making 

support programs for farm and ranch families more timely, 

simple and reliable. 

 

To this end, my government is moving the administration of the 

AgriStability program to Melville and assuming from the 

federal government the responsibility for administering the 

program. 

 

Crop insurance has been improved with innovations like yield 

trending, yield cushioning and 100 per cent wildlife damage 

compensation. 

 

Farm and ranch families will also continue to benefit from the 

Agricultural Crown Land Sale Program, the Gopher Control 

Rebate Program and the Farm and Ranch Water Infrastructure 

Program, which is providing $53 million over four years for 

wells, dugouts and pipelines. 

 

My government has provided over $70 million in direct support 

to livestock producers through the Cattle and Hog Support 

Program. 

 

Most importantly, after years of governments talking about 

education property tax on farmland, my government has 

provided a long-term solution and the largest farmland property 

tax reduction in Saskatchewan history. 

 

FIRST NATIONS AND MÉTIS RELATIONS 

 

The coming year will see further work on developing guidelines 

covering Saskatchewan’s legal obligations under court rulings 

that outline the duty to consult. 

 

Saskatchewan can take considerable pride in becoming the first 

jurisdiction in Canada to implement Jordan’s Principle – to 

ensure First Nations children get the medical attention they 

need when they need it. 

 

My government will continue to focus on greater First Nations 

and Métis engagement in the economic prosperity of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Provincial government funding to the Saskatchewan Indian 

Institute of Technologies, the Gabriel Dumont Institute and 

other educational institutions will help ensure First Nations and 

Métis young people have the skills they need to enter 

Saskatchewan’s growing workforce. 

 

The Métis Nation of Saskatchewan has requested that 2010 be 

designated as the Year of the Métis in Saskatchewan. 

 

My government will recognize the unique history and culture of 

Métis people by honouring this request and by working with the 

Métis Nation and other organizations to honour the Trails of 

1885 celebrations in 2010. 

 

ENVIRONMENT 
 

In the coming months, my government will move forward with 

plans for a new environmental regulatory framework. 

 

The safety of the public and protection of Saskatchewan’s 

pristine beauty will remain its top priorities. 

 

However, there remains considerable room for eliminating 

duplication and delays within existing administrative processes. 

 

Saskatchewan’s vast resource wealth and ingenuity have 

become an international story. 

 

Later this year, Saskatchewan will be represented in 

Copenhagen at the United Nations Climate Change Conference. 

 

On this international stage, Saskatchewan will present its 

unique and practical plan to ensure carbon offsets or penalties 

imposed on heavy greenhouse gas emitters will stay in the 



October 21, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3127 

province. 

 

This money will be used to fund continuing research and 

development of emissions-reduction technologies. 

 

Saskatchewan will continue to move forward in its role as a 

world leader in carbon capture and storage through further 

progress on the large scale Boundary Dam clean coal project 

and the Saskatchewan-Montana clean coal and carbon capture 

initiative. 

 

Our most important natural resource is an abundant supply of 

safe, clean water. 

 

In this session, my government will be presenting a 

comprehensive water management plan. 

 

It will provide security of supply for residential and commercial 

uses, both now and in the future. 

 

ENERGY 
 

My government believes we need to look at all energy options – 

gas turbines, cogeneration, clean coal, wind, hydro, biomass, 

solar, import contracts and nuclear – to determine the best way 

to meet Saskatchewan’s future energy needs in the most 

affordable, reliable and environmentally-friendly manner. 

 

A robust, advanced and reliable power system that can 

accommodate future growth is essential to keep Saskatchewan 

moving forward. 

 

Over the past few months, Saskatchewan’s energy future has 

been the focus of considerable public discussion. 

 

This discussion has been timely and productive. 

 

The Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

recently completed the first phase of hearings on 

Saskatchewan’s energy future, with a second phase to take 

place early in the new year. 

 

Over the course of the next year, SaskPower will develop an 

electrical power generation strategy to meet our province’s 

future needs. 

 

This strategy will include a significant commitment to increased 

wind power. 

 

The past two years have also seen significant growth in the 

development of our oil and gas and mining sector. 

 

My government has and will continue to work diligently to 

provide regulatory and tax certainty. 

 

This will encourage major investment across Saskatchewan in 

coming years. 

 

In the next year, Innovation Saskatchewan will be fully 

implemented. 

 

My government’s goal is to be a leader in innovation with the 

most aggressive innovation agenda in Canada. 

MUNICIPAL AFFAIRS 
 

One must reach all the way back to 1913 to find a year when 

two new Saskatchewan cities were proclaimed in the same year. 

 

This year, it happened in the same week. 

 

My government is pleased to welcome Martensville and 

Meadow Lake as Saskatchewan’s newest cities. 

 

These two communities—like all others in our province— have 

benefited from my government’s historic commitment to 

increase municipal revenue sharing by tying those grants to the 

revenue received through the Provincial Sales Tax. 

 

As a result, Saskatchewan communities will have predictable 

funding, now and into the future. 

 

TOURISM, PARKS, CULTURE AND SPORT 
 

Our parks, our vibrant culture and our sport and recreational 

opportunities make Saskatchewan a great place to live. 

 

This year, more people than ever enjoyed Saskatchewan’s 

beautiful provincial parks. 

 

By the beginning of the 2010 camping season, my government 

will have added 600 electrified campsites, and we will continue 

to improve our provincial parks by electrifying more campsites. 

 

My government is in the final stages of creating the first new 

Provincial Cultural Policy in 30 years. This policy will build 

pride and enhance the distinct character of our unique 

Saskatchewan communities. 

 

We will also highlight Saskatchewan tourism, Saskatchewan 

business opportunities and Saskatchewan hospitality through 

our participation in the 2010 Vancouver Winter Olympics. 

 

Those attending the Olympics will see what Saskatchewan has 

to offer through our athletes, our participation in the Cultural 

Olympiad and a first-class Olympic pavilion that will showcase 

Saskatchewan to people from around the world. 

 

IMMIGRATION 

 

Saskatchewan has a long and rich history of welcoming new 

Canadians from every part of the world. 

 

Our province’s motto reflects this rich history – ―From Many 

Peoples, Strength.‖ 

 

Today we are writing a new chapter – attracting more new 

immigrants to Saskatchewan than at any time since the earliest 

days of our province’s settlement. 

 

Over the past year, Saskatchewan has welcomed nearly 8,000 

newcomers from other countries. 

 

These new Saskatchewan residents are making a strong 

contribution to our province’s economy. 

 

In this fiscal year, the Saskatchewan Immigrant Nominee 



3128 Saskatchewan Hansard October 21, 2009 

Program has set the goal of attracting 3,400 nominations. 

 

This represents a 100 per cent increase over the goal two years 

ago. 

 

This goal will be met by reducing processing times. Last year, 

those times were cut by 24 per cent, despite a 47 per cent 

increase in applications. 

 

My government applauds those who have worked hard to 

achieve this goal. 

 

We welcome these new Canadians to the best province in the 

best country in the world. 

 

CONCLUSION 
 

One of the reasons Canada is the best country in the world is 

because of those who are ever willing to defend her liberty and 

her safety. 

 

As Members of the Legislative Assembly were preparing to 

return for this session, over 20 Saskatchewan reservists were 

preparing for a tour of duty in Afghanistan. 

 

My government salutes these Saskatchewan heroes and all the 

brave men and women who serve in Canada’s armed forces. 

 

We pray for their safety and wish them Godspeed in their 

mission as they risk their lives for our security, for our freedom 

and for the war-torn and war-weary people of Afghanistan. 

 

In the past year, my government has honoured the courage and 

sacrifice of Saskatchewan’s military personnel by affixing 

tribute decals on all government vehicles and by creating the 

Scholarship of Honour. 

 

This scholarship is available to returning soldiers and to the 

spouse and children of permanently disabled or fallen soldiers. 

 

To date, 11 Scholarships of Honour have been awarded and 

more will be awarded in the coming year. 

 

During this session, the Public Accounts for the last fiscal year, 

together with the Estimates for the new year commencing April 

1, 2010, will be submitted to you. 

 

Saskatchewan poet Florence Scholer penned the following: 

 

I am an ageless, impatient land that makes of timid men heroes; 

I am the hopes and dreams and disappointments 

Of long-gone pioneers. 

I am history and heartache and happiness, 

And I welcome all who pause here. 

I am the past and the future of this great, good land. 

I am Saskatchewan. 

 

The residents of our province have much to be thankful for. 

 

We have been blessed by providence. 

 

Saskatchewan people are a patient people, because sometimes 

our blessings have come to us later than we may have hoped. 

This year, summer came late to Saskatchewan. 

 

Time and again, you heard people say how much they were 

enjoying the beautiful September weather, probably because 

they had waited so long for it to arrive. 

 

In the same way, Saskatchewan people seem to share a special 

appreciation for our great province’s new era of growth and 

opportunity, probably because they have waited so long for it to 

arrive. 

 

Saskatchewan is moving forward. 

 

To keep our balance, we must keep moving forward. 

 

That is the goal of my government, and that is the task ahead 

for all Members of this Assembly. 

 

We can do this. We will do this. 

 

God bless Saskatchewan. 

God bless Canada. 

And God save the Queen. 

 

The Speaker: — Ladies and gentlemen, I invite you to stand 

and join with me as I repeat the traditional prayer. And I’m 

going to invite to come and join me as well Elder Mike Pinay 

and Pastor Merv Switzer, a good friend of mine who will join 

me and offer prayers as well. So if they would come and join 

me at the table. Let us pray. 

 

Present us, O Lord, in all our doings with thy most gracious 

favour and further us with thy continual help, that in all our 

works, begun, continued, and ended in Thee, we may glorify 

thy holy name, and finally by Thy mercy attain everlasting life. 

Amen. 

 

I now call on Elder Pinay. 

 

Elder Pinay: — I’m very honoured to say a prayer on behalf of 

everyone here on behalf of all the people of this land and to 

each and every one of you that are going to be working in this 

House. 

 

[The Elder prayed in Cree.] 

 

I ask you O Creator, God, to bless this House and all the people 

that work in it so that we all benefit all the people that live on 

this land. And we give thanks for this beautiful day and also to 

give thanks that also our children, our grandchildren will also 

live in harmony here on Mother Earth. 

 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I call on Reverend Merv Switzer, retired 

pastor, good friend, to offer a prayer for the province. 

 

Rev. Switzer: — Dear Heavenly Father, we come before you 

today with thanksgiving. We are thankful that we live in a 

country that is free. We thank you for life and the privilege of 

sharing that life with people in this great province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 



October 21, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3129 

We come before you today with humility. We’re humbled by 

the lifestyle that we are afforded in this vast country and 

especially for the privilege of being part of this province with 

all of its potential of making a contribution, making a difference 

in our country of Canada, in the world. 

 

We sincerely ask you that you would give the members of this 

House, to the individuals chosen through our democratic 

process, that you would grant to them wisdom, wisdom to make 

decisions that would not only be right but also beneficial to the 

many that they represent, that they may be able to manage the 

resources placed in their hands in order to provide quality of life 

for all who live in this province. May they have the strength to 

make the hard decisions, the wisdom to make the quality 

decisions, and the fortitude to carry them out. Give them special 

grace to govern in a righteous manner. In the name of our Lord 

and Saviour, Jesus Christ. Amen. 

 

The Lord bless you and the Lord keep you; the Lord make His 

face shine upon you and be gracious to you; the Lord lift up His 

countenance upon you and give you peace. 

 

The Speaker: — Thank you Elder Pinay. Thank you Pastor 

Switzer. 

 

Please remain standing for the departure of Their Honours. 

 

[His Honour retired from the Chamber at 14:34.] 

 

The Speaker: — Please be seated. I recognize the Premier. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Pro Forma Bill 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

honour to move that a Bill respecting the Administration of 

Oaths of Office be now introduced and read the first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Hon. Premier that 

the said Bill be now introduced and read the first time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

Introduction of Pages 

 

The Speaker: — I wish to inform the Assembly that the Pages 

for this session will be Kristin Bend, Katie Colhoun, Crystal 

Gall, Chelsea Laskowski, Shaheen Lotun, and Delee 

McDougall. 

 

I ask members to welcome our Pages for this session. 

 

TABLING THE SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 

 

The Speaker: — I wish to inform the Assembly that in order to 

prevent mistakes I have obtained the copy of the speech of His 

Honour the Lieutenant Governor which I now lay on the Table. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Speech from the Throne 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. I move the 

following motion: 

 

That the speech of His Honour the Lieutenant Governor be 

taken into consideration on Thursday, October 22, 2009. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Premier: 

 

That the speech of His Honour the Lieutenant Governor be 

taken into consideration on Thursday, October 22, 2009. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I move 

that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — Before putting the question on the 

adjournment motion, I have a few announcements to make. 

 

First, I would like to thank all of the guests and members of the 

public who have joined us here today. 

 

I want to thank the Hon. John Klebuc, Chief Justice of 

Saskatchewan; the Hon. R.D. Laing, Chief Justice of the Court 

of Queen’s Bench; the Hon. C.A. Snell, Chief Judge of the 

Provincial Court; and the members of the judiciary for your 

attendance here today. 

 

I would also like to thank Elder Mike Pinay from the 

Peepeekisis First Nation and Reverend Merv Switzer, retired 

pastor, for taking part in today’s ceremony. 

 

I would like to, at this time, introduce the school groups that are 

with us today and I ask that you please stand as I call your 

names. In the east gallery we have the grade 6/7 class from 

Vincent Massey Community School in Saskatoon. Please stand 

students. And in the west gallery joining us today are the high 

school students from the Christian Centre Academy in 

Saskatoon. I would like to thank all of you along with your 

teachers and chaperones for attending today’s ceremony. Thank 

you. 

 

Welcome also to the Royal Blend Vocal Jazz Group. They are 

seated in the west gallery. I will be calling on them shortly to 

sing for us. 

 

I would like to thank as well the members of the following 

Saskatchewan-based regular and reserve force units for 

providing us with the guard of honour earlier this afternoon: 15 

Wing Moose Jaw, 17 Wing Detachment Dundurn, HMCS 



3130 Saskatchewan Hansard October 21, 2009 

Queen, HMCS Unicorn, Saskatchewan Dragoons, Royal Regina 

Rifles, North Saskatchewan Regiment, 16 Service Battalion, 

and 16 Field Ambulance. As well I would like to thank the 10 

Field Regiment, the Royal Canadian Artillery for the 15-gun 

salute, part of the Royal Canadian Artillery band and the 

Snowbirds and 15 Wing for the flypast. 

 

At this time I would also like to invite everyone to join Their 

Honours, the Premier, the Leader of the Opposition, and 

members of the Legislative Assembly at the Speaker’s tea 

which will take place immediately following this Chamber 

ceremony. The tea will be held in two locations — room 218 in 

the west wing which is to your left as you leave the Chamber, 

and in the library in the east wing which is to your right as you 

leave the Chamber. 

 

It has been moved by the Premier that this House do now 

adjourn. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

I would now like to welcome the Royal Blend Vocal Jazz 

Group from Michael A. Riffel High School in Regina. The 

choir is under the direction of Mr. Ryan Hicks and accompanied 

by Nic Larsen. 

 

The choir will sing two selections for us this afternoon — 

―Let’s Call the Whole Thing Off‖ and ―Man in the Mirror.‖ 

Ladies and gentlemen, Royal Blend. 

 

[The choir sang.] 

 

The Speaker: — On behalf of all present, I would like to thank 

the jazz group for their very fine performance. They will also be 

performing for us again in the rotunda following the Chamber 

ceremonies and we’ll look forward to hearing them a little more 

this afternoon. 

 

One final announcement before we adjourn. I ask that members 

and guests observe the following order when departing from the 

Chamber: the Speaker’s party followed by His Honour’s party, 

the Premier and Provincial Secretary, Leader of the Opposition 

and Mrs. Lingenfelter, judges of the Court of Appeal, Queen’s 

Bench, and Provincial Court, members of the cabinet and their 

spouses, other members of the Legislative Assembly and their 

spouses, and guests. 

 

Ladies and gentlemen, members, this House stands adjourned 

until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 14:50.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

SPEECH FROM THE THRONE ................................................................................................................................................. 3123 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Pro Forma Bill 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3129 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 Introduction of Pages 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3129 

TABLING THE SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3129 

MOTIONS 

 Speech from the Throne 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3129 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium Development 

Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

 Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

Government House Leader 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. James Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Capital Commission 


