




















































Hansard: March 18, 2009


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 35A  WEDNESDAY, MARCH 18, 2009, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2353 

 March 18, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

The Speaker: — Before I call for introduction of guests, I want 

to extend a welcome to all of the guests who have joined us 

today, but also just a couple of comments in regards to guest 

participation in the proceedings on the floor. Just a reminder 

that guests are not to participate in any form in the proceedings 

on the floor. And we‟d really appreciate that. 

 

And also I would also ask that, if at all possible, that guests 

remain in their place until the Government House Leader 

adjourns the proceedings for the afternoon. Thank you for 

observing these guidelines. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well 

to you and through you — I guess this is more of a welcome 

than an introduction — on behalf of the government, we want 

to welcome all of the guests that have joined us this day for the 

budget presentation. Obviously the groups that are represented 

here and significantly the individuals are just too numerous to 

mention. But on behalf of the government, we want to welcome 

them all here to their Legislative Assembly. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty‟s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join with 

the Premier in welcoming the many guests who have gathered 

at the legislature today — those in the Chamber and those who 

are in other rooms in this building. We have today gathered in 

this building a very broad cross-section of the great people of 

Saskatchewan, and we welcome each of you here today. Thank 

you for being here. On behalf of the official opposition, 

welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you I‟d like to introduce a gentleman seated in your gallery, Mr. 

Olaosebikan Olajuwon Ebenezer. Mr. Ebenezer is a senior 

legislative officer at the Lagos State House of Assembly in 

Nigeria. He is an author and a lecturer at the Lagos university 

dealing with international conflict management issues. 

 

I met Mr. Ebenezer at the Commonwealth Parliamentary 

Association Conference in Malaysia last year, and Mr. Ebenezer 

will be visiting us over the next few days. And please join me in 

welcoming Mr. Ebenezer to our legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Members, it‟s my pleasure as well to 

introduce three guests who have joined us today from Ottawa. 

First of all the Hon. Peter Milliken, Speaker of the House of 

Commons, and I‟d ask him to rise. And joining Mr. Milliken is 

Mr. Andrew Scheer, Deputy Speaker of the House of 

Commons, and Mr. Anthony Carricato, events coordinator, 

Office of the Speaker. 

 

We‟re honoured to have the Speaker from the House of 

Commons joining us, his Deputy Speaker, and his events 

coordinator. They have come to observe the proceedings in our 

Chamber and I‟d like to ask the members to extend them a 

warm welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition that speaks to the point that the 

investment in quality child care delivers significant economic 

and social dividends to a region, and that with the provincial 

government receiving seven and a half million dollars from the 

federal government yearly for the creation of child care spaces, 

there‟s concern that this money is not being spent in its entirety. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this province we risk squandering an important 

social and economic benefit without significant new child care 

spaces. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government, through consultation with child care 

community, to immediately invest in growing the capacity 

of early child care community to enable new child care 

spaces. This investment must include infrastructure 

funding for new facilities and expansion, funding to 

significantly increase the number of early childhood 

diploma and certificate training seats, and funding to 

ensure that the sector is able to increase its wages and 

benefits to attract and retain needed personnel. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present on behalf of citizens of Estevan and 

Regina. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for wage equity for CBO 

[community-based organization] workers. And we know that 

many of these folks have been traditionally underpaid, and 

many continue to earn poverty-level wages. I‟d like to read the 



2354 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2009 

prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the development and 

implementation of a multi-year funding plan to ensure that 

CBO workers achieve wage equity with employees who 

perform work of equal value in government departments. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray.  

 

And these petitioners come from a wide range of communities 

in Saskatchewan, including Macklin, Riverhurst, Moose Jaw, 

Lanigan, Regina, Saskatoon, North Battleford, Borden, 

Melville, and Yorkton and Swift Current. Thank you very 

much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 

petition on behalf of rural residents who feel like they‟ve been 

left behind by this government and are having to deal with the 

cost burden of providing quality drinking water in their 

municipality. And the prayer reads as such: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to financially assist the town of Duck Lake 

residents for the good of their health and safety due to the 

exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency, and that this government fulfils its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions, Mr. Speaker, are signed by the good residents 

of Duck Lake. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m 

pleased to rise in my place today to present a petition in support 

of a new Saskatchewan Hospital in North Battleford. Mr. 

Speaker, the petitioners acknowledge that in February 2006 the 

Government of Saskatchewan did commit funds and resources 

to the development and construction of a new Saskatchewan 

Hospital at North Battleford. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petitioners ask: 

 

. . . the Legislative Assembly to call upon the Government 

of Saskatchewan to immediately recommit funds and 

resources for the continued development and construction 

of a new Saskatchewan Hospital at North Battleford and 

provide Prairie North Regional Health Authority with the 

authority necessary to complete this essential and 

much-needed project. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petitioners all come from the city of North 

Battleford and, Mr. Speaker, I so present. Thank you very 

much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a pleasure to 

stand and present a petition in support of fairness for students 

through the expansion of the graduate retention program. The 

prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately expand the graduate retention 

program to include master‟s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are 

students from the University of Saskatchewan, students from 

the University of Regina, as well as a number of health care 

professionals, some of whom hold graduate degrees. I so 

present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions in support of a reduction in the education 

portion of property taxes. This is needed by Saskatchewan 

families and Saskatchewan business. The prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to stop withholding and to provide significant, 

sustainable, long-term property tax relief to property 

owners by 2009 through significantly increasing the 

provincial portion of education funding. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are signed by concerned 

citizens of Regina. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

to repair the Highway No. 135 that runs through Pelican 

Narrows, Saskatchewan. This petition is signed by leadership 

and community members of Pelican Narrows First Nation, the 

village of Pelican Narrows and area. The prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to pave the 7 kilometres of Highway 135 



March 18, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2355 

through the community of Pelican Narrows as committed 

on August 24, 2007. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Cost of Living Increases 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, residents 

of Regina Walsh Acres are struggling to cope with the surging 

cost of living as a result of Sask Party ideological dithering on 

the renting crisis, government imposed increases in utility rates, 

and the lifting of the tuition freeze for university students. 

 

Janny, a senior who lives on her own now that her husband has 

passed away, is worried about paying her mounting Crown 

utility bills with her already tight pension: “I already turn down 

the heat and wear as many sweaters as I can [she explains], and 

the bills are still high.” 

 

Unfortunately Janny will also have to live in the dark now that 

the Sask Party is proposing to raise power bills by 13 per cent. 

 

Westly, a new renter in Regina, was recently served notice of a 

rent increase of $100, bringing his total rent for a one-bedroom 

apartment to $825. As Westly puts it, “It seems the Sask Party 

is more interested in helping their suit-wearing corporate 

friends instead of those of us who work all day and come home 

worried about how to pay these outrageous bills.” 

 

Tiffany, a student at the University of Regina, is finding out that 

the Sask Party‟s commitment to students involves higher tuition 

costs and more student debt. With the end of the NDP [New 

Democratic Party] tuition freeze, Tiffany is facing an increase 

of $592.45 for the upcoming undergraduate semester. 

 

Mr. Speaker, New Democrats stand on the side of 

Saskatchewan residents as the Sask Party makes life more 

expensive. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Moose Jaw Students Win Junior Achievement Awards  

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Congratulations to 

the Junior Achievement students at A.E. Peacock Collegiate in 

Moose Jaw. This outstanding group of young entrepreneurs 

won six awards at the Southern Regional Junior Achievement 

Awards Banquet last evening here in Regina. The Junior 

Achievement program is a business entrepreneur class that 

teaches practical business skills from the idea, concept, to 

creating, developing, and operating a business. 

 

The class at A.E. Peacock Collegiate created a packaged dry 

goods assembly made of ingredients of cookies, cappuccino, 

and homemade soup, and developed a company called Jarfuls. 

Jarfuls was a marketing success in the community and at last 

evening‟s award ceremonies, individuals received awards: for 

Salesperson of the Year was Christine Richard; Brent 

Gunningham and Steve Dearing for marketing excellence; and 

Allan Szeto for vice-president of finance. The Educator of the 

Year was their teaching adviser, Barbara McKinnon. Jarfuls 

was also the winner of shareholders report and the Prestigious 

Company of the Year award. 

 

I would like all members to show their appreciation for the 

Junior Achievement program and to congratulate the company 

members of Jarfuls: Annie Bartel, Allan Szeto, Christine 

Richard, Jessica Glass, Steve Dearing, Brent Gunningham, 

Terri-Lynn Abbey, Ashley Zaremba, Jesse Lutcher, Tyson 

Wenarchuk, Devan Rowsell, along with their teaching advisers 

Barbara McKinnon and Tessa Jordan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Property Tax Relief 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If a 

government is judged by whether it follows through on its 

promises and on its ability to respond to the current pressures of 

its residents, then the Sask Party is failing miserably on the 

property tax file. 

 

Given that 2009 is a reassessment year, many families and 

businesses are being hit with large increases. The Sask Party 

government has received thousands of petitions from 

communities and organization. This opposition has petitioned 

the Sask Party daily in this Assembly and adamantly called for 

reform. 

 

The hypocrisy of the Sask Party with regard to property tax was 

not lost on delegates from across Saskatchewan at the recent 

SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] 

convention or at SARM‟s [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities]. 

 

To add insult, the Sask Party‟s year-long property tax study and 

report, paid for with taxpayers‟ dollars, has not been released to 

the public. This is a complete reversal of the transparent process 

of past taxation studies under the NDP such as the Vicq report 

and the Boughen Commission. 

 

The Sask Party must provide Saskatchewan families and 

businesses the property tax relief they were promised and that 

they so deserve, Mr. Speaker. A long-term, sustainable 

reduction of the reliance on property taxes to fund education 

must be included in today‟s budget. It must provide fair sharing 

of provincial dollars across Saskatchewan, whether that‟s an 

urban centre or small town Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, 

anything less will represent a failure. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Before I recognize the next member, I ask for 



2356 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2009 

members‟ co-operation in allowing the member who has the 

floor to speak. I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Yorkton Hosts Canada Cup of Curling 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was both excited 

and honoured to be part of an event last evening to bring 

greetings on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan and my 

hometown and home constituency of Yorkton — the home of 

the 2009 Canada Cup of Curling. 

 

As local residents, we know the capacity and potential of our 

community, which is the centre of the third largest trading area 

in the province, to host special events, large and small, due 

largely in part to facilities like Yorkton‟s Gallagher Centre and 

our volunteer base. 

 

Events like the Canada Cup of Curling, which feature the best 

male and female curlers in Canada, let us showcase and show 

off our community, not only to the rest of the province but to 

the country and the world. 

 

[13:45] 

 

Let me just run through some of the facts about this event, Mr. 

Speaker. February 18, 2008, the CCA [Canadian Curling 

Association] awarded the Canada Cup to Saskatchewan for the 

first time — to Yorkton. This is the largest sporting event ever 

hosted by Yorkton and the committee is expected attendance of 

25,000 over 15 draws. Fifteen per cent of ticket sales are from 

outside the province, 50 per cent are from outside the 

community, bringing a large number of dollars to our local 

economy. 

 

The winners become part of the pool of 16 men‟s and 16 

women‟s teams eligible to either a berth directly into the 2009 

Olympic trials or into the pre-trials qualifier. TSN [The Sports 

Network] will be providing 14 hours of coast-to-coast coverage 

of this event. 

 

This is huge, and our government acknowledges the vital role 

that tourism plays in the promotion of our province and our 

economy. Our commitment to double the government‟s 

spending on tourism is reflected in our $50,000 investment in 

making Yorkton the home of the 2009 Canada Cup of Curling. 

 

I‟d like to congratulate the Yorkton committee, and best of luck 

to all competitors. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Graduate Retention Program 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, over the past weeks I‟ve 

repeatedly presented petitions from the people of Saskatchewan 

calling for the Sask Party to expand their graduate retention 

program to include master‟s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

When the Sask Party scrapped the previous NDP‟s grad tax 

exemption and introduced their tuition rebate scheme, they 

made two serious blunders. First, they excluded out-of-province 

graduates. Thankfully, after considerable pressure from the 

NDP opposition and from across Saskatchewan, they extended 

the program to out-of-province grads just as the NDP‟s grad tax 

exemption had done all along. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, there was a second blunder which they have 

yet to address. They neglected to include master‟s and Ph.D. 

graduates. In a time of global economic uncertainty, surely we 

ought to be encouraging those with higher education to build 

their lives here. On our university campuses, we need to attract 

new professors. In our health care system, we need more 

physiotherapists, speech-language pathologists, nurse 

practitioners, and clinical psychologists. In our society, we need 

public policy experts and social workers to provide intelligent 

advice and services. And in our economy, we need business 

graduates to remain and provide leadership. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s a time for the Sask Party government to stop 

squandering our province‟s future prosperity by refusing to see 

the value of keeping those with masters‟ and Ph.D.s here in 

Saskatchewan. Today my NDP colleagues and I, along with the 

many students and professionals who have signed the petitions, 

ask the Sask Party to do the right thing and expand their 

graduate retention program to include all university students. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Meadow Lake. 

 

Agreement Signed for Mineral Exploration 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, last week Pitchstone 

Exploration announced that they have signed a letter of 

agreement with Japan Oil, Gas and Metals National 

Corporation. Pitchstone Exploration is a junior exploration 

company with uranium properties in the Athabasca Basin of our 

province. 

 

The deal was worth $2 million to do further exploration of the 

properties. This is great news at a time when junior exploration 

companies are having a difficult time raising funds in the 

market. 

 

Last November, companies and a government delegation 

attended the China mining conference in Beijing which I was 

fortunate enough to lead. Our delegation made some great 

contacts and further promoted Saskatchewan as an excellent 

place to invest. In addition to that trip, Pitchstone Exploration 

was one of eight companies that attended the most recent 

mineral investment mission in Japan and China, led by the 

Minister of Energy and Resources, the member from 

Kindersley. 

 

Over the past three years, over $60 million of investment have 

flowed to companies operating in Saskatchewan from the Asian 

market. Our government believes there are strong prospects for 

more investment, and we will do our best to help companies 

attract that investment. 

 

In closing, I would like to congratulate Pitchstone Exploration 

on their new agreement, and wish the best of luck in their 



March 18, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2357 

exploration activities. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Provincial Psychiatric Facility 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Every day since this legislative session opened 

in early March, I have risen in my place and presented petitions 

signed by the residents of The Battlefords and surrounding 

constituencies, including Cut Knife-Turtleford and Biggar. It 

was my intention to show that there is support for continued 

provincial funding for the development and construction of a 

new Saskatchewan Hospital in North Battleford. 

 

The petitioners know that this one and only provincial 

psychiatric facility received support and funding from the 

previous NDP government in early 2006. They know that the 

local health authority has indicated that a new hospital is a 

priority. And more importantly, the petitioners know that the 

existing facility is nearly 100 years old and in much need of 

replacement. 

 

During the 2007 provincial election, the Saskatchewan Party 

said if they were elected they would honour the commitment to 

the new hospital. After the election and after last year‟s 

provincial budget, the new Minister of Health indicated that he 

was aware of how badly the facility needed replacement. And in 

recent weeks, the Minister of Health has announced more than 

150 million in new infrastructure funding for long-term care 

homes that need replacing. 

 

Therefore, I think, Mr. Speaker, we have established the need 

for new funding, support for new funding, and an ability to 

provide new funding. It‟s only the matter of commitment that is 

left to decide. Will we or will we not see in this provincial 

budget if this government has the will and commitment to 

support people with psychiatric needs, their families, and the 

host community of The Battlefords? Mr. Speaker, I remain 

supportive and optimistic. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Government Spending 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, last fall the government‟s 

Growth and Financial Security Fund, the so-called rainy day 

fund, sat at $1.9 billion. At the time, the Premier claimed that 

the rainy day fund is, and I quote him, the rock on which we 

will build the economic future of the province. It was to be our 

insurance policy against the wild gyrations in revenue that 

might occur. 

 

Today the rainy day fund sits at just $1.2 billion. In a year when 

government revenues have never been higher, and dramatically 

so, the Saskatchewan Party has drained the rainy day fund by 

nearly $800 million in just a few months. 

And my question is to the Minister of Finance: what happened 

to the Premier‟s rock? Why did he drain the rainy day fund in a 

year when government revenues were rising so dramatically? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 

Minister of Finance is going to have the opportunity to address 

this Assembly and provide the budget and then answer 

questions in the days that follow. So permit me, if I can, to 

answer the hon. member‟s question. 

 

I want to thank him for the question and point out that the 

position of the opposition with respect to the balance in the 

Growth and Financial Security Fund has changed markedly. 

When we made the original announcement in the fall about 

historic tax reductions, about investments in infrastructure, 

about reducing the province‟s debt by 40 per cent, the comment 

with respect to the balance in the Growth and Financial Security 

Fund from that member was: 

 

Reacting to the mid-year report [I‟m quoting from a radio 

story] the NDP has found fault not with what the 

government is doing, but rather with what it is not doing. 

Finance critic Harry Van Mulligen maintains with all the 

extra money it should be doing more to help those with 

rising costs of housing and utilities. 

 

So which is it, Mr. Speaker, with respect to the opposition‟s 

position on this fund? Do they want it to be spent or do they 

want it to be maintained? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Speaker, at that time the 

Premier was committing to keep $2 billion in the Fiscal 

Stabilization Fund and so-called rainy day fund, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, private sector forecasters are saying that they see 

storm clouds on the horizon for Saskatchewan. Last Thursday 

RBC [Royal Bank of Canada] forecast economic growth of less 

than 1 per cent in Saskatchewan in the coming year, and just 

yesterday Scotiabank predicted zero per cent economic growth 

for 2009. Is the minister still convinced that, given what lies 

ahead, this current fiscal year was the right time to drain our 

rainy day fund? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — It is an interesting characterization of the 

Growth and Financial Security Fund that it would be drained 

with $1.2 billion on balance today after the fact, after the fact 

that we‟ve already provided historic income tax relief to help 

stimulate the economy, infrastructure investment to stimulate 

the economy, and reduced the debt this government inherited in 

its first full budget year by 40 per cent, Mr. Speaker. By 40 per 



2358 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2009 

cent. 

 

With respect to the balance that was in the fund in the fall as 

reported in the third quarter, the Leader of the Opposition had 

this to say, Mr. Speaker: “NDP Leader Lorne Calvert also said 

[and I‟m quoting from a Canadian Press story] the $1.9 billion 

. . . was, „a very substantial amount of money‟ to hold when 

there are issues to be dealt with.” 

 

Issues I would expect the hon. member was referring to: 

stimulating the economy and ensuring the people of the 

province are sharing in the benefits. That sounds like 

infrastructure investment. That sounds like sustainable tax 

relief. That sounds like historic debt reduction, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, no one believes that the 

government‟s actions were anything more than an inter-year 

transfer of responsibilities of spending commitments. 

 

 Mr. Speaker, in the last election, in the last election, the 

Saskatchewan Party promised to limit increases in provincial 

government spending to an average of 3 per cent per year. The 

current year budget, the first Saskatchewan Party budget, 

increased spending by 10 per cent over the previous year. We 

don‟t know yet about today‟s budget, but third quarter 

projections would indicate an increase of at least 10 per cent 

over what was budgeted this year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, did I read the Sask Party platform wrong? Was it 

3 per cent per year or was it 3 per cent per quarter? Or is this 

simply a broken promise? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m glad the hon. member is 

reading the Saskatchewan Party platform. If he has indeed read 

the entire platform he will note that 100 promises in that 

platform have already been kept by this government ahead of 

the budget that it‟s going to bring down today. 

 

And with respect to the finances of the province, he would have 

noted that we had promised a new, tougher, balanced budget 

legislation. We have kept that promise. He would have noted 

that this government promised to automatically use unbudgeted 

surplus for debt reduction and for other economic initiatives 

like infrastructure investment. We‟ve also kept that promise, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

We inherited a huge infrastructure deficit from those members 

opposite. We have begun the work of dealing with that deficit 

and with respect to the promise in the platform, again I‟m proud 

to say that the people of the province of Saskatchewan, together 

with their government, have reduced the province‟s debt by 40 

per cent in one year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, the new balanced budget 

legislation looks a lot like the old balanced budget legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, speaking of promises, last year, last year the 

Minister of Finance said in his four-year financial plan, he 

would keep provincial government spending at manageable 

levels. He announced for example that the Sask Party had set a 

target of five per cent growth in spending for the budget that he 

will be presenting today. 

 

So my question is to the minister: will he be able to keep that 

promise today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I think this is an important 

line of questioning that we have now before the Assembly. This 

is an important debate. And it‟ll be interesting to see if the 

opposition, in the weeks that come to follow the budget, are 

going to be listing the things they want the government to spend 

on or be advocating for the expenditure side control. 

 

I could say this, Mr. Speaker. This party in opposition 

committed to balanced budgets for the province of 

Saskatchewan. At a time when no one else in the nation and 

very few other jurisdictions on the continent are providing 

balanced budgets for their people, are providing debt reduction, 

are providing sustainable tax reduction, Mr. Speaker, at a time 

such as that, the province of Saskatchewan, up until today — 

and we‟re not going to talk about what‟s in the budget yet — 

but up until today, we have been doing exactly that, Mr. 

Speaker: balancing the books, reducing the debt, keeping taxes 

low to keep our economic advantage going. 

 

And I say to that hon. member in terms of what‟s to come, just 

a few more minutes he need wait to find out whether or not this 

trend of good management and balanced budgets and a growing 

economy will continue for the great province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — . . . a simple question about spending 

increases, Mr. Speaker, but we get an unrelated answer. 

 

So let me try this in a different way. Mr. Speaker, the Minister 

of Finance also pledged to limit growth in provincial 

government spending to 3 per cent in the Sask Party‟s fourth 

year in office. He stated, and I quote, “We think that this is a 

responsible way to approach it and that it will be attainable.” 

Let me underline that word, attainable, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So to the minister: does he feel confident that the Sask Party 

will be able to meet its target of 3 per cent spending growth in 

2011? 

 



March 18, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2359 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, just before question period we 

heard from a number of members opposite in their members‟ 

statements, and each one of them had a list of things that they 

would like this government to spend money on. Some of them 

were talking about property taxes. I think that‟s a very 

important issue for the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I would say this, Mr. Speaker. The interesting thing about 

property tax reduction is that it means there‟s going to be an 

expenditure increase because the definition of educational 

property tax reduction means the government is funding more 

of education for the province of Saskatchewan. So I would say 

to the hon. member, he need only wait a few more minutes to 

see whether or not we can achieve that meaningful and 

sustainable property tax reduction and whether or not there‟ll be 

an attendant balance on the expenditure side of the budget. 

 

What he doesn‟t have to wait for, Mr. Speaker, is an assurance 

of this — that this government will present the only balanced 

budget in Canada later this day. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — So we‟ll see at the end of the day, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in a year when government revenues 

were rising dramatically, the Saskatchewan Party inexplicably 

drained the rainy day fund. The Sask Party has overshot 

spending targets they set for themselves during the election and 

during last year‟s budget. Now private sector forecasters are 

predicting growth of less than 1 per cent in Saskatchewan this 

current year. 

 

So my question is to the minister. Will he announce a credible 

plan in today‟s budget to bring provincial government spending 

in line with the growth in the provincial economy, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — You know, Mr. Speaker, just before the 

election the NDP government of the day broke a long-standing 

tradition of this Assembly, of the governments of this province, 

including previous New Democratic governments — 

principally the Romanow administration — of providing a 

longer term view of the province‟s finances, providing a 

four-year or a five-year picture of the province‟s finances. But 

in the dying days of that tired, old NDP government from only 

15 months ago, they stopped doing it, Mr. Speaker. They 

wouldn‟t provide the people of Saskatchewan any perspective 

on their long-term plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have enshrined that kind of planning, that kind 

of transparency in the new balanced budget legislation of the 

province. The people of Saskatchewan can expect, they will see 

in this budget, a long-term perspective that spells out balanced 

budgets and surpluses, Mr. Speaker, and a growing economy 

for Saskatchewan people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Management of Pension and Investment Funds 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 

speaking of storm clouds, the province has already been 

negatively affected by the economic storm outside our 

provincial borders. According to the latest SGI [Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance] annual report, the SGI Auto Fund is 

approximately 1.1 billion in investments. The Saskatchewan 

Auto Fund has recently suffered a $40 million loss as a result of 

a $60 million loss in investment income. 

 

With a $60 million drop in income, Mr. Speaker, what plan 

does the Minister of Finance have in place to ensure that the 

people of Saskatchewan are not facing a massive increase in car 

insurance rates? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. I‟m not sure if the hon. members opposite could be 

any more negative, but I can tell you on a day as today, just 

wait a few more minutes and things will be very, very positive 

in this Chamber. 

 

SGI continues to operate in a very sound financial manner. It‟s 

an insurance company that operates like all insurance 

companies do in North America. It has a sound portfolio of 

investments they use to keep insurance rates as low as possible. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, there has been a downturn in capital markets 

all over North America. Yes, it has an effect on the portfolio of 

SGI. It will be continued to be managed in a professional way 

by Greystone management and others to ensure that those rates 

remain the lowest in the country, which they are today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The SGI Auto Fund is 

not the only fund in government that‟s suffering from the 

economic crisis. Investment income is also an important 

revenue stream for the Workers‟ Compensation Board, and 

there is a direct correlation between how well the WC [workers‟ 

compensation] investment fund performs and what the premium 

rates are set at. Last year when Workers‟ Compensation Board 

announced a premium reduction of 8.2 per cent, the WCB 

attributed it to higher than anticipated investment returns. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if higher investment returns result in an 8.2 per 

cent decrease in premiums, my question to the Minister of 



2360 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2009 

Finance is what per cent increase are we looking at with today‟s 

market numbers? Mr. Speaker, will premiums have to rise, 

affecting the affordability of doing business in Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, we certainly appreciate this 

question. Mr. Speaker, we have every confidence that the 

Workers‟ Compensation Board continues to manage funds in a 

very professional way, Mr. Speaker. It‟s with that confidence 

that we know that we can move forward and industry and 

business should have every confidence that the system is sound 

and intact. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There are thousands 

of government employees that are invested in the Saskatchewan 

health employees‟ pension plan. In June of last year, this 

pension fund had almost $3 billion in assets. At the beginning 

of this year, it was down to 2.4 billion in assets. This fund has 

lost $600 million in six months. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Finance: government employees 

are losing pension dollars. What plan is there in place to deal 

with the situation? Or, Mr. Speaker, do we just let the current 

circumstances apply and pass on the increased costs to the 

taxpayers through the GRF [General Revenue Fund]? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, our province regulates a 

large number of pension funds — pension funds for government 

employees, pension funds for private sectors. We are working 

with private sector and public sector pension funds across the 

province right now to ensure that they are able to maintain 

solvency and to maintain everything that they‟re required to do 

so that they can satisfy the employees as their retirements come 

about. And of course global markets have been a factor, but we 

have every confidence that with professional management that 

things will continue to work as they are supposed to do, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Top of 

everyone‟s mind at the recent University of Saskatchewan 

board of governors meeting was the future of the school during 

this economic crisis. In less than a year, the university‟s 

endowment fund has dropped 20 per cent while its investment 

funds have lost a staggering $85 million. 

 

This has had staff and students asking a number of questions. 

Will the university be able to maintain its level of education? 

Will this result in the cutting of classes offered which will result 

in job losses? And how will this affect tuition fees? 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Finance: what is he going to do 

to assure that this dramatic loss in endowment and investment 

funds will not affect the day-to-day operations of the university 

or result in increased tuition fees? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, for over the last hundred 

years, the University of Saskatchewan has gone through a series 

of challenges and opportunities. It‟s endured world wars. It‟s 

gone through the depression. Mr. Speaker, we have every 

confidence that the administration and board at the University 

of Saskatchewan is well positioned and well placed to ensure 

not only that that institution endures, but succeeds in this time 

of change. Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Private 

sector forecasters are telling us to brace for a storm. They do 

see storm clouds on the horizon. The storm hasn‟t hit 

Saskatchewan in a very dramatic way, and yet we‟re seeing 

dramatic losses in government investment funds and pension 

funds, as well as the university endowment and investment 

funds. 

 

Will the minister, Mr. Speaker, stop looking in the rear-view 

mirror at last year‟s economic prosperity and start looking 

forward? Will he tell us what the long-term plan is to weather 

the coming storm? And more importantly, Mr. Speaker, 

thinking about without the rainy day fund — the insurance 

fund, Mr. Speaker, the Premier‟s Rock of Gibraltar — what is 

the plan to deal with the storm damage that we‟ve already 

experienced? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, if the members opposite 

can wait for a few more minutes, they‟ll hear a strong and 

robust economic plan that will take this province forward and 

will deal with a number of the issues that are there. 

 

With regard to the global economy, this province is not 

completely immune from those things. And we will work 

through those challenges, and we will work through them as 

effectively and as strongly as can possibly happen. And I want 

to say to the citizens of this province, that they need not worry 

about financial institutions or pension solvency in this province. 

We have a government that is aware of the issues and is 

working with the agencies and the institutions that provide 

those services. And the citizens of this province can be entirely 

confident that they will be well protected by this government, 

Mr. Speaker. 



March 18, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2361 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Property Tax Relief 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, today‟s media reports that 

the government will be introducing changes to the education 

property tax. We‟re pleased to see that after daily petitions and 

lobbying by this opposition, that that government may put 

forward a plan for our review. We have learned, however, that 

with this government, it‟s the devil that‟s in the details. 

 

To the Premier: can he assure Saskatchewan property owners 

that every property owner will be treated fairly, no matter where 

you live in this province? Will property taxes decline for every 

property owner in Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, very, very interesting 

preamble from my hon. friend, the NDP taking credit for what 

may happen in the budget with respect to sustainable property 

tax relief — very, very interesting. 

 

And I think some of the stakeholders here today may be 

weighing in on it because what we saw from the NDP, year 

after year and term after term, were promises, Mr. Speaker. 

They‟d go to SARM and they‟d make a promise, did the former 

premier, Mr. Speaker. They‟d commission a study. They would 

ignore that study. They‟d commission another study, and it 

would gather dust on the shelf. And no long-term solution was 

ever forthcoming from members opposite. In the last campaign, 

when they finally did offer something on property tax . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I would like to remind members that, you 

know, if you‟ve asked the question, please have the respect to 

allow the member to answer. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, in the last campaign they 

again came forward with their plan for property tax and 

completely omitted agriculture — not a single initiative for the 

property tax issue in rural Saskatchewan. That has been their 

track record, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As for this side of the House, we‟ve made some promises with 

respect to interim action on rebates and a long-term plan. We‟ll 

see just in a few minutes whether or not we will be able to keep 

that promise a year ahead of schedule, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty‟s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Revenue Projections 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, my question will be for the 

Premier. Yesterday we saw some troubling headlines. We see 

how the Potash Corporation intends to lay off 940 people and 

cut production. Now I understand they cut production by 2 

million tonnes. This adds another 1.5 million tonnes of cut in 

production in potash. 

 

The same day, just behind this article, we read an article that 

says the Scotiabank is now predicting that our real, the GDP 

[gross domestic product] growth in the coming year will be at 

zero per cent. 

 

My question is to the Premier: do these new indications of 

what‟s happening in our economy, will they have impact on the 

revenues of the province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 

to thank the hon. member for that question. We‟re going to find 

out about the revenue projections for the province going 

forward with respect to potash and other resource commodity 

revenues here, just in a very short while. 

 

You know, members on this side of the House, myself and 

others, members on that side of the House have been all saying 

relatively the same thing when it comes to the economy of the 

province. 

 

We‟re not immune to what‟s happening worldwide. We‟re not 

immune at all to global economic recession. Certainly that is the 

market for our products that we have here in the province. 

However, it is true that every forecaster, every chartered bank, 

and the Conference Board of Canada, up to and including 

yesterday‟s, which are reduced forecasts for growth, have said 

the same thing, and that is that this province — our province of 

Saskatchewan, notwithstanding the fact that we are not immune 

to what‟s going on — that we will lead Canada. That, Mr. 

Speaker, we are still a place that is creating jobs and economic 

momentum, not just for our citizens but for people across the 

country. 

 

We need to make sure we have a government that‟s maintaining 

that momentum, and we‟re going to work very, very hard to do 

that, beginning with the budget in a few minutes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Growth and Financial Security Fund 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, my question is again to the 

Premier. When in opposition, he was opposed to the notion of 

this province having what was then called the Fiscal 

Stabilization Fund. When he inherited government, he said the 

fund that he inherited, which was about $1.8 billion, he 

described that as a stark situation. Well now, Mr. Speaker, we 

have a new commitment to a process of fiscal stabilization, 

whether you call . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Whether it‟s called the growth and security 

fund or the rainy day fund or the insurance fund, we all agree 

such a fund is necessary. Now back in October the Premier said 



2362 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2009 

to the people of Saskatchewan, “Even with historic tax cuts, 

even with the largest debt repayment ever, and even with 

historic investment in infrastructure, we will maintain a balance 

in the Growth and Financial Security Fund of about $2 billion.” 

 

My question is to the Premier: when the budget is unveiled 

today, will we see a balance in the growth and fiscal stability 

fund of $2 billion as he promised? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I remember well that day in 

the fall, Mr. Speaker, when this government was able to 

announce record income tax relief for the people of the province 

retroactive to ‟08, where we were able to confirm a reduction in 

the province‟s debt by 40 per cent, where we were able to 

confirm infrastructure investment for the coming months as a 

bit of a stimulus and a way to deal with the deficit in 

infrastructure we inherited. And we did talk about the balance 

of that particular fund, Mr. Speaker, both in the legislation that 

prescribes that fund . . . And in the announcement we said we 

need this money there to ensure that our momentum continues. 

That‟s the insurance. 

 

[14:15] 

 

Well, I think there‟s a combination of things you can do. You 

can maintain a healthy balance in that fund. Today it‟s $1.2 

billion; I think that‟s pretty healthy. You can also use it for 

stimulus to provide a booster shot against some of the very 

things the member said in his earlier question that is happening 

to the province‟s economy as a result of the global recession. 

 

So we‟ve taken that action in terms of a half billion dollar 

stimulus in infrastructure. We‟ve taken action in terms of tax 

reduction. And in fiscal probity that means balanced budgets for 

this province that I predict will be on the national news later 

this day right across the country, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

TABLING OF ESTIMATES AND SUPPLEMENTARY 

ESTIMATES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker 

it is my pleasure to submit the estimates and supplementary 

estimates accompanied by a message from His Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor. 

 

The Speaker: — I would ask the members and our guests to 

rise for the message from His Honour the Lieutenant Governor. 

 

The message is as follows: 

 

The Lieutenant Governor transmits estimates of certain 

sums required for the service of the province for the 12 

months ending March 31, 2010, and supplementary 

estimates March 9, no. 2, of certain sums required for the 

service of the province for 12 months ending March 31, 

2009, and he recommends the same to the Legislative 

Assembly. The Honourable Gordon L. Barnhart, 

Lieutenant Governor, province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Please be seated. I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, 

and colleagues. Today, Mr. Speaker, I welcome some very 

special guests in this Chamber for our government‟s second 

budget presentation. First and foremost I would like to 

introduce my wife Carole who is just escorting one of our other 

guests into the Chamber. Carole of course is always there 

steadfastly as my best friend and an unfailing confidante — and 

critic as well. And I would like to thank her very, very much. 

 

Sitting next to Carole . . . 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Sitting next to Carole is Bill and 

Shirley Chyz from Watson, Saskatchewan. Bill is here, much to 

his dismay, because of his age, that he didn‟t have a choice of 

leaving Canada during the war. He served in the infantry in 

both Saskatchewan and Manitoba, and it‟s a pleasure to have 

both of them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Jack and his wife Velma Booker are 

from Star City, Saskatchewan. Jack joined the Royal Canadian 

Air Force in 1943. He trained as a navigator in Portage la 

Prairie, Edmonton, and Regina. After graduating he was held on 

reserve in Three Rivers, Quebec, commando division. It is 

interesting to note that Jack‟s three brothers served in the 

artillery as well as Velma‟s father and two brothers. We 

welcome them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Rosco and Doris Long from Lac Vert, 

Saskatchewan. Rosco was a part of the Army 2nd Canadian 

Infantry Division, the 6th Brigade Battalion, Queen‟s Own 

Cameron Highlanders of Canada. He served in Normandy in 

1943 with the division unit. He returned to Canada in 1945 after 

a number of months in the occupation of the Netherlands. 

Rosco has written a book entitled Life in the Canadian Army 

1942-1946. We welcome them here as well. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, these 

veterans and their wives represent all of the men and women 

over the years who have and are putting themselves in harm‟s 

way to defend the freedom of our country that we so value. 

Their sacrifices allow us to stand in this legislature and freely 

give voice to our principles, dreams, and aspirations that we 

have for our citizens. 

 



March 18, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2363 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me welcoming them here 

today and thanking them for all that they have done for our 

province and our country. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I see that Mr. Tom 

Morton has just joined us from Quill Lake, and if I could briefly 

introduce him. He joined the Canadian Air Force in 1941, 

stationed at #12 line school in Brandon, Manitoba, as an aero 

engine mechanic. In 1943, he re-mustered to the air crew in 

Monjeau, Quebec, then Bomb Gunnery School in Pat Bay, BC 

[British Columbia], where he graduated from flight engineering 

in 1943. He was then posted to Torbay, Newfoundland, serving 

with the 106 Bomb & Reconnaissance Squadron. And I thank 

him for being here today as well. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, today it‟s my honour 

and privilege as the Minister of Finance to present our 

government‟s second provincial budget to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

This provincial budget comes at a time of global recession, a 

complete 180 degree shift from one year ago. The tides began 

to turn last fall when the US [United States] housing crisis 

tipped the global economy into a free fall. The world economy 

is shaken and we can spot damage from every vantage point. To 

the east, to the south, and even west of our borders, economies 

are shrinking, jobs are being lost, and governments are plunging 

into deficit. 

 

Here in Saskatchewan we‟re not immune to the economic 

turmoil. We have felt the effects, but compared to what is going 

on in the rest of the world, Saskatchewan has a different story to 

tell. At a time when others are experiencing economic decline, 

we are forecasting economic growth. While others are shutting 

down factories and cutting their workforce, we‟re looking for 

workers and showing an increase in employment. While others 

are lamenting lack of opportunity and are mulling greener 

pastures, more people are moving to Saskatchewan and our 

population is growing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — So we‟re optimistic but cautious. Our 

economy is strong. The job of this government and the job of 

this budget is to make sure that it stays that way. Even before 

this budget, even before the full effects of the recession were 

being felt throughout the world, our government was taking 

action to prepare for what was the coming storm. We cut taxes. 

We invested in infrastructure. We provided economic stimulus 

and funded shovel-ready projects before these became the 

buzzwords of governments throughout North America. 

 

And it appears to be working. In a recent economic outlook, the 

Conference Board of Canada predicted, and I quote, “massive 

income tax cuts, combined with a swift increase in 

infrastructure spending” will help keep Saskatchewan out of 

recession and give our province the highest growth rate of any 

province in Canada in 2009. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — But even more important than 

economic forecast and predictions about GDP growth is the fact 

that these measures will help Saskatchewan people. This year a 

family of four with a combined income of $60,000 or more will 

save over $1,700 in tax cuts and benefit increases. A family of 

four with $35,000 income will save over $2,600. A single 

parent of two school-aged children and a $35,000 income will 

save more than $2,800. And a senior couple with a $25,000 

income will save nearly $2,200. And putting more money back 

into the hands of Saskatchewan people will keep our economy 

strong. 

 

Our government also believes in paying down debt. When 

mighty financial institutions abroad were collapsing under the 

weight of their debt load, our government announced we were 

cutting the province‟s debt by $2.6 billion — almost 40 per 

cent. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — That means less money leaving our 

province in interest payments and more money that will stay in 

Saskatchewan to help build our province. And we are, in a very 

real sense, building our province. 

 

Last spring we announced the $1 billion ready-for-growth 

initiative — the largest investment in infrastructure in 

Saskatchewan‟s history. And last fall the Premier announced we 

were going to increase our investment in infrastructure to $1.5 

billion in 2009. $500 million of this investment was unveiled 

last month in our economic booster shot — better schools for 

our children, better long-term care facilities for our seniors, 

better municipal infrastructure for our communities, safer 

highways for our drivers, more affordable housing for those in 

lower incomes, and more jobs to build each of these 

much-needed projects. 

 

The record tax cuts for Saskatchewan people, the record 

investment in the ready-for-growth initiative, have helped keep 

our economy strong and steady. And today we take the next 

step. I think every other Finance minister in the country would 

be delighted to be standing in my shoes today and be able to say 

the following — our new budget is a balanced budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — This new balance is built on strong 

but cautious revenue estimates. We don‟t expect to see the 

massive jump in provincial revenues that we enjoyed last year. 

However, this year we‟re expecting revenues to be up by $1.3 

billion from the 2008-2009 budget estimate. Still, even using 

cautious estimates, we‟re able to move forward on many 

important initiatives and fulfill our campaign commitments 

within a balanced budget. 

 

Here in Saskatchewan, education property taxes have been too 

high, for too long. That‟s why, during the 2007 campaign, the 

Premier and our party promised a long-term solution to this 

problem. He promised a solution based on three principles: a 

fair balance for education funding, ensuring that K to 12 

[kindergarten to grade 12] education was properly funded, and a 



2364 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2009 

significant reduction in the education portion of property tax. 

Today, we‟re keeping that promise. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Under the new system, the province 

will cut and cap education property tax rates for each of the 

three major property classes: residential, agricultural, and 

commercial. The overall amount of tax paid by property owners 

to fund education will be reduced by $103 million or 14 per 

cent in 2009, compared to last year. 

 

This represents the largest education property tax cut in a single 

year in the province‟s history. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — In turn, the provincial government 

will increase its share of funding to school divisions by just 

over $240 million this year. As a result, the province will fund 

about 63 per cent of the operating cost of pre-K 

[pre-kindergarten] to grade 12 education, up from last year‟s 

provincial funding of 51 per cent. The educational property tax 

will be further reduced by a further $53 million next year, with 

the province assuming an offsetting share of the funding. At 

that point, the provincial government will be funding about 66 

per cent, two-thirds of the cost of education. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — The actual amount of property tax 

relief will vary greatly from school division to school division 

and from property to property. That‟s because today we have a 

patchwork quilt of education tax rates across the province. 

People in some parts of Saskatchewan are paying much higher 

education tax rates than people in other parts of the province. 

 

It would be like paying a different PST [provincial sales tax] 

rate every time you went to a store in a different town. As we 

move to a fairer system and uniform rates across the province, 

those who are paying disproportionately high education taxes 

under the old system will see a larger tax cut. The vast majority 

of Saskatchewan property owners will pay less education tax 

under the new system. Clearly, Mr. Speaker, today‟s 

announcement fulfills the Premier‟s commitment to a fair 

balance for education funding to properly fund education and to 

significantly reduce the education portion of property tax. 

 

[14:30] 

 

And that‟s not all. Our government will continue to improve the 

competitiveness of Saskatchewan as a place to do business. 

This budget will introduce a progressive three-rate structure to 

determine the education property tax on commercial property so 

that small businesses will pay a lower mill rate. Mill rates will 

be applied consistently across Saskatchewan to promote equity 

for all businesses, while meeting the government‟s tax relief 

commitment. 

 

The report prepared by the member for Rosetown-Elrose 

formed the basis of today‟s announcement. I would like to 

thank . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — I would like to thank that member and 

the Deputy Premier, the Minister of Education, for countless 

hours of hard work in developing this new budget and new 

balance for education funding in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during the 2007 campaign, the Premier made 

another important commitment to Saskatchewan municipalities. 

He said our government would introduce a new revenue-sharing 

deal with municipalities tied to the province‟s own-source 

revenues. Today we are keeping that promise. In this budget, 

we‟re introducing a new municipal operating grant program. 

This program will provide funding support equal to 90 per cent 

of 1 per cent point of the provincial sales tax. This is the first 

step in our plan to provide municipal operating grants based on 

one full point of the PST. We‟ll bump it to a full one percentage 

point next year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — In this budget, municipalities will 

receive nearly $170 million to continue fixing sewer systems, 

upgrading streets, improving parks, and enhancing public 

buildings. And that‟s on top of the $100 million in one-time 

municipal infrastructure funding the Premier announced last 

month. This is what municipal leaders wanted — to tap into a 

predictive revenue source — and it‟s what we have delivered. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Last year we announced $1 billion in 

our ready for growth plan to rebuild schools, improve hospitals 

and health facilities, upgrade roads and highways. We said, let‟s 

get to work. Last month we announced a $500 million 

economic booster shot to get dollars flowing swiftly to our 

municipalities, our communities, our people. They put these 

much-needed infrastructure dollars directly into the hands that 

needed it — the hands that swing the hammers, that dig the dirt, 

that keep our economy moving forward every day. But we 

aren‟t finished yet. There‟s still more to do. 

 

Today our government is dedicating another $1 billion to keep 

building on what we‟ve already begun to keep our province 

moving forward strong and steady. This $1 billion will fix more 

roads and more schools and health care facilities. It‟ll expand 

child care centres in Saskatchewan and improve our 

post-secondary system. And this $1 billion investment will 

create more affordable housing and a better life for all 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

This additional funding brings us to $2.5 billion in capital 

funding in just two years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — This is a solid investment that‟ll pay 

off many dividends in the future. When it comes to new 

buildings, new roads, new facilities, these amenities are 

wonderful. But what matters most is the people that they serve. 

That‟s why our government will invest in our infrastructure 

system and our people. 

 



March 18, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2365 

Our government balanced budget will also support and enhance 

key priorities and key programs for Saskatchewan people. 

We‟re building on our promise for stronger, safer communities. 

Our government will continue to take action to crack down on 

crime. This year we‟ll hire 30 more police officers to add to the 

30 new officers we added last year, steadily working toward our 

commitment of 120 new officers by 2012. 

 

We‟re building on our promise to get tough on gangs. Gang 

violence in Western Canada is a serious problem. Our 

government will deliver funding for a Western Canadian gang 

database to share knowledge on criminal activities. 

 

Our government will build on our promise to reach out to the 

most vulnerable in our society. Our government will continue to 

address wait-lists in the community living division by 

expanding these facilities and creating more spaces for those 

with disabilities. We provide over $27 million in additional 

funding for community-based organizations. 

 

This year‟s budget will support firefighting efforts up north by 

dedicating nearly $30 million to continue modernizing the 

water bomber fleet. And we‟ll equip volunteer fire departments 

across the province with new radios linking them to the new 

provincial emergency radio network. 

 

Our government is building on our promise for a better life for 

all Saskatchewan children. We‟re creating 1,000 new child care 

spaces in Saskatchewan for children of parents who work 

outside the home. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — And over $12 million is added 

funding which will go toward space expansion, training 

programs, and increased pay for early learning and child care 

workers. 

 

We‟re delivering on our promise to provide $18 million for the 

active families benefit, to help parents that enrol their children 

in healthy, engaging activities. Our government will launch a 

multi-year $25 million strategy to give attention to our youngest 

citizens at risk. And we‟re taking one more important step for 

the children of our province. Today I am pleased to announce 

that we will deliver on our province for a new children‟s 

hospital in Saskatoon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — $200 million over two years will be 

provided for construction in this facility, dedicated to the health 

and well-being of Saskatchewan‟s youngest citizens.  

 

We‟re building on our province to invest in education and skills 

training. We‟ll dedicate over $23 million to enable universities 

to limit tuition increases to an average of just 3 per cent. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — This budget will enhance our student 

aid program to make education more accessible to those whose 

minds are rich with unlimited potential and thirst for 

knowledge. And our government will continue to ensure that 

eligible post-secondary students have the opportunity to have 

up to $20,000 in tuition reimbursement through the most 

aggressive youth retention plan in Canada, our graduate 

retention program. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Funding for this program will be 

increased by $6.5 million this year to reflect the growing 

number of post-secondary graduates who will qualify by simply 

choosing to start their careers and build their lives in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Our government is building on our promise to support more 

training seats for doctors and nurses. We‟ll provide $23 million 

this year on a comprehensive plan to attract more nurses and 

other hard-to-recruit health professionals to Saskatchewan and 

keep them here. This budget will also provide more funding to 

recruit more physicians to our province. 

 

To broaden the scope of opportunities in Saskatchewan, we‟re 

building on our promise to invest in an Aboriginal workforce 

development fund. This program highlights new employment 

opportunities for those of First Nations and Métis heritage. Our 

government will invest in a new regional college buildings in 

Nipawin and Humboldt to ensure distance does not hinder the 

chance to further one‟s education. We‟ll also improve funding 

for our library system so it‟ll continue to be an up-to-date 

resource for all our citizens. 

 

We‟ll dedicate increased funding to advance the InterVac 

project at the University of Saskatchewan. Our people at 

InterVac are considered world leaders in the field of vaccination 

technology, striving to make breakthroughs in vaccines for 

people and animals. We‟re proud of their efforts and their 

achievements. 

 

This budget will follow through on the increase of 1,100 

apprenticeship training seats. We‟ll build on our promise to 

pilot new health initiatives to better care for our people. We‟ll 

introduce a three-year plan to encourage people to quit 

smoking, especially our youth, before the grip of addiction can 

take hold. 

 

Our government will continue to fund a study that combines 

stroke prevention and proved rehabilitation methods. And we‟ll 

support improved infection control measures through regional 

health authorities. We‟ll develop a province-wide mental health 

strategic plan to assist those struggling with overwhelming 

symptoms and illnesses too often dismissed because they can‟t 

be easily seen. 

 

And plans are under way for new First Nation and Métis 

consultation and health plan. We‟re building on a promise to 

keep our economy strong. This budget delivers on our province 

to dedicate millions towards improving our road and highway 

network across the province. With federal partnership, twinning 

efforts will be stepped up on the busy lanes of Highway 11 

between Saskatoon and Prince Albert to be completed in just 

four years. 

 

A new bypass road to connect Highways 1 and 11 will be 

constructed outside of the Queen City. This will support the 



2366 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2009 

tremendous development around a new container shipping 

facility — the global transportation hub. 

 

This budget will provide for a new bridge at St. Louis, a 

Lewvan Drive interchange in Regina, and a truck bypass in 

Yorkton. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — We are fixing what was once voted 

the worst highway in Saskatchewan, and providing funding to 

upgrade Highway 368 near St. Brieux to provide . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — To provide the safe and solid road that 

residents, the local industry have wanted and needed for years. 

We‟re building Highway 32 near Leader. Over $40 million . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Over $40 million will help rehabilitate 

municipal roads to better support the heavy traffic of a growing 

economy. 

 

We‟re building on our promise to enhance the Saskatchewan 

research and development tax credit, making it fully refundable 

to provide financial support and incentives to the leaders in 

innovation in our province. This will help . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — This will help bridge the financial gap 

between initial research and commercial development. And this 

budget will also attract investments in Saskatchewan-based 

small- and medium-sized business. 

 

A tax credit that supports the federal labour-sponsored venture 

capital corporation will be increased to match the existing rates 

for similar provincial funds. Our government will continue to 

support those who enhance and diversify our economy. We‟ll 

support an enterprise regions program that encourages regional 

economic development, and we‟ll support a western-based 

partnership agreement, also designed to encourage economic 

growth right here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Our government will expand and broaden its reach by creating 

northern enterprise regions to support economic development in 

the far North districts of our province. We‟re building on our 

promise to improve support programs for farmers and ranchers 

— over $100 million of new dollars to fulfill our promise to 

fully fund our share of the AgriStability and AgriInvestment 

programs . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — And another $25 million to fulfill our 

commitment to improve crop insurance for farmers. We‟ll 

broaden our pest management control programs. We‟ll launch a 

water study to ensure Saskatchewan people have access to this 

basic necessity of life for today and for tomorrow. 

 

We‟re building on our promise for a greener Saskatchewan. 

We‟ll continue to support innovations in the capture and storage 

of CO2 emissions. This year alone we‟ll commit over $17 

million towards these and other key go green initiatives. 

 

We‟re building on our promise to keep life affordable. Our 

government will begin an ambitious project to renovate 

government-subsidized rental housing by making these units 

more environmentally friendly, energy efficient, and yet still 

affordable. Millions of dollars in funding will better adjust 

shelter rates for income assistance programs. We‟ll also 

increase transit support for the disabled, and we‟re building on 

our promise to help senior citizens by increasing monthly 

support to seniors to help them cover rising costs. 

 

Today our government has set a course for a strong and steady 

Saskatchewan. After so many years of losing people to other 

provinces, after so many years of trailing the pack, 

Saskatchewan‟s time has come. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — There are those who have said that 

Saskatchewan today is an economic star of our country. If that 

is the case then let‟s make sure it‟s the right kind of star. Not a 

shooting star burning bright for an instant and then fading way, 

but let us be a North Star, the one that you can set your compass 

by. Strong and steady, Saskatchewan will navigate through the 

choppy waters ahead. By sticking to a solid economic plan, by 

remaining sound fiscal managers, we will stay on course. 

 

[14:45] 

 

We will stay strong and steady through meaningful tax 

reductions, like the largest education property tax cut in 

Saskatchewan history. We‟ll stay strong and steady through 

meaningful infrastructure projects, which keep our province 

working and keep our economy moving forward. We‟ll stay 

strong and steady through meaningful investments in 

Saskatchewan people, in families, in students, in children, in 

seniors, in First Nations and Métis people, in those from rural 

and urban Saskatchewan. Because when you think about it, 

where does this province get its strength? Really, that‟s easy. 

The answer is right in the province‟s motto — from many 

peoples, strength. 

 

Today I‟m honoured to deliver a budget that builds on the 

strength of the people, all of the people, of our great province. 

And while I‟m sure we‟ll face some challenging days ahead, is 

there anywhere on earth that you would rather be living today 

than our Saskatchewan — the best province in the best country 

of the world. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I‟m proud to move, seconded by the 

member from Rosetown-Elrose: 

 

That this Assembly approves in general the budgetary 

policy of the government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance, 

seconded by the member from Rosetown-Elrose: 

 



March 18, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2367 

That the Assembly approves in general the budgetary 

policy of the government. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Let 

me at the outset say some, I‟m sure, remarks that will be 

welcome, but I‟m going to make some very brief remarks, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a house is only as solid as its foundation, and so it 

is with budgets. A key component of the foundation for a solid 

budget is the government‟s economic outlook. That is the 

government‟s outlook of growth, forecast for growth in our 

gross domestic product or GDP. Strong economic growth 

means strong growth in revenues to support spending in the 

budget. Little or no economic growth means weak revenues. It 

may even trigger increased expenditures. 

 

It is the practice in Saskatchewan for the provincial government 

to provide a forecast of GDP growth and to publish the forecast 

that had been provided by private sector forecasters. All of this 

information is in our budget documents. Usually the GDP 

forecast by the government and the private sector are similar. 

One may be a little higher or lower, but on balance they‟re 

pretty much the same. 

 

This year, for the first time in a very long time, we see a 

dramatic difference between private sector GDP growth 

forecast and the government‟s own growth forecast. In the 

budget documents where the private sector is projecting GDP 

growth of 1 per cent for Saskatchewan this year, the provincial 

government is projecting GDP growth of 2.1 per cent — double 

the growth being forecast by the private sector. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it gets even worse. Since the government 

completed its internal consideration of the budget before it put 

it to bed, so to speak, private sector forecasters have continued 

to scale back their growth projections. Now the average private 

sector forecast is point six three per cent. The government‟s 

growth forecast is now more than three times that of the private 

sector. 

 

History tells us, Mr. Speaker, there is a lag effect between the 

onset of recessionary trends in the United States and the rest of 

Canada, and the onset of recessionary trends here in 

Saskatchewan. Given what is taking place in the world 

economy, this is a time for the government to be cautiously 

optimistic, not blindly optimistic. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this budget there‟s another set of economic 

assumptions that need to be questioned. Here I speak of 

revenues from potash in Saskatchewan. Twenty per cent — 1 in 

$5 of all of the revenues in this budget — come from potash 

royalties and related surcharges. That‟s a huge number. And 

when so many eggs are placed in one basket, Mr. Speaker, we 

need to be careful. 

 

When we turn to the budget summary, we see the government is 

projecting potash production this year of 10.3 million tonnes. 

Since the budget went to print, the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan has said it will reduce its production by a further 

1.5 million tonnes. And that, Mr. Speaker, is a further 10 per 

cent cut in production. And what confidence should 

Saskatchewan people place in the government‟s potash revenue 

projections, especially since this now amounts to 20 per cent of 

all our revenue? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the flip side of revenue is expense. I note that the 

total spending in this budget is 12.4 per cent — that‟s right, 

12.4 per cent — higher than in last year‟s budget. And last 

year‟s increase in spending was 10 per cent over the previous 

year. And that‟s a 22.4 per cent increase in spending in two 

years. That kind of increase in spending, Mr. Speaker, is not 

sustainable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a few words about debt. I note that the 

government is projecting to increase, increase public debt by 36 

per cent over the next four years. Not only is it growing in 

actual terms, the debt is also projected to grow at a higher rate 

than the economy. Debt is increasing as a percentage of GDP, 

growing faster than the province is growing. Given our history 

of indebtedness, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan, this should 

concern us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, wild revenue assumptions, out-of-control 

spending, and a mounting debt problem, this budget is all about 

short-term gain for long-term pain. And some people aren‟t 

getting their short-term gain. If you‟re a single mother making 

less than $25,000, the government‟s own inner-city comparison 

suggests you‟re worse off under this budget than you were last 

year. 

 

I worry, Mr. Speaker. I worry that this government can‟t help 

themselves when it comes to spending money. I worry that the 

private sector forecasters are right and that the Saskatchewan 

Party is wrong. I worry that they have gambled on potash and 

will come up short. I worry that they are not helping the most 

vulnerable in our province. I worry that spending initiatives 

today will not be affordable tomorrow. And I worry that the 

government is just not up to the job. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, the government would have you 

believe that this budget is strong and steady. We think this 

budget is wrong already. 

 

I will have more to say on this tomorrow, Mr. Speaker, but at 

this point I move to adjourn debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Douglas Park has 

moved adjournment of debate. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 



2368 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2009 

Resumption of Budget Debate 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move: 

 

That debate on the motion that the government approves in 

general the budgetary policy of the government be 

resumed on Thursday, March 19, 2009. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance: 

 

That debate on the motion that the Assembly approves in 

general the budgetary policy of the government be 

resumed on Thursday, March 19, 2009. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — Before I place the question on adjournment, I 

want to first of all say thank you to our guests who‟ve joined us 

today, and for your co-operation in observing the rules of the 

Assembly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — And now I would like to extend an invitation 

to our guests and to members to join us for tea in the library — 

if you leave the Assembly to your right, down the hall, the 

library room, or to your left in room 218. 

 

At this time I place the question. The Government House 

Leader has moved that this House do now adjourn. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. This Assembly stands adjourned until 

tomorrow morning at 10 a.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 14:56.] 

 



March 18, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2369 

CORRIGENDUM 

 

On page 2282 of Hansard, No. 33A Monday March 16, 2009, 

in the left column, second last paragraph spoken by Hon. Mr. 

Hickie, the second sentence reads, “The NDP did not get any 

information from escape reports when they formed the 

government, Mr. Deputy Speaker.” 

 

The sentence should read, “The NDP did not vet any 

information from escape reports when they formed the 

government, Mr. Deputy Speaker.” 

 

We apologize for this error. 

 



 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2353 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2353 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2353 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2353 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2353 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2353 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2354 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2354 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2354 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2354 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2354 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Cost of Living Increases  

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2355 

 Moose Jaw Students Win Junior Achievement Awards  

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2355 

 Property Tax Relief 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2355 

 Yorkton Hosts Canada Cup of Curling 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2356 

 Graduate Retention Program 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2356 

 Agreement Signed for Mineral Exploration 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2356 

 Provincial Psychiatric Facility 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2357 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Government Spending 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2357 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2357 

 Management of Pension and Investment Funds 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2359 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2359 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2360 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2360 

 Property Tax Relief 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2361 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2361 

 Revenue Projections 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2361 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2361 

 Growth and Financial Security Fund 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2361 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2362 

TABLING OF ESTIMATES AND SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2362 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2362 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2362 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2367 

 Resumption of Budget Debate 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2368 

CORRIGENDUM .......................................................................................................................................................................... 2369 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 


