




















































Hansard: April 27, 2009


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 53A  MONDAY, APRIL 27, 2009, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2851 

 April 27, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — Members, before I recognize other members, 

I would like to introduce a group of teachers who have joined 

us today, and I would ask leave of the Assembly for an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, it’s my honour 

today to introduce to you a group of teachers who are here in 

the Legislative Assembly to attend the 11th annual 

Saskatchewan Teachers’ Institute on Parliamentary Democracy. 

The institute began on Saturday and will conclude on 

Wednesday. 

 

This group has already met with a number of people including 

members of the judiciary, the Acting Chief Electoral Officer, 

the Clerk, and several MLAs [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly]. Earlier today they observed the mock parliament 

presentation in the Legislative Chamber. They have scheduled 

to meet with the House Leaders, caucus Chairs, caucus Whips, 

cabinet ministers including the Minister of Education; the 

Premier and the Leader of the Opposition as well as 

government caucus and legislative staff. 

 

I would ask as I introduce these teachers that they might wave 

as I mention their names. Ms. Jestina Beskowiney, Milestone 

School in Milestone; Mrs. Beverly Bzdel, Wynyard Elementary 

in Wynyard; Ms. Amanda Christensen, École Vickers School in 

Prince Albert; Mrs. Candy-Lyn Chuckry, Wynyard Elementary 

School in Wynyard; Mr. Brandon Doom, Marshall School in 

Marshall; Mrs. Cecile Elliott, École Vickers School in Prince 

Albert; Mrs. Sandra Hamp, Hepburn School in Hepburn; Mr. 

Michael Horgan, Lashburn High School in Lashburn; Mrs. 

Mauri Ingham, Columbia School in Yorkton; Ms. Erin McIvor, 

Fort Qu’Appelle Elementary Community School in Fort 

Qu’Appelle; Mr. Raymond Michaud, École secondaire Collège 

Mathieu in Gravelbourg; Mr. Murray Neudorf, student, 

University of Saskatchewan; Ms. Michelle Schaff, Warman 

High School in Warman; Ms. Brittany Thies, student, 

University of Regina; Mrs. Angela Thiessen, Debden School in 

Debden; Mr. Greg Walker, Prince Albert Collegiate, Prince 

Albert; and Mr. Paul Weiman, Holy Family School in North 

Battleford. 

 

And I would also like to mention our steering committee, 

composed of three teachers who attended past institutes and 

officials from the Ministry of Education. From the Ministry of 

Education, Gerry Craswell, Anna Schmidt, and Brent Toles; 

and Ms. Delores Syrota from Elfros, Larry Mikulcik from 

William Derby School in Strasbourg, and Delise Fathers from 

Riverview Collegiate in Moose Jaw. 

 

I ask the members to welcome this fine group of teachers to 

their Legislative Chamber. 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Southeast. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 

number of victims services volunteers and would request leave 

for an extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave for an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Southeast. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you 

to all members. Mr. Speaker, this is Victims of Crime 

Awareness Week in Saskatchewan, and seated in your gallery 

are 10 individuals who have served with police-based victims 

services programs in Saskatchewan. A bit earlier today, I had 

the pleasure to present each of them with a gift commemorating 

their long services as victims services volunteers. I’d ask that 

they wave when I call their name. 

 

Bill Heard has been a victims services volunteer in Regina for 

20 years. Jill Hay is the Regina victims services coordinator. 

She has been both an employee and a volunteer with this 

program for 20 years. Adrian Walker of Yorkton, Dale Ebert of 

Prince Albert, and Glen Herman of Swift Current each have 15 

years of volunteer service. Those here today who have given 10 

years of volunteer service are Diane Loewen of Lloydminster, 

Judy Hughs of Yorkton, Irene Nowosad of Marcelin, and Joann 

McKay of Regina. 

 

Also honoured today who are volunteers and support workers 

with 10 years of service — who are not here but I would like to 

recognize them in any event — are Sandy Rediron of Beauval, 

Wanda Bouvier of Cole Bay, Theresa de Both of Hudson Bay, 

Bertha Gowen of Carrot River, Rheta Renwick of Milestone, 

Beth Goeres of Weyburn, Phyllis Smith and Caroline 

Ratt-Misponas of Pinehouse Lake, Ida Cook and Lena Young 

both of Pakwaw Lake, Hilda Thommes of Cumberland House, 

Pat Balon of Wakaw. And also two that have recently passed 

away: Jean Babchuk of Regina, Betty Heil of Smeaton. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as our victims services programs have evolved 

over the years, dedicated volunteers have given of their time 

and energy. They have connected with their victims and their 

communities and supported them throughout the criminal 

justice process. I would ask that all members join me in 

expressing our appreciation to these dedicated individuals and 

to all of our victims services volunteers for their years of 

service to the people in their communities. And I point out to 

them that this is not a retirement. This is merely marking a 

milestone, and they are expected to continue to work. I thank 

them and thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 



2852 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2009 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like 

to join the Minister of Justice and on behalf of the official 

opposition welcome the victims services volunteers that are 

here in the gallery today. If one has an occasion, as some of us 

have had, to visit a community perhaps in an official capacity 

following a particularly horrendous and high profile crime, one 

quickly learns that the circle of victims is much larger than is 

readily apparent through reading the newspaper or listening to 

the radio or watching the television. 

 

And in these communities, I have seen victim services 

volunteers lend the strength and support that can never make 

the trauma go away, but it does so much to mitigate it, and I 

know families and communities in Saskatchewan in which this 

has made a tremendous difference, Mr. Speaker. So I want to 

join with the minister, on behalf of the official opposition, in 

welcoming our guests here today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. It’s my pleasure 

to introduce to you and through you to all members of this Hon. 

Assembly, Mr. Terry Drabiuk and Mr. Gerald Proctor from the 

Northern Alberta Institute of Technology. Mr. Drabiuk, a 

SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 

Technology] alumni, has been with NAIT [Northern Alberta 

Institute of Technology] since 2003 and oversees all of their 

corporate client relations in Canada and over 23 countries. As 

well, Mr. Proctor, a established and well-recognized athlete and 

scholar — previously worked for a number of years in the 

cabinet policy coordination role in the Alberta government — 

currently is the director of government relations at NAIT where 

he works to enhance NAIT’s reputation at home and abroad. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure to have these gentlemen with us 

today. NAIT is currently engaged in a successful partnership 

with the Meadow Lake Tribal Council, our own North West 

Regional College, and Shell Canada, to deliver employment 

readiness and trades for Aboriginal peoples. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ll ask all members of the Assembly to welcome 

these gentlemen to the Saskatchewan legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 

to introduce to you and through you to all members of the 

Assembly 43 students from the great school of Henry Janzen in 

my fine constituency of Regina Walsh Acres. They are here 

today to participate in the legislative mock parliament and also 

to visit with us here in the Chamber today and view question 

period. And then we’ll get together and have a chat afterwards 

and I’ll answer any questions that these students may have. 

 

They are accompanied here today by teachers, Betty Elliott — 

and perhaps you could give a wave — and Vic Stevenson, as 

well as Nora Semchuk who is their teacher assistant. We would 

like to welcome you to the Legislative Assembly today. We 

hope you’ve enjoyed your experience so far in the mock 

parliament, and I look forward to meeting with you after 

question period. And perhaps I could get all my colleagues to 

welcome you to the legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today it’s my honour 

to present petitions in support of changes to The Highway 

Traffic Act, to be referred to as the Gallenger amendment. Mr. 

Speaker, the petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to enact changes to The Highway Traffic Act, 

to be referred to as the Gallenger amendment, which 

would require all vehicle traffic to slow to 60 kilometres 

per hour when passing a snowplow with their warning 

lights activated on Saskatchewan roadways. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to present these petitions from 

Qu’Appelle, McLean, Regina, and Balgonie. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

present a petition that speaks to the inadequate access to quality 

and affordable child care, and that it’s a major roadblock for 

parents who want to access the labour market or further their 

own education. And, Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government, through consultations with the daycare 

community, to immediately invest in growing the capacity 

of the early child care community to enable new child care 

spaces. And this investment must include infrastructure 

funding for new facilities and expansion funding to 

significantly increase the number of early childhood 

diploma and certificate training seats and funding to 

ensure that the sector is able to increase its wages and 

benefits to attract and retain the needed personnel. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present on behalf of Saskatchewan families. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 



April 27, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2853 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition in 

support of indexing the minimum wage. And as we all know, 

indexing the minimum wage would ensure that minimum wage 

earners would be able to maintain a standard of living as the 

cost of living increases. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to indexing Saskatchewan 

minimum wage to ensure that the standard of living of 

minimum wage earners is maintained in the face of cost of 

living increases. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the petition is signed by residents of Regina. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of wage equity for CBO 

[community-based organization] workers. And we know that 

research demonstrates those working for community-based 

organizations are paid on average 8 to $10 per hour less than 

employees performing work of equal value in government 

departments. I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the development and 

implementation of a multi-year funding plan to ensure that 

CBO workers achieve wage equity with employees who 

perform work of equal value in government departments. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And these citizens come from the cities of Regina, Melville, 

and Weyburn. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

a petition on behalf of rural residents of Saskatchewan who 

question why the Sask Party government is leaving them behind 

with respect to providing safe and affordable water. And the 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to financially assist the town of Duck Lake 

residents for the good of their health and safety due to the 

exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency, and that this government fulfills its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good residents of 

Duck Lake, Prince Albert, Rosthern, and Wakaw. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition in support of fairness for graduate students 

here in the province through the expansion of the graduate 

retention program. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately expand the graduate retention 

program to include master’s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are 

students at the University of Saskatchewan as well as the 

University of Regina. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

to repair Highway 123 that goes to the community of 

Cumberland House, Saskatchewan. This petition is signed by 

the leadership and community members, village of Cumberland 

House and Cumberland House First Nations. The prayer reads 

as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

Saskatchewan Party government to stop denying the 

money that was allocated to this highway and commit to 

immediately providing the repairs to this highway that the 

people of northern Saskatchewan were promised. 

 

And that in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by the good people of Cumberland House and area. 

I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Holocaust Memorial Service 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday I along with members 

from Greystone, Southeast, and Sutherland attended the 

Holocaust memorial service at Congregation Agudas Israel in 

Saskatoon. Agudas Israel annually invites a survivor of the 

Holocaust to bring their story to the congregation, invited 

guests, and many interested citizens. 

 



2854 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2009 

Yesterday survivor David Shentow shared a powerful, 

emotional account of his life in three concentration camps — 

Auschwitz, Warsaw, and Krakow — during World War II. His 

story is told through his 17-year-old eyes — his very words “an 

idea of what hell is all about.” This brutally graphic recount of 

his experiences shocked and saddened the audience. There were 

not many dry eyes in the packed hall. 

 

[13:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, we simply cannot forget the Holocaust and its 

warning to the world. This is what can happen, does happen, 

and still continues to happen when the world community is 

indifferent. We all need to be witness to the Holocaust. Strong, 

brave men and women like David Shentow need us to carry 

their story forward. The stories cannot die with the survivors. 

 

Mr. Speaker, thank you to Agudas Israel for being witness to 

the Holocaust and never letting us forget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Weyburn. 

 

Remembering Keith Whyte 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, it is with a heavy heart that I rise 

to speak on the passing of Keith Whyte of Bengough. Keith 

became well known for his courageous and tenacious advocacy 

on behalf of cancer victims like himself to secure funding for 

the cancer drug Avastin. And while his personal battle came to 

an end late last week, it did with him knowing two things: that 

he was successful in helping to increase drug coverage for 

others, and that he beat every estimate on how much time he 

really had left. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this past January I had the great privilege of 

joining with Keith’s family and friends in seeing Keith 

recognized by the Canadian Cancer Society with the 2009 

National Medal of Courage for exhibiting outstanding and 

unusual courage during his battle with colorectal cancer. 

 

While Keith was pleased to be recognized for his work, I know 

that he was very humbled by the attention. And you knew full 

well that he was building on the work done by people like Terry 

Rak and Bob Loeppky before him, and so many others. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Keith Whyte was many things. He was a farmer. 

He was an unrelenting advocate, a storyteller, a constituent, 

and, Mr. Speaker, he was a friend. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as a newly elected MLA, I first met Keith when he 

came to my constituency office in his fight against the 

Government of Saskatchewan. At the conclusion of that first 

meeting, he said with a smile, you probably didn’t know Keith 

Whyte when I walked through the door, but when I leave, you’ll 

never forget me. Mr. Speaker, Keith never knew how right he 

was. Rest easy, Keith. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Northern Saskatchewan’s Curling Champions 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I speak of northern 

Saskatchewan’s ice man today. He is Lawrence Corrigal from 

Ile-a-la-Crosse, and at the age of 51 and in his 37th year of 

curling, Lawrence skipped his team to win the men’s 2009 

National Aboriginal Championships in Saskatoon. In the 

winning team were third Chad Sahyes; second Tavio Mori; and 

lead David Corrigal, who is Lawrence’s nephew. 

 

However the celebrations for Lawrence did not stop here. 

Lawrence’s daughter, Danielle, is a high school graduate and 

also a curler. Her team won the 2009 Junior Mixed National 

Aboriginal Curling Championships this same year. Lawrence’s 

son, Evan, a grade 10 student, placed first at Lloydminster’s 

curling regionals to win a berth at the high school provincials. 

And, Mr. Speaker, with two more years left of high school 

competition ahead of him, we are sure Evan, with his sister 

Danielle, are this province’s rising curling stars. Evan is also a 

very good hockey player and plays at the midget level. 

 

Lawrence credits his devotion to the game of curling to the 

northern school leagues where his passion for curling began, 

and where his children began their own successful venture into 

the ice sports. 

 

Lawrence is the iceman of the North, since Lawrence is also the 

ice technician at the local curling rink. And finally, Lawrence is 

as steady and sure as the ice that must come every year to a 

wintery North. Lawrence has served as the manager of the local 

housing authority for 21 years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Lawrence, Danielle, and Evan truly make me 

proud they are from northern Saskatchewan and are great 

curling champions. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Meadow Lake. 

 

Victims of Crime Awareness Week  

 

Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 

today to inform this House that April 26 to May 2 is Victims of 

Crime Awareness Week in Saskatchewan, proclaimed as such 

to coincide with National Victims of Crime Awareness Week. 

This week’s an opportunity to raise awareness about victim 

issues and about the programs and services in place to help 

victims and their families in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, this 

year’s theme is Supporting, Connecting, Evolving. 

 

Victims of crime and traumatic events can feel overwhelmed, 

isolated, and unable to cope with what has happened. They may 

need the help of a volunteer victim services worker who can 

offer information and support immediately after the event and 

throughout the criminal justice process. Victim services 

volunteers also connect victims and their families to other 

programs and services for help. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with the expansion of the Prince Albert regional 

victim services program to Spiritwood, we have almost 300 

victim services volunteers operating out of 18 police-based 

programs which are available to 87 per cent of our province’s 



April 27, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2855 

population. 

 

I ask that all members join me in expressing our appreciation of 

our victim services volunteers for their service to the people of 

Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Saskatoon Local Area Planning 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Local area planning 

is an initiative of the city of Saskatoon that puts citizens at the 

forefront in determining the future of their neighbourhood. It 

involves individuals, community groups, business owners, and 

other local stakeholders working closely with the city of 

Saskatoon personnel. Together they identify specific goals and 

strategies to strengthen the neighbourhood economically, 

socially, and environmentally. The result is a comprehensive 

local area plan that guides development of the neighbourhood 

for many years to come. Approximately 10 neighbourhoods in 

Saskatoon have developed local area plans. 

 

City Park is a neighbourhood mostly in my constituency, the 

beautiful Saskatoon Meewasin, and its residents have been 

working diligently with the city of Saskatoon for two years 

towards finalizing their local area plan. Like all local area plans, 

City Park’s plan is wide-ranging in scope, including land use, 

parks and recreation, traffic, municipal services, neighbourhood 

amenities, and neighbourhood safety. I congratulate the 

residents of City Park and particularly the City Park 

Community Association for their participation and leadership in 

this process. 

 

I also commend the city of Saskatoon for enabling extensive 

and thorough citizen input into neighbourhood planning. This 

provision for active citizen consultation and participation is 

something which governments at all levels should ensure. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Humboldt. 

 

Humboldt Broncos Win Anavet Cup 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

a couple of weeks ago it was my honour to rise and 

acknowledge the accomplishments of the Humboldt Broncos, 

who had just captured their third consecutive SJHL 

[Saskatchewan Junior Hockey League] championship. The next 

step towards the national championship for the Broncos was a 

best of seven series with Manitoba champions from Portage. 

They competed for the Anavet Cup, which was played out over 

the past few weeks. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was looking like the Broncos were in some 

trouble. Down three games to one, it looked like their season 

was coming to an end. However, in game five, Mr. Speaker, the 

Broncos proved their skills in scoring 12 goals for a win of 12 

to 2. In game six on the road in Portage, they battled hard and 

once again won, 4 to 3 in overtime. 

Game seven was played last night, Mr. Speaker. Trailing 4 to 1 

in the third period with less than 12 minutes to go, Humboldt 

scored three exciting goals and sent the game into overtime. 

This was the fourth overtime game of the series. At 5:56 of 

overtime, Nick Kalnicki scored for the Broncos to complete the 

tremendous game and series comeback. The Broncos were once 

again champions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there were times when many doubted that the 

Broncos could win the Anavet Cup again. There should have 

been no doubt. These young men have over and over again 

shown their resilience, toughness, and pride. They have once 

again made the town of Humboldt very, very happy and proud. 

 

The Broncos will now move to the RBC [Royal Bank of 

Canada] Royal Bank Cup, to be played in Victoria later this 

week. So I ask all members to please join me in congratulating 

the Humboldt Broncos in their season thus far and extend their 

support for the Broncos in their pursuit of the second 

consecutive national junior A championship. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from the Battlefords. 

 

Battlefords Community Players 

 

Mr. Taylor: — I would like today to draw members’ attention 

to the great work of the Battlefords Community Players, who 

have once again presented themselves very well at the 

provincial community theatre awards festival, TheatreFest, held 

recently in Prince Albert. Battlefords Community Players’ 

exceptional male lead Jim Walls for the second year in a row 

won the award for best actor at the festival. The Players’ 

production of the play Trying won the award for best visual and 

was named runner-up in the best play and best director 

categories. It’s also interesting to note that this year’s director 

Donna Challis, last year at TheatreFest, won the best director 

award. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of The Battlefords are very proud of 

this incredible, non-profit, community-based theatre company 

that continually provides great local entertainment throughout 

the year, but also performs at a level that produces awards and 

recognition at competition events throughout the province. 

 

To quote executive producer Donna Challis in a recent news 

story: “People always know that our standard is going to be 

among the best and I’m very proud of that and I think all the 

Community Players’ members are proud.” Well, Mr. Speaker, I 

can say that all residents of The Battlefords are proud of the 

work done by and the accomplishments achieved by The 

Battlefords Community Players. And I ask all members of the 

Legislative Assembly to join me today in offering our 

congratulations and best wishes for continued success in their 

future endeavours. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 



2856 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2009 

Review of Hospital Policy 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Late last week, the 

Saskatoon Health Region issued a statement regarding an 

incident at Saskatoon City Hospital that contradicts comments 

made earlier in the week by one of its own spokespersons. Not 

only does it contradict one of its own spokespersons; the 

statement specifically contradicts the version of events 

originally put forward by one of Saskatoon’s good Samaritans, 

Mr. Ken Olson. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m sure the Minister of Health has been in touch 

with the Saskatoon Health Region. And I’m wondering if he 

can confirm today, does he believe Mr. Olson’s accounting of 

this incident, or is he accepting the Saskatoon Health Region’s 

statement that implies Mr. Olson is not telling the truth? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, when this came to light last week, we were very 

concerned obviously when we heard of the report. That’s why 

we acted immediately and asked all health regions to review 

their policies as to what would be the situation where people 

would react to people found on the grounds. That review has 

certainly been conducted. 

 

What I was certainly satisfied with when I talked to many of the 

people in the Saskatoon Health Region was that, you know, 

certainly common sense will apply because that’s what I had 

asked all health regions to look at — through the lens of 

common sense when they write policies such as that. 

 

In this particular case, Mr. Speaker, I think there’s still some 

evidence being gathered. I will not comment on that until I get a 

full report from the Saskatoon Health Region, Mr. Speaker. But 

what I will say is that the health region has looked into it, and 

they’ve taken this situation very serious, which I compliment 

them on. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week before the 

health region put out its official statement, the minister said he 

had reviewed the case in question and subsequently called for 

common sense to prevail. 

 

After the minister’s hasty review in his letter to the region, the 

Saskatoon Health Region released its statement contradicting its 

earlier description of the events, indicating that a triage nurse 

had attended the individual in question. Mr. Olson says this is 

fictional and calls the Saskatoon Health Region’s statement “an 

affront to my credibility.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister’s credibility on this file is also in 

question. The minister needs to clarify today: did he speak to 

the Saskatoon Health Region before he called for common 

sense to prevail in matters like this, or was he simply basing his 

first response on media reports? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I think if you review the 

Hansard from last week when I answered the question, unlike 

what that member just accused, I didn’t say that I had reviewed 

the case extensively. I didn’t say that at all. What I said was, 

I’m going to ask the health regions to look at their policies to 

make sure that common sense prevails. 

 

I would ask that member to at least be sincere when she’s 

asking a question like that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, there are three different versions of 

this story. There’s the first-hand report of the good Samaritan, 

Mr. Olson. There’s the first response from the Saskatoon Health 

Region. And finally there’s the official statement from the 

region. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s no reason to treat Mr. Olson’s comments 

as untrue. The minister responded with his common sense 

request based on the region’s first response; therefore it must be 

surmised that the minister believed that common sense had not 

been used in this case. Contrarily the health region’s official 

statement suggests that common sense was followed. 

 

Given that the minister has called for a province-wide review of 

the policy in question, we really must ask today: how is the 

minister going to treat this case now that it is clear that he has 

either been misled by the region in the first incident or he’s 

being misled in the second incident? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said last week and I 

just finished saying this afternoon is that we need to make sure 

that all the policies that we have set up through the regional 

health authorities are through the lens of common sense to 

ensure that staff safety, health and safety, is certainly looked 

after but also that the patients who need to be first and foremost 

in our health care system, their needs are looked after as well, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so what I did is I asked the health regions not necessarily 

to change the policy that they had because if the policy is 

already set up looking through the lens of common sense, Mr. 

Speaker, then I think it will be meeting their mark. And that’s 

certainly what I’ve asked the health regions to do. They have 

been doing that work. There had been a meeting conducted on 

Thursday discussing the various policies because policies do 

vary from health region to health region to health region, Mr. 

Speaker. The work is being conducted and I’m satisfied with 

that work. 



April 27, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2857 

[14:00] 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Controlling Greenhouse Gas Emissions 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, last Thursday the member for 

Carrot River Valley unveiled the Sask Party’s latest excuse for 

their broken promises on climate change: it’s just too 

expensive. The Sask Party dismantled the $320 million Green 

Future Fund we established from the sale of the NewGrade 

upgrader, and now they complain they have no money to 

address climate change. 

 

The member claims we need to choose between lower 

SaskPower rates and higher climate change targets. But, Mr. 

Speaker, last week the Sask Party told Saskatchewan people to 

expect neither. 

 

To the minister: why is the Sask Party more interested in 

making excuses for climate change than keeping their promises 

to reduce it? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I can tell you 

what our government is interested in, and that is keeping life 

affordable for the residents of this province. Apparently the 

NDP [New Democratic Party] did not have this consideration in 

place. The last NDP Environment minister, the member for 

Regina . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Minister Responsible 

for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The last NDP 

Environment minister, the member for Regina Lakeview, said, 

and I quote, “And this is one area where people can contribute, 

is to actually pay for new production which is near zero 

emissions.” Mr. Speaker, the NDP’s plan all along was to pass 

the cost of their emissions on to SaskPower ratepayers without 

any consideration of what that cost is. Our plan is to balance the 

economy with environmental protection, and that also includes 

looking out for SaskPower ratepayers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Looking out for SaskPower ratepayers meant 

that they had the guarantee of a lowest cost utility bundle, 

which they no longer have under the Sask Party. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, this minister will say anything to 

excuse this government’s lack of action on climate change. 

What’s not clear is what the minister believes. Twice last week 

she hinted that she might reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 

20 per cent by 2020, but she didn’t say whether they will 

actually adopt the proposed American targets which use the 

2005 as the base year. 

 

To the minister: what year will be used as the base year against 

which absolute reductions would be measured? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, the one thing that I can 

guarantee the member opposite is that the action taken by this 

government will have greater results than the inaction by the 

NDP. Mr. Speaker, if the NDP were in government, their plan 

— and it’s on page 4 of their green energy plan — was to, and I 

quote, “. . . complying with industry’s mandatory emissions 

reduction obligations under the federal climate change plan.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is no federal climate change plan that’s in 

effect in this country at the moment. The regulations are not 

enforced. So if the NDP were on this side of the House, they 

would be doing absolutely nothing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — I suggest that the minister start reviewing her 

file a little more in depth because clearly she’s not that familiar 

of it. So, Mr. Speaker, last week the minister couldn’t tell us 

what year those emissions would stabilize. Without a 

stabilization date, reduction targets simply aren’t credible. She’s 

had nearly a week to think about it and come up with an 

answer. So we’ll try again, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Once and for all, will she tell us what year greenhouse gas 

emissions will stabilize under the Sask Party government, if 

ever? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, as I stated in a scrum last 

week — and I also answered the member’s question in 

committee last week — that we will be announcing our plan in 

May, and all those details would be announced there. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I would like to quote the member from 

Regina Walsh Acres who says, and I quote, “Hypocrisy on the 

environment . . . cannot be covered up with glossy print.” Mr. 

Speaker, I couldn’t agree more because that’s all this is, from 

the NDP. We will have a plan next week that lays out targets 

for our province, that lays out a . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I hate to say this, but you haven’t 



2858 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2009 

disappointed me as what I explained to the students. But I 

would ask members to be mindful of who’s in the Chamber and 

the role of question period and allowing the minister to respond. 

I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I pointed 

out, the member opposite agrees that a glossy brochure does not 

necessarily guarantee action. Mr. Speaker, we will have our 

plan announced next month. I ask the member opposite to be 

patient. We waited for 16 years for the NDP to do anything. I 

think they can wait a few more weeks. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Since the minister is so unclear as to what the 

NDP did, let me give her a real quick overview: $320 million of 

which 100 million was for conservation and efficiency, 125 

million for carbon capture and storage in the oil and gas sector, 

75 million to increase the use of renewable energy, and 20 

million to reduce methane from oil and gas and agricultural 

sectors. That’s what the NDP was doing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party has no credibility 

on climate change. They promised to implement the NDP’s 

climate change targets and squandered the money set aside to 

meet those targets and now complain that they can’t meet the 

targets because it’s too expensive. They claim their desire to 

protect our economy is why they’re breaking their promises on 

climate change, but the health of our economy is the very 

reason that they should be keeping them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Morin: — And they can’t answer basic questions about 

how or even when they will reduce greenhouse gas emissions. 

To the minister: why is the Sask Party dragging its feet on 

climate change when Saskatchewan could be a leader in the 

green economy? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, if the member opposite 

wants to have a discussion on the green economy, perhaps she 

can explain why she said on March 23 this year in this House, 

“. . . carbon capture and storage, a technology the Sask Party 

claims to be cost-effective . . . is a claim that is simply dubious 

. . .” 

 

Mr. Speaker, they have completely turned their back on clean 

coal. The member opposite has clearly turned her back on 

carbon capture and storage even though according to her glossy 

brochure, on page 11, that carbon capture and storage is . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Some members on the opposition side 

of the House that are really interfering with the . . . And it’s not 

all the members. The public needs to be aware of the fact that 

sometimes it’s just a few. But I want to ask members to allow 

the minister to respond. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, if the member 

opposite is absolutely concerned about a green economy for our 

province, perhaps she can explain why she, speaking on behalf 

of her party, has completely turned her back on carbon capture 

and storage for our province. She said it’s not cost-effective. 

The little glossy brochure, page 11 says it is a cost-effective 

alternative for our province. So perhaps they could explain the 

complete hypocrisy of their position today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

2010 Winter Olympics 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people are properly 

excited about the 2010 Winter Olympics in Vancouver. They 

want Saskatchewan athletes to be showcased and foreign 

tourists and TV viewers to learn more about Saskatchewan. But 

Saskatchewan people are asking why our province appears to be 

spending up to $4 million or more on the Olympics while 

Manitoba spends 1.5 million and Ontario, a province with more 

than 12 times our population, spends just 5 million. 

 

At the same time, Saskatchewan families will be paying more 

this summer to camp in our provincial parks. To the minister: 

what is the total amount of money from all sources that 

Saskatchewan is spending on the Vancouver Olympics, and 

why are we spending so much more per capita than other 

provinces? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Mr. Speaker, I think we’ll all agree here 

today that participating as a contributing province in the 

Vancouver Olympics is absolutely essential to showcasing this 

province and what we are as a province and what we are as a 

people. Mr. Speaker, I cannot speak to what the members 

opposite refer to in the other provinces. We are spending the 

amount of money which includes . . . [inaudible] . . . a 

contributing province to the Olympics and monies associated to 

operating a pavilion at the Olympics, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’re very proud of Saskatchewan. We believe this money, 

along with the contributing province, will give us the ability to 

showcase Saskatchewan in the most cost-effective way. Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, perhaps I’ll help the minister. We 

know that the Sask Party has allocated 1.5 million for the Own 



April 27, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2859 

the Podium and the Cultural Olympiad; 405,000 for the torch 

relay; 187,000 in administration costs; and $700,000 to take 

pictures of Saskatchewan. That’s still leaves well over 1 million 

out of about $4 million for which there is no explanation — so 

1 million with no explanation. 

 

To the minister: can she provide Saskatchewan taxpayers with a 

complete breakdown of how their money is being spent at the 

Vancouver Olympics? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Mr. Speaker, I can assure the members 

opposite and the people of Saskatchewan that we are well 

positioned to showcase Saskatchewan at the Vancouver 2010 

Winter Olympics, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Plans are under way with respect to how we’re going to present 

Saskatchewan, and when those plans are ready to be unveiled, 

Mr. Speaker, we will unveil them. Rest assured we will 

showcase Saskatchewan in the most cost-effective, efficient, 

and best way known possible. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the 2010 Winter Olympics will be 

proud days for Vancouver, and Saskatchewan should be part of 

that. But we’re spending more than $4 million on an event in 

Vancouver, and it’s not clear what the benefits are to 

Saskatchewan taxpayers. Saskatchewan people are also 

wondering how much they will be spending to send the 

Premier, the minister, and other Sask Party bigwigs off to 

Vancouver and Whistler to take in the Olympics and maybe get 

a free photo op with an Olympic champion or two. 

 

To the minister: how much will Saskatchewan spend for travel 

and accommodation for government ministers and officials 

during the Vancouver Olympics? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — I don’t know. Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure who 

the member opposite is referring to when he says the word 

bigwigs . . . [inaudible] . . . However these Olympics are to 

showcase Saskatchewan, to showcase Saskatchewan athletes. 

This is the best time for Saskatchewan to stand apart from other 

provinces because, Mr. Speaker, we are apart from other 

provinces. 

 

With respect to the member’s specific question, we have no 

plans or intentions unless there’s a purpose, a bona fide 

business purpose, for government officials to attend, Mr. 

Speaker. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the minister may not like these 

questions, but Saskatchewan people do have the right to 

question how their money is being spent. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Nilson: — And they’re growing concerned about the 

culture of entitlement that seems to be gathering around the 

Sask Party after just 17 months in government. They don’t 

understand why Saskatchewan families are paying more to 

camp in provincial parks while the Premier and minister get 

free tickets to the Vancouver Olympics. To the minister: why 

are Saskatchewan taxpayers shelling out more than $4 million 

for the Vancouver Olympics while families pay more to camp 

in Saskatchewan parks? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Mr. Speaker, all we have to do is look at 

1986 Expo. The Government of Saskatchewan spent over $6 

million to have Saskatchewan House at the Expo and the 

pavilion, Mr. Speaker. We are talking more than 20 years later, 

Mr. Speaker, and we are putting, we are putting our best foot 

forward . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Culture. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — 20 years later, Mr. Speaker, and we are 

spending less money. With respect to the member’s question 

with the camping rates, Mr. Speaker, our camping rates are the 

second lowest in Canada. All monies that are used for camping 

rates are turned back into the parks to continue with park 

improvement, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What is the member suggesting? What is the member 

suggesting, Mr. Speaker? That we continue to keep the park 

rates at a certain level so that monies can be paid out of the 

GRF [General Revenue Fund]? Mr. Speaker, they are speaking 

out of both sides of their mouth again, Mr. Speaker, and we are 

satisfied that we have the answers required with park fees. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Rate Review Panel’s Recommendations for SaskPower 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister Responsible for 

SaskPower has repeatedly said that power customers should pay 

13 per cent more. He’s said repeatedly SaskPower needs 13 per 

cent rate increase. Earlier today the rate review committee 

looked at it and recommended an eight and a half per cent 



2860 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2009 

increase would be plenty enough. 

 

To the minister: there’s a 5 per cent discrepancy here. Why the 

difference? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much to the hon. 

member for that question. I’d like to begin by thanking the 

Saskatchewan rate review panel — members that have served 

for quite some time, as well as new members appointed by this 

government — for doing a great job, a comprehensive job of 

looking at SaskPower, and also with meeting with corporations 

and businesses and organizations across the province to hear 

directly about their wants and needs going forward. 

 

Indeed the Saskatchewan rate review panel is operating as it 

should. It is not a rubber stamp for what is put forward by the 

Crown corporations. It’s an independent review that takes 

place, a comprehensive review that brings witnesses forward. In 

this case they’ve done some very good work and put forward a 

recommendation of 8.5 per cent. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, you know for nine months 

now the world has watched while natural gas prices have been 

falling. The rate review panel earlier today recognized more 

than $11 million in natural gas savings for SaskPower, that cost 

savings — they recommended — be passed on in the form of a 

lower rate increase, from 13 to eight and a half per cent. 

 

Why did the minister ignore the reality of the world until the 

rate review panel stated the obvious? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, the rate review panel 

made 11 recommendations. One of them was that SaskPower 

should work closer with SaskEnergy and the good work that 

SaskEnergy is doing. Both corporations are committed to 

keeping natural gas rates and rates used in power generation as 

low as possible. And that’s indeed what the work has already 

begun, and we concur with that statement. 

 

Some other recommendations that were made by the rate review 

panel include . . . Regarding pension liabilities, for example, the 

corporation was wanting to take a charge right now because of 

losses that have happened on the pension side. The rate review 

panel suggested that be deferred and that that not be undertaken 

right now but that indeed it’s an idea that’ll have to be 

addressed in the future. Similarly the corporation wanted 

automated meter infrastructure so that could be more efficient. 

There was a $16 million charge associated with that. The rate 

review panel said, again, that that should be maybe deferred and 

ensure that Saskatchewan residents get the lowest possible rate 

today. And we agree. The good work will be well respected. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, indeed one of the 

recommendations to save money was to — get this — to do a 

cost-benefit analysis before spending $16 million on automated 

meter technology. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: — Spend it before . . . To the minister: can he tell 

me if they did any work at all on this file before they asked for a 

13 per cent rate increase? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — I can assure the member opposite 

that a lot of work has been done on the SaskPower file, mainly 

because of the infrastructure deficit that was left by members 

opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — We will provide safe and reliable 

power, sustainable power to Saskatchewan businesses to ensure 

that we continue to have the fastest growing economy in the 

country. We will do so in a way, Mr. Speaker, and I’ve always 

said in this House, we will do so in a way that’s a cost-effective 

manner to ensure that Saskatchewan residents pay the lowest 

cost possible. That’s indeed the case that’s true for SaskEnergy, 

and it’s true for SaskPower as well. 

 

If a body like the rate review panel says that things should be 

deferred, that’s indeed what will happen. We’ll ensure the 

strength of the corporation. We’ll ensure that their balance sheet 

remains positive. And we will ensure that the days of 

infrastructure deficits are behind us, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we find out that, for as long 

as most natural pregnancies last, the price of natural gas has 

been dropping for nine months now, while they ignored it, 

while they ignored it. The rate review panel cited more than $11 

million in natural gas savings earlier today and asked that those 

be passed . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I recognize the member 

from Regina Coronation Park. 



April 27, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2861 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And of course the rate 

review panel did its job. They recommended that it be passed 

on. The rate review panel also recommended that before they 

spend $16 million on automated meter reading technology, they 

actually do a cost-benefit analysis. Well I say congratulations to 

the rate review panel. 

 

Can the minister tell us about the $750,000 the panel 

recommended that they not spend on the president’s 

responsibility centre? Just what in the world is that, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much. Since 

becoming government, we’ve encouraged SaskPower to reach 

out to other corporations to look at partnering, to look at 

strategic partnerships going forward. That can be done within 

the corporation. We’ve asked them to streamline the operations 

of SaskPower International to bring that work into . . . And the 

president has made the assurance that she will take direct 

responsibility for that operation. 

 

There were additional dollars that were asked for in that regard, 

Mr. Speaker. Again the rate review panel said that that good 

work should be deferred, and right now we should concentrate 

on providing the service at the lowest possible cost until things 

improve as far as the capital markets go, and indeed that’s what 

will be done. That commitment was made we became 

government. That commitment remains today. And that 

commitment will ensure that we have a growing province going 

forward. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order for 

the standing committees on Human Services and 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to do their important 

work, I move this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that in order to facilitate the work of committees, this House do 

now stand adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. This Assembly stands 

adjourned until tomorrow afternoon at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 14:24.] 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2851 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2851 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2852 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2852 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2852 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2852 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2852 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2853 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2853 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2853 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2853 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2853 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Holocaust Memorial Service 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2853 

 Remembering Keith Whyte 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2854 

 Northern Saskatchewan’s Curling Champions 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2854 

 Victims of Crime Awareness Week  

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2854 

 Saskatoon Local Area Planning 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2855 

 Humboldt Broncos Win Anavet Cup 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2855 

 Battlefords Community Players 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2855 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Review of Hospital Policy 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2856 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2856 

 Controlling Greenhouse Gas Emissions 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2857 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2857 

 2010 Winter Olympics 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2858 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2858 

 Rate Review Panel’s Recommendations for SaskPower 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2859 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2860 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 


