




















































Hansard: April 08, 2009


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 47A  WEDNESDAY, APRIL 8, 2009, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2705 

 April 8, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

Clerk: — Members, I wish to inform you that Mr. Speaker is 

not present today to open today‟s sitting. 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, seated in your gallery today is a great 

group of Saskatchewan young people who have joined us for 

the proceedings. There are 40 students from the Paul J. Hill 

school of business at the University of Regina who are joining 

us today. 

 

These students earned, Mr. Speaker, second place in the Jeux du 

Commerce West, which is a case competition held annually. 

They were just a few points, just a few points behind the host 

Alberta team in the field of 14 business schools and 600 

students, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So it‟s obviously a great 

achievement, and we want to acknowledge all of them and 

welcome them to the Assembly here. 

 

Joining them, by the way, are faculty adviser Ernest Johnson, 

one of the professors; and student co-captains are here, Jon Di 

Stasi, Tricia Gillis; and Anne Lavack, the dean of the faculty. 

They‟re also joined by the president of the University of 

Regina, and the vice-chancellor — Dr. Vianne Timmons is also 

here today with us. This is her first opportunity as president of 

the University of Regina, I think, to visit the Assembly, to join 

us here at the Legislative Assembly. 

 

I‟m going to have a chance to meet with these students and the 

faculty and the leadership of the University of Regina after 

question period. I‟m looking forward to it. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I‟m going to ask if they‟d all stand 

up so that we can properly welcome them and congratulate 

them as they‟ve come to their Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟d like to join with 

the Premier on behalf of the official opposition in welcoming 

all of the business students that are in the Assembly today, as 

well as extend our welcome and appreciation for Dr. Timmons 

and the rest of the faculty and administration who are here with 

us today. Welcome to your legislature. 

 

And while I‟m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I would also like to 

welcome my uncle, David Rosom, a resident of Regina, who 

often watches from home but is able to join us today. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 

Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I‟d ask leave to do an extended invitation. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Agriculture has 

asked leave for extended introduction of guests. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What I 

meant was actually introduction. Thank you for that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I rise today to introduce members of a newly 

appointed agriculture youth advisory committee. I announced 

the formation of this committee this morning, Mr. Speaker. The 

committee will provide advice and direction to the provincial 

government on how to attract and retain young people in the 

agriculture industry. 

 

The members of the youth committee come from a variety of 

farming operations from around Saskatchewan. I‟d like to 

welcome the members of the youth advisory committee. And 

I‟d invite them to stand when I say their names. 

 

The chairperson is April Nichol from Qu‟Appelle; Jeff Prosko 

from Rose Valley; Max Halyk from Melville; Derek Tallon 

from Lafleche; Daryl Frank from Southey; Landon Swityk from 

Spiritwood. And unable to be with us today — also though, on 

the committee — is Colin Wilgenbusch from Halbrite. 

 

I would ask all members to recognize this young group and 

thank them for the participation into where we head with young 

people in agriculture, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Douglas Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

seated in the east gallery are the members of the University of 

Regina men‟s curling team that on March 29 won the CIS — 

Canadian Interuniversity Sports championship in Montreal. 

 

The team had a very successful championship week, finishing 

with a perfect seven and oh record. They outscored their 

opponents by nearly five points per game, and that is a 

remarkable achievement, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Their victory was the first for a U of R [University of Regina] 

curling team on the national level and the fourth Canadian title 

in the history of the university for any sport. And next up for 

the team is to represent Canada at the 2010 Karuizawa 

Invitational in Japan. 

 



2706 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2009 

And now, Mr. Speaker, I would ask our guests to rise as I call 

their name. From Biggar, Saskatchewan, he is a fourth-year 

Education student. He was also the all-star skip at the CIS 

championship, Mr. Speaker — Chris Busby, skip. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — From Weyburn, he is a fourth-year 

Kinesiology student — the third, Jason Obst. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — From Regina, he is a fourth-year 

Administration student — the second, Justin Mihalicz. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — And also from Weyburn, he is also a 

fourth-year Administration student — the lead, Brad Wallin. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — And joining them, Mr. Speaker, is John 

Papandreos, director of recreational services and curling liaison 

at the University of Regina. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, not joining them today are 

the alternate, Brent Rodgers of Regina, and the coach, Wayne 

Obst. Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join me in 

welcoming again these Canadian champions and in recognizing 

their achievement. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Weyburn-Big Muddy. 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I want to join with my colleague across the way in 

welcoming the CIS gold medal winning team, curling team to 

the Assembly, particularly, Mr. Speaker, the two members of 

the team from Weyburn, Jason Obst and Brad Wallin. 

 

And I also want to note, Mr. Speaker, that aside from curling, 

Brad Wallin is also the co-inventor of a new putter grip, a 

newly designed putter grip that he and two of his business 

colleagues are looking at marketing. And in fact Brad has been 

most recently to, I believe, Florida at a golf trade show. And 

hopefully it looks promising that a major company will pick 

them up. 

 

So I just want to again welcome them to their Legislative 

Assembly. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 

to join the Minister of Agriculture in welcoming the youth 

advisory committee to the legislature this afternoon and also to 

welcome their appointment. I know that there are more and 

more young people that are getting involved in the field of 

agriculture, particularly young women, and it‟s wonderful to 

see that one of the members of the committee is a young 

woman that‟s actively involved in farming. So on behalf of the 

official opposition, I want to welcome the youth advisory 

committee to the legislature. 

 

And while I‟m on my feet, I also, as someone that hails from 

Biggar, Saskatchewan — was born in Biggar; and we are the 

curling capital, I think, of this province — I want to 

congratulate the skip from the U of R team, congratulate him. 

Biggar has a proud tradition of great curlers, and it doesn‟t 

surprise me at all that we have the skip coming from Biggar, 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 

Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s also my 

pleasure to be able to introduce to you and to the members of 

the legislature, 50 grade 10, good-looking grade 10 students 

from the city of Melville with their teacher. And I know all 

members, or most members, will recognize this name. Perry 

Ostapowich is their teacher, who faithfully brings his classes 

into the legislature and we all appreciate that. Another teacher 

accompanying them is Don Coleman and their chaperone is 

Bob Simpson. 

 

And I also want special mention for Stewart because I met with 

him a few minutes ago and he felt it was necessary that I 

actually picked him out and highlighted him here today. So I 

want everyone to welcome them to their legislature and thanks 

for coming. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I ask leave for an 

extended introduction of guests. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Coronation 

Park has asked for extended leave of introductions. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Mr. Trew: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank all 

members for this courtesy. Today, Mr. Speaker, it is my honour 

to introduce two constituents who are determined to make their 

province a better and a safer place. I‟m going to ask my guests 

to rise as I introduce. Sharon Gallenger is the widow of Jim 

Gallenger. Crystal Gallenger is their daughter. 

 

Jim Gallenger drove snowplow since 1984 for the then 

Department of Highways, now Ministry of Highways. January 



April 8, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2707 

16 this year, Jim‟s snowplow broke down on the highway and 

he called for help. Then as is so typical of many Saskatchewan 

people — certainly typical of Jim Gallenger — when a car slid 

into the ditch nearby, he went to help. Jim and another good 

Samaritan were helping the driver when just after 4 p.m. on 

January 16, a semi slid into the ditch, sadly killing both men. 

 

Sharon and Crystal Gallenger are here today to see the first of 

their petitions being presented as a first step to making 

Saskatchewan highways safer for highways workers and the 

public. And for that, I thank you both. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I invite all hon. members to join with me in 

welcoming Sharon and Crystal Gallenger to their legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 

Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I‟d like 

to join my colleague in acknowledging the presence of Sharon 

and Crystal Gallenger today in the gallery. Mr. Speaker, we had 

the opportunity to attend the memorial service for Jim 

Gallenger, at which time I learned much about this man. He‟d 

served with our Ministry of Highways for many years, a very 

dedicated worker. One who was first on the job often, who went 

beyond the call of duty, and in this instance, certainly showed 

his commitment to helping his fellow man by providing 

assistance to a stranded motorist. 

 

The impact of that particular accident was tragic for the family, 

and I think I would like to express my condolence once again to 

Mrs. Gallenger and her daughter. But it was also a very difficult 

situation for Jim‟s fellow employees who had worked with him 

for many years, who knew him as not just a co-worker but as a 

very good friend. And I would like to acknowledge that 

commitment that Jim showed to his colleagues and to his daily 

job and recognize that we have many public servants in the 

employment of this province, of this provincial government, 

that bring the same level of commitment day after day. 

 

And so to those employees who are serving the people of 

Saskatchewan faithfully, I offer my acknowledgement and 

appreciation. To the Gallengers, I express my condolences once 

again and thank them for having shared their husband and 

father with our ministry for so long. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I‟d like to take this opportunity to introduce to 

you and through you to all members of this Hon. Assembly a 

man well known in the city of Regina — Mr. Bruce Anderson, 

president, Regina Chamber of Commerce. Mr. Anderson is 

seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, and I hope that all members 

will give Mr. Anderson a warm welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, it is my honour today to present the 

first more than, well more than 400 signatures in a petition 

dealing with The Highway Traffic Act. And the petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to enact changes to The Highway Traffic Act, 

to be referred to as the Gallenger amendment, which 

would require all vehicle traffic to slow to 60 kilometres 

per hour when passing a snowplow with their warning 

lights activated on Saskatchewan highways. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that these, well more than 400 

signatures, have come in less than six days since this petition 

was first started, and I am very confident it is the first of many 

to come. Most of this batch are signed from people from 

Regina, but I can assure you there are scattered names from all 

across the province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s well known that 

inadequate access to quality and affordable child care is a major 

roadblock for parents who want to access the labour market or 

further their own education, and we also know that too many 

Saskatchewan families are struggling with this issue and unable 

to find child care. And the petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government through consultation with the child care 

community to immediately invest in growing the capacity 

of early child care community and to enable new child 

care spaces. This investment must include infrastructure 

funding for new facilities and expansion, funding to 

significantly increase the number of early childhood 

diploma and certificate training seats, and funding to 

ensure that the sector is able to increase its wages and 

benefits to attract and retain the needed personnel. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I so present on behalf of Saskatchewan 

families. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition in support of the indexing of minimum wage. 

And the prayer reads: 



2708 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2009 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to indexing Saskatchewan 

minimum wage to ensure that the standard of living of 

minimum wage earners is maintained in the face of cost of 

living increases. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the petition is signed by residents from Weyburn, Estevan, 

Unity, Battleford, and North Battleford. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

rise to present a petition today calling for wage equity for CBO 

[community-based organization] workers. And we know that 

these workers in community-based organizations, CBOs, in 

Saskatchewan have traditionally been underpaid and many thus 

continue to earn poverty level wages. I‟d like to read the prayer, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the development and 

implementation of a multi-year funding plan to ensure that 

CBO workers achieve wage equity with employees who 

perform work of equal value in government departments. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And these folks, Mr. Deputy Speaker, come from the 

communities of Regina, Yorkton, Prince Albert, and Moose 

Jaw. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 

present a petition on behalf of rural residents of Saskatchewan 

who question why the Sask Party government is leaving them 

behind when it comes to providing safe and affordable water. 

Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to financially assist the town of Duck Lake 

residents for the good of their health and safety due to the 

exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency, and that this government fulfills its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are signed by the good 

residents of Duck Lake, Hague, and Rosthern. I so present. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from The 

Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m 

pleased to rise today to present a petition in support of a new 

Saskatchewan Hospital. The petitioners note that the nearly 

100-year-old existing structure is in much need of replacement. 

Mr. Speaker, the petitioners ask that: 

 

. . . the Legislative Assembly call upon the Government of 

Saskatchewan to immediately recommit funds and 

resources for the continued development and construction 

of a new Saskatchewan Hospital at North Battleford and 

provide the Prairie North Regional Health Authority with 

the authority necessary to complete this essential and 

much-needed project. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petitioners are all from the city of North 

Battleford and the city of Saskatoon. I so present, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition in support of the expansion of the graduate 

retention program. As you know, graduate students do not 

qualify for this program which would include, of course M.B.A. 

[Master of Business Administration] graduates here in 

Saskatchewan. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately expand the graduate retention 

program to include master‟s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are 

students from the University of Saskatchewan, the University of 

Regina, as well as a number of health care professionals who 

practise here in the province who have graduate degrees. I so 

present. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Technology Safety Workshop for Parents 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

rise today to speak about a workshop that will be held at Vanier 

Collegiate in Moose Jaw on April 21. This workshop is to give 

parents a better understanding of issues when it comes to their 

children using technology to their best advantage. 

 

As your children are putting information on Facebook or other 

social networking sites, what could put them at risk? If you‟ve 

ever asked yourself this question, you are encouraged to attend 



April 8, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2709 

this free technology safety workshop. The workshop is open to 

the entire community of Moose Jaw and surrounding areas, and 

will include presentations from members of the Moose Jaw 

Police Service and personnel of Vanier Collegiate, among 

others. 

 

The speakers will give presentations that demonstrate proper 

netiquette. Netiquette are rules of etiquette that apply when 

communicating over the Internet. This will help show parents 

how they can use computers and social networking sites to 

better ensure the safety of their children, and how some sites 

can be harmful. This workshop is for adults only — parents, 

guardians, or anyone who is in contact with children on a 

regular basis. Another workshop will be held specifically for 

students the next day at Vanier. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this time of vast options for communications 

and interest in technology safety, I ask that the members join 

me in thanking Vanier Collegiate and all those who helped 

coordinate this important workshop. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 

Education. 

 

National Archery in Schools Program 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, the motto of the national archery in schools 

program is: Changing Lives — One Arrow at a Time. This 

program is now offered to grades 4 to 12 students in the United 

States, Australia, the province of Nova Scotia, and most 

recently in Saskatchewan. 

 

Right now in our province, as many as 7,200 students in 34 

schools have the opportunity to experience all that the sport of 

archery has to offer. With the assistance of the Saskatchewan 

Wildlife Federation, school divisions are able to implement the 

NASP [national archery in schools program] program in their 

schools. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this past Friday afternoon I had the 

opportunity to attend the provincial silver medal presentation to 

the NASP team from the Canora schools, with instructors Mr. 

Thomas Lowe and Mr. Rodney Steciuk. The provincial gold 

medal was won by the Melfort school team, instructed by Mr. 

Randy Steciuk. Congratulations to the two brothers on their 

provincial awards. 

 

Mr. Speaker, two grade 5 students, Shale Tratch and Bailey 

Steciuk from Canora Composite School, won provincial silver 

and gold medals respectively in the grades 4 to 6 boys and girls 

individual category. They will now advance to the national 

competition being held May 8 and 9 in Louisville, Kentucky. 

This is the first time that Saskatchewan and Canada will be 

represented at the national level. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 

these students and wish them well at the national competition. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Hockey Star from Northern Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to profile 

another northern athlete who‟s an exciting female hockey star 

named Jayden Campbell of the English River First Nations. 

 

Jayden was put on skates by her grandmother when she was just 

two years old. Jayden fell and got up and fell again, and the 

second time she got up, she never looked back. And now the 

16-year-old phenom has all the makings of a future hockey star 

from the Northwest. 

 

Jayden never liked girls‟ skates and wanted Wayne Gretzky 

skates and got those skates for Christmas. She played minor 

hockey in Meadow Lake and played with the Beauval novice 

and atoms in her early years, and even had her grandpa coach 

her. 

 

In her first game, Jayden scored five goals and four assists. And 

since joining the Beaver River hockey league at the age of nine, 

she scored 52 goals and had 54 assists in 17 games with the 

Beauval team, Mr. Speaker. 

 

At the age of nine, Jayden played for her home team of 

Patuanak in a tournament in Prince Albert. She was the 

youngest player and was so exciting that even the opposing 

teams cheered when she made a good play or scored a goal. 

Jayden played with the P.A. [Prince Albert] Thunder when she 

was 13, played in the winter games in Nipawin, and also played 

in the National Aboriginal Hockey Championships. 

 

At one game Jayden shot the puck so hard that she knocked 

down a player, but her motto is, don‟t talk about it until 

everything is over. Her grandparents are very proud of her. She 

wants to be a professional fighter, is looking at playing 

university hockey, and is dreaming of playing in the Olympics. 

Based on her skill and the support and sacrifice that her 

grandpa, Ray, and her grandma, Sharon, are giving her, 

remember the name Jayden Campbell because I predict we‟ll be 

hearing a lot from that name. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Humboldt. 

 

Humboldt Broncos Win Championship 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I know that the member from Saltcoats will enthusiastically join 

me today to acknowledge what has become a yearly tradition. 

The Humboldt Broncos, for the third year in a row, captured the 

Credit Union Cup as champions of the SJHL [Saskatchewan 

Junior Hockey League]. 

 

Last night in front of 1,700 fans, the Broncos defeated a strong 

Melville team 5 to 1, to win the series four games to one. The 

Broncos will now move on to the ANAVET [Army, Navy & 

Air Force Veterans in Canada] Cup against Manitoba 



2710 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2009 

champion, Portage Terriers. 

 

This is the Broncos‟ eighth title, Mr. Speaker. As the coach and 

general manager of the Broncos, Dean Brockman, said, “It 

never gets old.” Special congratulations to Matthew Kirzinger, 

who was named the SJHL playoff most valuable player. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there was a reason that Humboldt did so well in 

the Kraft Hockeyville 2009 competition that recently 

concluded. It is a strong community with enthusiastic people 

willing to work hard to get the job done. These are the same 

traits that the Broncos continue to exemplify and the reason 

they are once again champions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Humboldt Broncos are not only the SJHL 

champions three times running, they are also the defending 

ANAVET Cup champions which goes to the best team from 

Saskatchewan and Manitoba, as well as defending the national 

Junior A champions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to please join me in 

congratulating the Humboldt Broncos on their season so far, 

and extend their support to the Broncos in their pursuit of their 

second straight ANAVET Cup over the next couple of weeks, 

and hopefully another national championship. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres. 

 

German Language School Easter Celebration 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, on Saturday, April 4, I had 

the pleasure of participating in the Regina German Language 

School‟s annual Easter celebration. The school is comprised of 

children learning German who can even qualify for high school 

credits, as well as adult learners from beginner to advanced. 

 

This celebration allows the students and their families to engage 

in traditional aspects of the German culture with respect to how 

Easter was and is currently celebrated. One such historical fact 

is that the first edible Easter bunny was created in the early 

1800s, using pastry and sugar. 

 

Mr. Speaker, students and guests were able to engage in games, 

crafts, songs, and stories, and of course indulge in delicious 

baked goods and some good, strong German coffee. Canada 

Safeway Ltd., through store manager Dean Shaw, sponsored the 

event as his reason was, “This is a small role that Safeway can 

play in promoting harmony through understanding different 

cultures.” 

 

One of the unique aspects to this yearly celebration is the 

invitation that was extended to the students and teachers of the 

Japanese language school, as both schools operate from the 

Campbell high school location. They participated 

enthusiastically, which is a true testament to how similar 

interests in learning additional languages and cultures can cross 

any boundaries. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I‟d like to commend the dedication of the 

students, families, teachers, and volunteers for maintaining the 

German language and culture in Regina and the surrounding 

community. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood 

River. 

 

Provincial Championship Hockey Teams 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Today 

I‟d like to recognize the accomplishments of three provincial 

championship hockey teams from the area around my 

hometown of Glentworth. On March 8, the Glentworth Thunder 

midget hockey team won their first provincial title since 1994. 

Also the Wood River Ice Cats took the provincial championship 

over the Carrot River team by a score of 11 to 5, and this 

follows up on their championship win of 2007. Plus the Wood 

River Wildcats beat the Biggar Nationals to capture their 

second straight provincial championship. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, these amazing athletes came from various 

communities in my constituency. They travelled many miles. 

They got up early in the morning on numerous occasions for 

practices and games which they had to drive for ice time, gave 

up weekends and personal time to become the champions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the players aren‟t the only ones who made 

sacrifices. The parents did also. And we can‟t forget the 

volunteer coaches who go through many stressful hours 

watching the games and put in many hours at practices and 

mentoring our young people. 

 

[14:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate Glentworth Thunder, 

Wood River Ice Cats, and the Wood River Wildcats for 

becoming the provincial champions. I‟d also like to thank the 

parents and coaches for their support of minor hockey. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of the Assembly in joining me 

in congratulating the teams, coaches, and parents for a very 

successful season. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Regina Community Living Spring Fling 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Regina 

Association for Community Living held its most successful 

Spring Fling ever last Saturday. There was a perfect mix of 

great meal, both silent and live auctions with our favourite 

special guest CC of Z99 as the auctioneer. 

 

My friend CC used his very best humour to coax mostly willing 

bidders to dig very deep in their wallets and beyond. Corporate 

sponsors were numerous and generous. Happily, Mr. Speaker, 

people attending the 2009 Spring Fling responded with 

generosity, fed by our firm knowledge that all people deserve 

respect, the opportunity to be the best we can be, and we all 



April 8, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2711 

need connection with other people. In other words, we need to 

love and be loved. 

 

Seldom am I in such a large gathering with so much civility or 

with so much determination to do what we can to make our 

world a better place. I‟m left with the thought that the lives of 

all would be richer if, as a rite of passage, every person was 

forced to attend at least one Spring Fling. As we were leaving, 

my wife and I felt very good about humanity and the future that 

continues to be ever more inclusive, caring, and sharing. That 

future will indeed have no one left behind. 

 

Congratulations to the Regina Association for Community 

Living on hosting such a terrific annual Spring Fling. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres. 

 

Drinking Water 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, a public meeting in 

Hepburn last week confirmed the severity of the problems 

facing the community‟s water supply. Seventy-five per cent of 

wells tested exceed the maximum allowable limit for substances 

that could have an adverse effect on human health, including 

uranium and coliform bacteria. Forty-four per cent of people 

draw water from wells that do not have adequate treatment and 

even some infants in the community drink untreated water. 

 

To the minister: what is the Sask Party doing to provide the 

people of Hepburn with safe, clean, and affordable drinking 

water? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Municipal 

Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

It‟s a pleasure to answer the member‟s question. 

 

Like so many other issues, this one has a long and sad history. 

Last fall our government, through the Saskatchewan Watershed 

Authority, offered free water-quality testing to every single 

resident in Hepburn. The town has had a precautionary drinking 

water advisory in effect since June 12, 2007, which, if I am not 

mistaken, was during the time of the previous NDP [New 

Democratic Party] government — the same government, Mr. 

Speaker, that was in office when similar problems came to light 

in the town of Duck Lake. Under our direction, SWA 

[Saskatchewan Watershed Authority] has now focused the 

delivery of its rural water quality program . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the 

Minister of Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Under our direction, the Saskatchewan Watershed Authority 

has now focused the delivery of its rural water quality program 

on high-risk communities serviced by private groundwater 

wells like Hepburn. Previously, Mr. Speaker, private wells were 

sampled in an ad hoc manner, i.e., waiting for clients to call in 

and say that they had a problem. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — The minister himself has just admitted that they 

knew about the problem for 18 months since they‟ve been in 

government and done nothing about it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, we saw in Duck Lake 

what happens when people can‟t afford to pay for safe, clean 

drinking water. Now people in Hepburn are facing a similar 

situation. 

 

A solution to Hepburn‟s water crisis will likely cost this town of 

approximately 700 people between 5 and $6 million. The cost 

to users will be at least $10,000 — that‟s approximately $8,000 

for construction plus 2,500 for hookup when all is said and 

done. People who don‟t have that kind of cash lying around — 

and it‟s fair to say that that would be most people, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker — will be forced to take out loans to cover the cost. 

Many people simply won‟t be able to get a loan. 

 

To the minister: what will she do to make safe, clean water 

more affordable for the people of Hepburn? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Municipal 

Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Mr. Speaker, happy to undertake a 

quick gender change to solve the problem from the member 

opposite here. I have to complete the previous answer. 

Previously, private wells were sampled in an ad hoc fashion 

under the term of the previous government, and this simply 

allowed problems to go unnoticed and unattended. What we‟ve 

decided to do is to do something entirely different. 

 

We‟re doing the following. The previous government‟s policy 

of waiting until problems occur has now been changed. We‟re 

working with the town and a number of government agencies to 

find a solution to this problem in a timely fashion. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I would ask that you respect 

the person that has the floor. I recognize the Minister of 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to 

conclude with the following remarks. We have actually 

attended that same meeting on April 2, the MLA [Member of 

the Legislative Assembly] from Martensville, her chief of staff, 

my chief of staff, met with the Village Council of Hepburn. The 

village council discussed the need for a new water system 

which we understand, presented options provided by a private 

consulting firm. 



2712 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2009 

Later that same evening, they along with officials from 

Saskatchewan Watershed Authority and the local health region 

attended a public meeting attended by 100 folks in the school 

gymnasium. The community appears to have the support of the 

residents to pursue a project related to the Intervalley Pipeline 

project with a cost of around $5.3 million. They‟re going to 

apply to the Building Canada fund. We‟ll assist them, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — The sex change was not necessary since the 

questions were posed to the Minister of the Environment. Mr. 

Speaker, each family in Hepburn will be forced to pay more 

than $10,000 upfront for water, even after the province‟s 

stimulus money and the Building Canada fund are taken into 

account. And this is before they get their new monthly water 

bill, estimated by village officials to be approximately $100 a 

month. One hundred dollars a month just to have access to safe, 

clean water. 

 

Many families simply can‟t afford it. Many are saying that if 

something isn‟t done to bring the cost down, they will be forced 

to leave Hepburn. 

 

To the minister: how does she plan to help the families who 

simply can‟t afford to pay $10,000 upfront for safe, clean 

drinking water? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Municipal 

Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the town of Hepburn, like all communities, are now 

benefiting from the largest investment in infrastructure in 

Saskatchewan‟s history under the MEEP program, the 

municipal economic enhancement program, plus the largest 

increase in revenue sharing in the province‟s history. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Mr. Speaker, we are assisting all 

communities, including Hepburn in the following fashion as 

well. Through the Saskatchewan infrastructure growth 

initiative, money has already been provided to towns for worthy 

projects: Big River, Biggar, Birch Hills, Buena Vista, Carlyle, 

Colonsay, Dalmeny, Estevan Hague, Kindersley, Kipling, 

Lajord, Leroy, Macklin, Melfort, Midale, Milestone, Moose 

Jaw, Muenster . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I would ask that all members, each of 

you will have a turn. You allowed the question to be put. I 

would ask that you allow the answer to be put. I recognize the 

Minister of Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟ll 

complete the list under the SIGI [Saskatchewan infrastructure 

growth initiative] program. That includes Moose Jaw, 

Muenster, Oxbow, Porcupine Plain, Prince Albert, Regina, 

Rocanville, Rosetown, Saskatoon, St. Brieux, Strasbourg, Swift 

Current, Turtleford, Unity, Wakaw, Weyburn, Wilkie, and 

Yorkton — $75 million worth of worthy infrastructure projects, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Six million dollars to buy out Victoria Park 

Capital could have paid for this project, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Morin: — Hepburn isn‟t the only community facing a 

water crisis. Another five families in Duck Lake had their water 

disconnected on Monday — 16 disconnections in total so far. 

As of last Friday, there were nearly 150 precautionary drinking 

water advisories and 54 emergency boil water orders in the 

province, and the Watershed Authority‟s plan for the upcoming 

year says there are at least two other high-risk communities 

where the authority will be conducting an assessment. 

 

To the minister: what are the names of those communities? And 

just how big is the water crisis in rural Saskatchewan? And 

what does she plan to do about it? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Municipal 

Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, 

one thing I‟d like to mention is that by simply getting out of the 

terrible Victoria Park Capital deal that the former government 

got us into, we‟re going to be saving something like $80 million 

which we‟ll use on further projects, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Mr. Speaker, on top of all of the 

other dollars in all of the other programs I‟ve mentioned, we 

need to talk about the Building Canada fund in partnership with 

the municipalities, the provincial government, and the federal 

government. 

 

Here‟s where the money is going: Arm River, Big Arm, Big 

River, Bredenbury, Brittania, Buckland, Buffalo Narrows, 

Burstall, Carrot River, Chaplin, Cole Bay, Creighton, and 

Cudworth, Cupar, Denare Beach, Dundurn, Englefeld, Gull 

Lake, Herbert, Ile-a-la-Crosse, Insinger, and Kannata Valley, La 

Loche, Lajord, Langham, Leask, Loon Lake, Lloydminster, 

Meadow Lake, Mervin, Miry Creek, Morse, Osler, Pense, 

Pinehouse, Prince Albert, Rose Valley, Rosthern, St. Louis, 

Stony Rapids, Unity, Viscount, Weyburn, Willow Bunch, 

Wilton, and Yorkton — Mr. Speaker, almost $96 million of 

more infrastructure investment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 



April 8, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2713 

Rosemont. 

 

Curriculum Materials 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. According to 

the action plan of the Ministry of Education, one of the key 

strategies of the ministry is to, I quote: “Develop K-12 

curriculum that includes environmental education, conservation 

and sustainability.” This was important to this government, so 

important that that Premier put this goal in the mandate letter 

that dictates and directs the Minister of Education. 

 

To the minister: can he confirm that environmental 

conservation education is a key goal of his ministry? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in Saskatchewan we have what is referred 

to as a green curriculum. It constantly changes. It‟s constantly 

updated. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we‟ve been working on the science 

curriculum in a number of the grade areas where we‟re going to 

be enhancing that curriculum with material that will recognize 

environmental concerns. Those are being done on a ongoing 

basis, and I can provide the exact information as to which 

curriculum will be affected in which grade to the member in a 

subsequent release of information to him. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan 

Watershed Authority has two education programs — one called 

Project Wet and the other is called Project Wild. I would like to 

quote from Project Wet‟s website: “The Saskatchewan Ministry 

of Education highly recommends this interdisciplinary program 

for the core science grades 1-10, [and for] biology 20 & 30 and 

chemistry 30.” 

 

Will the Minister of Education agree that these programs meet 

the mandate letter perfectly, and can he confirm that his 

ministry is still recommending these programs? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I indicated in 

my first answer, we work with a number of officials within the 

curriculum department within my ministry. We work with 

teachers. We work with a number of people in the entire 

education community. In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Western 

Canadian protocol assists in developing curriculum right across 

Western Canada to ensure that measures are dealt with on a 

province-wide basis. 

Mr. Speaker, we have a tremendously mobile population, and 

we have to ensure that curriculum in Saskatchewan, curriculum 

in Alberta, curriculum in Manitoba has content that is similar. 

And the material that the member talks about has been 

discussed at the appropriate levels, and there will be constant 

updates to the curriculum of the courses that he‟s just 

mentioned. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, according to the 

Saskatchewan Watershed‟s annual report for last year put out 

under that government, it turns out that 949 educators in 2007 

alone utilized these programs — Projects Wet and Wild. 

Almost 1,000 educators per year, Mr. Speaker, benefiting from 

a program that teaches environmental conservation, education, 

and sustainability. But in this year‟s budget, this government, 

that government eliminated both programs. 

 

To the Minister of Education: why did he let the Minister of 

Environment cut a program that is recommended by his own 

ministry and benefits almost 1,000 teachers a year? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are materials 

that are presented to teachers, that are materials that are 

presented to my curriculum individuals to assist and to ensure 

that it is made available to all schools. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we‟ve had a number of changes to 

curriculum in this province. One of the largest changes that has 

been made, new introduction of new materials, was the treaty 

curriculum information that has been implemented in this 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, we will continue to assess 

and to analyze material. As new material becomes available, 

we‟re going to ensure that it is analyzed, that it is assessed. And 

if it is relevant material that will assist teachers in doing the 

jobs that they want to do in providing quality education in this 

province, we will do that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Health Disparity in Saskatoon Report 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The 

StarPhoenix is reporting today that a well-respected researcher 

and co-author of the Health Disparity in Saskatoon report is 



2714 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2009 

stating that he‟s been fired by the Saskatoon Health Region. Dr. 

Lemstra and his co-author wanted to release the report months 

prior to the final date but were continually delayed by 

government interference. The delays were to the point that the 

authors were becoming embarrassed. This demonstrates what is 

becoming apparent in many sectors — the heavy-handedness of 

this government and their my-way-or-the-highway approach. 

Dr. Lemstra has been given the highway. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the Minister of Health: why did this 

government interfere and delay the release of the report and 

what were they afraid of the public seeing? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, to the first part of that 

question regarding Dr. Lemstra or Mr. Lemstra‟s employment 

with the Saskatoon Health Region, I can uncategorically say 

that we, our government, had absolutely no input as to the 

release of that . . . as to his employment status.  

 

There was a decision made by the Saskatoon Health Region, 

strictly by the Saskatoon Health Region. And I think if you 

follow through the article, there are a number of people — one 

person, for sure — that says that, that we had absolutely nothing 

to do with the release of Mr. Lemstra. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the health disparity report 

is damning and it challenges the government on a number of 

issues. On Monday, April 7, in the Human Services Committee, 

the Minister of Social Services made her displeasure with the 

report known when she went on to call the report‟s 

recommendations, “. . . blue sky in nature . . . blue sky 

recommendations with no substance as to how in the world you 

would ever make them happen.”  

 

She went on to describe, “others [meaning recommendations] 

. . . are absolutely outrageously impractical and borderline 

irresponsible.” The minister finished her comments by saying, 

“I don‟t have a lot of patience for blue sky statements and 

mission statements . . .” 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the minister: why did this government 

instruct the health region to dismiss Dr. Lemstra? Was it 

because they received a report that was not favourable to the 

government and that they had no patience for a blue sky 

statements or mission statements? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social 

Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I‟ve said on a number of 

occasions, including committee, and I‟ll say it again. There 

were a number of recommendations made by this report that we 

implemented even prior to the report coming out. There are 

other recommendations that we will give some consideration to. 

And there are recommendations that are simply impossible to 

implement and that they are vague in nature, and it would be 

very, very difficult. 

 

But you know what we did do, Mr. Deputy Speaker? We‟ve 

increased and indexed shelter rates. We increased and indexed 

rental supplement. We increased the mileage rates paid to 

support travel. We increased the house heating allowance for 

clients on TEA [transitional employment allowance] by 20 per 

cent. We increased the seniors‟ income plan. We introduced a 

low-income tax credit, putting money directly into people‟s 

pockets. We introduced a drug plan that includes children 14 

and under. And we have an active families benefit. 

 

We have done a lot to fix the disparities for people that are 

struggling, that was left for us by the NDP when they were 

government and when Lemstra actually did his study. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, that‟s all very well and 

good. But the government‟s track record on accountability, 

transparency, and openness is not good. 

 

We‟ve seen a number of blacked-out reports, and now we are 

seeing a well-respected researcher being dismissed because of a 

report that the government views as blue-sky or borderline 

irresponsible. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the minister: how can the minister 

expect the public to have any faith that any report generated by 

this government will be fair and unbiased in light of what 

happened to Dr. Lemstra? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Social 

Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I just have one quick question for the 

member opposite. Does she agree that we should freeze 

spending on health care? And if she does, that means we will 

not have the money for the children‟s hospital in Saskatoon. Is 

that what she supports? Because that was one of the 

recommendations. And if she thinks all these recommendations 

should be implemented and, if indeed that they are responsible, 

there will not be a children‟s hospital because that goes under 

the health care budget that he suggests should be frozen. 

 

As well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are other recommendations 

that are extremely difficult to know how they would be 

implemented. So I would like her to explain if she agrees with 

freezing health care spending. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 



April 8, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2715 

Nuclear Development 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I believe it 

was earlier this week, the Premier was called upon, in the 

rotunda of this legislature by the journalists, to justify this 

two-week consultation period that his government has put in 

place to deal with this very significant issue of whether or not 

Saskatchewan ought to have a nuclear reactor. To justify that, 

the Premier‟s response was, well it needs to happen this quickly 

because a decision — a decision — on the reactor will be made 

by the end of this year. 

 

Now last night in a committee hearing in this same legislature, 

the minister responsible for the file, when asked about the 

Premier‟s announcement that a decision would be made by the 

end of the year said, and I quote: 

 

Certainly I don‟t think any decisions will be made in any 

time frame that would even resemble that one. This is a 

long-term proposition. No decisions will be made for a 

very long time. 

 

So who‟s right? Is the decision going to be made by the end of 

this year, as the Premier has announced, or is it going to take a 

long, long time, as the minister said last night? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. What 

we‟ve embarked upon here is a very long-term, multi-step 

process that began with the commissioning of the Uranium 

Development Partnership. And now we‟ve received the report 

from the UDP [Uranium Development Partnership] and have 

proceeded on to planning our public consultations and have 

indeed started the public consultation process as of last Friday, 

April 3, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And that public consultation 

process will continue for some two and a half months — not 

two weeks, as that member keeps repeating incorrectly — until 

June 15. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, through that multi-step process there will 

be, there will be many jumping-off points for this government 

and many decision points for this government. One of them, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, may occur by the end of this year, 

assuming that Bruce Power or someone else determines a site. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, there is a very serious 

discrepancy between what the Premier of Saskatchewan has 

said to the people of Saskatchewan — that a decision would be 

made by the end of the year — and what the minister 

responsible is saying, who says that there will be no decision 

for a very long time. Mr. Deputy Speaker, an issue of this 

magnitude demands openness, transparency, clarity. 

 

So my question is to the Premier: what decision will be made 

by the end of this year? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. What I‟ve begun to try to explain to that member who 

insists that the public consultation process is a two-week 

process when it‟s indeed a two and a half month process — I 

hardly know where to start, Mr. Deputy Speaker — but through 

this multi-step process, there will be a number of decision 

points for government and a number of jumping-off points for 

government, I must say as well. 

 

One of those decision points may come this fall, Mr. Speaker. If 

Bruce Power or someone else decides that they would like to 

build a nuclear power plant on a specific site, that would trigger 

a decision by this government that would be critical to the 

piece. It would certainly not be the final decision in the process, 

but it would be one that could end the process right there and 

then, so I‟m sure that‟s what Mr. Mandryk was referring to. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Official 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — You know, I‟m not here to question what Mr. 

Mandryk may or may not have said. I am here to question what 

the Premier and the minister responsible may or may not have 

said to a reporter. A reporter‟s question which went as follows: 

when your government would hope to say yes or no to a power 

plant, by the end of the year? That was the question. The 

Premier‟s answer, by the end of the year. 

 

The Premier has announced that the decision on the reactor will 

be taken by his government by the end of the year. The minister 

says no such decision will be taken. Again I ask, who is right? 

Who is telling the truth? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Having 

reviewed the comments that were made last night in the 

committee meeting, there is complete consistency along the 

front benches of this government. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the minister just 

stood in his place and said by the end of this year there will be 

an opportunity — if indeed we have some more information 

from proponents of nuclear power — that the project potentially 

ends, that the proposition ends if it doesn‟t meet with our basic 

standard of affordable power, safe power, environmentally 

sustainable power for the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

If we decide together as a province to move ahead with it, we‟re 

talking about a number of years of process, and that‟s exactly 

what the minister said. The environmental process in itself, and 

rightly so, is an extended process. 



2716 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2009 

Now consider that, contrast that transparency and this debate 

we‟re having now with what we got from that member opposite. 

What we got from that member opposite when he was the 

premier of this province was just declarations that we were 

going to go ahead with the nuclear power, and he consulted 

precisely nobody in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Official 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if it is in fact the 

case that there is lots of opportunity, decision points down the 

road, then why in the world would this government not offer to 

the people of Saskatchewan a fair, a fair opportunity to consult, 

a fair opportunity to have their positions put? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Why will they not extend the period available 

— this two-week period of public hearings? 

 

We call upon them again today, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I call 

upon the Premier. Will he expand the process? Will he develop 

a process that in fact fully engaged the people of Saskatchewan 

in a hard look at all of the options before us in an extended 

period of time beyond this truncated two weeks they‟ve set up 

now? Will they change their mind on that, if he‟s changed his 

mind on the decision-making process? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the track record, the track 

record of that hon. member who just asked the question is 

interesting. He called nuclear power the dirtiest form of energy, 

but on the other hand said we should do a reactor and said we 

should store the spent fuel in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. He made these pronouncements without engaging the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan in consultation. 

 

Now very consistently the next leader of the NDP, Mr. 

Lingenfelter has said there ought not to be any debate at all, Mr. 

Speaker. That‟s the view of the next leader of the NDP. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, given what Mr. Lingenfelter‟s been saying 

lately about nationalizing the oil industry and nationalizing the 

potash industry, I think the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan welcome the debate and the consultation put 

forward by members on this side of the House. And they‟re 

scared to death of whatever would happen in this province if 

they ever ran the show again, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL 

COMMITTEES 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood 

River. 

 

Standing Committee on the Economy 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Thank 

you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I‟m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 46, The Labour 

Market Commission Amendment Act, 2008 without amendment. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I‟m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 46, The Labour 

Market Commission Amendment Act, 2008 without amendment. 

When shall this Bill be . . . I recognize the member from 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

request leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole 

on this Bill and that the Bill be now read for the third time. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Enterprise and 

Innovation has requested leave to waive consideration in 

Committee of the Whole of Bill No. 46, The Labour Market 

Commission Amendment Act, 2008 without amendment. Is 

leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. The minister may proceed to 

move third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 46 — The Labour Market Commission 

Amendment Act, 2008 
 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I move 

that this Bill now be read the third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Enterprise and Innovation that Bill No. 46, The Labour Market 

Commission Amendment Act, 2008, without amendment, be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

[14:30] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. Or is the Assembly ready for 

the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is the motion carried? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Agreed. 

 

Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL 

COMMITTEES 

 



April 8, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2717 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Chair of 

House Services. 

 

Standing Committee on House Services 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

instructed by the Standing Committee on House Services to 

report that it has considered certain estimates and to present its 

sixth report. I move: 

 

That the sixth report of the Standing Committee on House 

Services be now concurred in. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — It is moved by the Deputy Chair of 

House Services: 

 

That the sixth report of the Standing Committee on House 

Services be now concurred in. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 79 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by The Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 79 — The 

Education Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2)/Loi n
o
 2 de 2009 

modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s my 

privilege to rise in debate here today to discuss The Education 

Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2), Mr. Deputy Speaker. I guess at 

first glance, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on this side of the House, 

we‟re quite confused why this government would be adding this 

as an amendment to a Bill that‟s already on the Table and in 

committee when this could have very simply, expediently, and 

efficiently been dealt with in committee, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I suppose they maybe wanted to frame it in a sense as if they 

were doing something significant. However nothing could be 

further from the truth, Mr. Speaker. This Bill pertains to the 

newly legislated schools of opportunity legislation, Mr. 

Speaker. This legislation was presented last year around this 

time in this House, and it was intended to fulfill campaign 

promises around stopping school closures across Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. We know now that nothing could have been 

further from the truth. 

 

Schools have continued to struggle to keep their doors open, 

and many communities have continued to lose their schools, 

which is a fair cry of course, Mr. Speaker, from the strong and 

bold campaign promises and rhetoric from that side opposite, 

Mr. Speaker, for many, many years around their actions on 

school closures. 

 

So we are addressing a piece of a legislation that was 

introduced only a year ago, and we see changes to that this year 

— an extension of what they call schools of opportunity from 

two to three years with this piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But we know already that this whole piece of schools of 

opportunity itself has fallen far short, Mr. Speaker, of meeting 

the needs of Saskatchewan communities. And we hear it in the 

media. We hear it in communities. Saskatchewan people are 

still very much concerned about the viability of education 

within their communities, and they do not feel as if they‟ve 

been responded to by this government. They certainly recognize 

the broken promises. 

 

But it‟s worthwhile to note, I guess, that certainly here in this 

Bill, we have an extension from two years to three years and it 

simply lengthens the period of time for which a school of 

opportunity might be designated, Mr. Speaker. We wonder why 

this simply wasn‟t amended in committee because it would not 

need to merit the time within this House for that entire 

discussion, Mr. Speaker. On the surface it looks quite possibly, 

Mr. Speaker, that this unfortunately might just be an extending 

of that period for schools of opportunity that would take the 

members opposite past the next provincial election. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if that‟s what‟s driving policy from the Sask 

Party — getting past the next provincial election — that‟s a sad 

day for good policy here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. So 

we‟re concerned about a policy that‟s simply intended to serve 

them well around an election period. So we see that this change 

is simply for political reasons and not necessarily intended to 

address the needs of schools. 

 

And you know, I have to wonder, Mr. Speaker, why the Sask 

Party puts forward a Bill that barely fiddles with the edges of a 

piece of policy. And communities across Saskatchewan are 

concerned about school closures. They‟re concerned in urban 

ridings, Mr. Speaker, such as Regina and in Saskatoon, but 

they‟re concerned as well in specific communities here right 

now, such as Wishart, that yesterday was simply . . . had the 

motion go forward for school closures. 

 

And I know the member from Kelvington is saying, with nine 

kids that school should close, she‟s saying. Why would you 

keep that school open? Well I know the community‟s feeling 

different, Mr. Speaker, and I know at one point they felt like 

they had the ear of the Saskatchewan Party to effect some sort 

of change around how to keep a school open. 

 

Certainly that‟s a good example though, Mr. Speaker, of why 

many, many schools in Saskatchewan have closed, is that with 

declining enrolment and changes in where people are living that 

we have struggled to keep that population to keep education 

viable. This side of the House knows that all too well, and it 

was very responsible and never took that job lightly. But we 

never gave the kind of hope and promise that the members 



2718 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2009 

opposite gave — false hope, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They are also concerned, I know, communities like Chaplin 

right now and in Morse, in Major and Meota. Chaplin and 

Morse, Mr. Speaker — viable communities. Viable education is 

a concern for those communities because they‟re being 

considered for closure here this year. More than likely, they‟re 

also going to be considered for schools of opportunity, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now the boards haven‟t actually set closure motions on either 

of those schools here yet. But the change that‟s put forward 

limits the ability of the board of education, but limits the ability 

of the community to have enough time to show that the school 

in the community is actually viable. 

 

And so here we have a government who‟s putting a fixed time 

period on economic growth, Mr. Speaker. And if we think of 

the many external factors — world pressures and economic 

challenges that relate back to our current place and time here in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker — a lot of projects unfortunately 

aren‟t going ahead that could be and should be with the right 

market conditions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So it‟s concerning that we see a fixed period of time on 

economic growth for communities, when much of the economic 

growth that should and will be spurred on with the right global 

capital markets may be simply a year or two or three down the 

road. We don‟t know this, Mr. Speaker, so we‟re wondering 

why they‟re fiddling away with a fixed term. On that note, 

we‟re concerned that communities might not have the time to 

be able to justify their case. And why are we prescribing a fixed 

period of time on this amendment here, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 

 

It‟s also been known that the schools of opportunity process 

itself is a resource-straining activity. It‟s not a simple exercise, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. And of course it‟s very important to 

communities. As I said, right now it‟s important to communities 

such as Chaplin or Morse. 

 

We can use Chaplin for example. As I understand, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, it‟s required a lot of human resources from within the 

community and also financial resources, Mr. Speaker. And here 

we have a community — the example being Chaplin, as I 

understand — has spent actually $60,000, Mr. Speaker, by 

business people, by individuals, and by the local municipalities 

who have chipped in to be able to provide the dollars needed to 

make an application to the minister for his school of 

opportunity status, something that then will have a prescribed 

and fixed period of time on it. 

 

We‟re concerned about this, Mr. Speaker, because not only are 

they engaged in an expensive activity, but they‟re engaged in an 

activity that takes them away from their focus on where they 

may be placing those otherwise: supporting their communities 

through their community involvement, supporting the economic 

growth through strategic plans and through putting those efforts 

into building that local economy. 

 

We‟re concerned that they‟re caught in a bit of a politicized 

wild goose chase, Mr. Speaker, because the criteria for who will 

actually be accepted as a school of opportunity is very ill 

defined, Mr. Speaker. Those criteria aren‟t set so it then simply 

goes to the Minister of Education to consider that presentation. 

 

So we‟re concerned, Mr. Speaker, that we have communities 

investing huge amount of time, of financial resources, and that 

we see a very non-consequential amendment that simply keeps 

a fixed period of time on a school of opportunity status when 

we really don‟t know what the world‟s economy holds and how 

that relates to Saskatchewan and what that means for the 

viability and the vibrant economies that local communities are 

looking to stimulate and to grow. 

 

I know that there‟s been questions across from certain 

communities, and I pose this simply as a question, but I wonder 

if the minister‟s considered or contemplated allowing grade 

discontinuance to be eligible for funds. Certain schools and 

communities, I know, I believe this has been pitched to the 

minister. And in fact I would look forward to committee just to 

see where the ministry is at on that consideration and what their 

thought around that is. 

 

We know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this all relates back to 

school closures. Big campaign promises from the Sask Party. 

Now Saskatchewan people know that that‟s been a big failure 

by this government to respond to the needs. And as a result 

many communities are still waiting and concerned and wanting 

a policy that reflects some of their concerns in a more accurate 

way. 

 

The handbook that was put forward by the minister last year 

and championed as his response to school closures simply fell 

far short, Mr. Speaker, from having any meaningful change. It 

certainly did validate and verify the best practice that many and 

most school divisions, school boards have been engaged with 

around the school closure process for many, many years. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, at this point, because we do want to have 

more of a conversation in committee, we‟re wondering why this 

Bill was even brought to the House and not simply an 

amendment brought forward to committee for thoughtful and 

constructive discussion. Mr. Speaker, we wonder why that 

wasn‟t the case. 

 

But here at this point in time, we have more questions that we 

look forward to engaging with the Minister of Education in 

committee, some constructive discussion, and we have more 

questions with the communities who are facing such challenges, 

Mr. Speaker, and with the stakeholders, the education sector, to 

see how this process is working for them. 

 

But at this time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I‟ll move this Bill — I‟m 

not sure if this is Bill no. 3, 4, 5, or 6 of the amendment . . . Oh, 

it‟s no. 2. Sorry, Mr. Speaker, my mistake — The Education 

Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2). And we will now refer this Bill 

to committee, and we look forward in engaging in conversation. 

 

And I know the Minister of Education is shouting across the 

floor here right now. He‟s angry. He‟s an angry, mad man, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And it might be, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I 

believe, on this point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that in Murray 

Mandryk‟s column on December 31, 2008 in the Leader-Post, 

this very politician, the Minister of Education, was referred to 

as the most disappointing politician of 2008. “Ken Krawetz . . . 

[for among other things his failure to do] much to address 



April 8, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2719 

school closures . . .” So I can understand, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

why the minister‟s agitated. 

 

I know there‟s much dissent in that caucus between numerous 

powerful ministers within that caucus as to what the best policy 

is to go forward. 

 

The only thing that‟s very clear right now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

is that that government, that Sask Party continues to fail the 

people of this province on an area where they had very clear 

promises. 

 

I now refer this Bill to committee and look forward to 

constructive dialogue. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

a motion by the Minister of Education that Bill No. 79, The 

Education Amendment Act, 2009 be now read a second time. Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. Order. 

 

Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the Standing 

Committee on Human Services. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the 

Standing Committee on Human Services. 

 

Bill No. 49 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 49 — The 

Ambulance Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Saskatoon 

Eastview. I‟m happy to speak today on Bill 49, The Ambulance 

Amendment Act, 2008. Most of the Act is basically 

housekeeping. It‟s repealing sections that are no longer needed 

in this Act, as they are covered in The Regional Health Services 

Act and the more recently proclaimed paramedics Act. There is 

really no significant or appreciable changes in service delivery 

inherent in the changes. 

 

However, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is some benefit to having 

a clear delineation of authority that the health regions will have 

for ambulance and EMS [emergency medical services] delivery. 

It also reinforces the new self-regulatory authority for 

paramedics by The Paramedics Act. 

 

We all agree with the importance of the emergency medical 

services that are accessible to all Saskatchewan residents, and 

we all agree with the need to have highly qualified EMS staff in 

ambulances and appropriate response times for emergency calls 

across the province. And many of my colleagues have spoken 

about that and how much we appreciate the services that are 

delivered through EMS. 

 

[14:45] 

 

But since the Bill is being opened, there are many 

improvements that could be made to strengthen our emergency 

medical system. And I know that the minister has said in 

committee that there is a current review being done on road 

ambulance and air ambulance as well. There will be, I assume 

then, some changes being made again. We‟ll have to open this 

Act yet again. 

 

And I do know that we‟re going to see some, we do have some 

lobbying going on right now with firefighters coming and 

talking about they expect to see or would like to see a change in 

the way their members are utilized in emergency service 

delivery. They feel they‟re being underutilized and basically 

could contribute more in emergency medical services. 

 

We definitely think that this, as I said, this Act is really 

inconsequential for anything that will change in service 

delivery. And I think probably we‟ll see some changes 

anticipated as well in the patient-first review. So I am expecting 

to see this Act again in the near future, in the next legislature, I 

would assume, our legislative session. And the stakeholders that 

I have spoken to of course have no question or no problems 

with the proposed changes as they are really not very 

significant. 

 

So we can certainly see that this Bill can go off to committee, 

and we‟ll have further debate and discussion there. Thank you, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

the motion by the Minister of Health that Bill No. 49, The 

Ambulance Act, 2008 be now read a second time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the Standing 

Committee on Human Services. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the 

Standing Committee on Human Services. 

 

Bill No. 43 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 43 — The 

Trespass to Property Act be now read a second time.] 

 



2720 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2009 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. A lot‟s 

been said in the legislature on this Bill since it was introduced. 

And a lot of it had to do with the Bill and some of it had to do 

with the concept of trespass more generally and maybe a little 

bit less to do with the Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I just want to very briefly focus attention on the Bill and a 

concern with the Bill, which I trust is a result of an oversight on 

the part of the government and not deliberate, Mr. Speaker. And 

it‟s a criticism that I made when interviewed about the Bill 

when it was first introduced. It‟s a concern that I continue to 

have and it‟s a concern that I‟ll highlight in this debate briefly, 

not at great length, Mr. Speaker. I don‟t think it needs great 

length to bring it to attention. 

 

The Bill sets, I would say, a minimum standard or a minimal 

regime for trespass across the province because the Bill sets out 

that any municipal bylaw, any municipal legislation in effect 

would actually trump the Bill. That this, unlike some legislation 

that says notwithstanding any other Act or certainly any 

enactment of municipal government, this is the case. This Bill 

doesn‟t do that, Mr. Speaker. This Bill says it is subordinate to 

any municipal trespass law. So any trespass bylaw brought in 

by Saskatoon or Kindersley or anywhere else that has different 

provisions that are in conflict with this legislation, those 

provisions would carry the day, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I have a question as to why we would have legislation that 

effectively takes the place of a municipal bylaw for a 

municipality that didn‟t want one or didn‟t want one badly 

enough to pass one, Mr. Speaker. I‟m not sure I understand the 

motivation for the Bill. 

 

But the Bill raises for me a constitutional concern and that is 

that, unlike similar legislation . . . And I would use the example 

of Manitoba for example that‟s had a petty trespass Act similar 

to this legislation in some ways — perhaps not as well drafted 

in some ways as this legislation is, but superior to this 

legislation in one key respect, Mr. Speaker. In the Manitoba 

legislation for example, Mr. Speaker, and I wouldn‟t want to 

suggest this is unique to the Manitoba Act, but the Manitoba 

legislation provides a defence, and the defence is a 

constitutional defence, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Before the enactment of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms, 

Canadians expected to be able to assemble and freely express 

their opinions, not just on publicly owned land, but also on land 

that is normally accessible to the public without fee or charge 

— what one might call quasi-public land, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And if that exercise of freedom of assembly, peaceful 

expression of opinion caused some concern or acted against the 

interests of the owner of those premises, Mr. Speaker, then the 

owner, the occupier of those premises or the associated 

premises could apply to the court for an injunction enjoining the 

demonstration or the assembly, whatever form it took. And the 

interests of the property owner would be balanced by the court 

against people‟s right to assemble freely and to express their 

opinions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

These freedoms that would have to be balanced in such a 

decision are now entrenched in our Charter of Rights and 

Freedoms. They are part of the constitution of the country, 

which brings me to my concern about the constitutionality of 

the Bill. 

 

The Bill suggests that one no longer has to go to a judge to have 

that balancing done between the interests of the property owner 

— which are quite valid and legitimate and often win out in 

these cases, Mr. Speaker — against people‟s freedom to 

assemble and express their opinions, sometimes in respect to 

the activities of that very same person. 

 

These injunctions are granted all the time, but the Bill would 

seem to suggest that you no longer have to do that because now 

it‟s trespass and it‟s an offence. And the fact that you are 

gathering to express your opinions as provided for in the 

constitution of the country, that you are assembling to do so as 

provided for by our constitution is not a defence to the trespass. 

There is no such defence in this Bill. There is in the Manitoba 

legislation, for example, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now either the government overlooked this very fundamental 

problem with their legislation — it‟s an oversight which I 

would call upon them to address, Mr. Speaker — or they 

decided that, well, you know, if the legislation is not 

constitutional, the courts will fix it. And that is a common 

attitude of governments, not just this government, Mr. Speaker. 

Common attitudes of governments unfortunately across the 

country is that, well if there‟s a constitutional problem, the 

courts will fix it. 

 

Well how does that happen, Mr. Speaker? The only way that 

can happen is that a group of people exercise the constitutional 

right to assemble and express their opinions. They would be 

charged under the trespass Act. The police would not 

understand that there is a problem with the constitutionality of 

the legislation that they are making the charge under. There‟s 

no defence set out in the Act, Mr. Speaker, and then the matter 

would proceed to court. 

 

And the problem the member has from Saskatoon Northwest is 

he only listens to part of the argument, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Then the charge is trespass, would proceed to the court. People 

would raise the fact that, the defence that well in fact we were 

exercising our constitutional rights under the Charter of Rights 

and Freedoms and rights that we had before then, but we 

certainly do have now entrenched in the Constitution. And a 

judge would find that yes indeed, you do, and the legislation has 

to be read down to include that defence and to include that 

exemption or exception to the trespass Act, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well why should free Canadians, exercising their freedoms — 

their constitutional freedoms of assembly and expression, Mr. 

Speaker — why should any of them have to go to court to argue 

and establish that the legislation is unconstitutional; when we 

can, by reading it and by comparing it to similar legislation 

across the country, see that that is the case, Mr. Speaker? And 

surely it‟s the duty and responsibilities of legislators to ensure 

the minimum constitutionality of legislation, and not to leave it 

to courts to fix, Mr. Speaker. 

 



April 8, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2721 

And that is the key. That is the key problem, the key issue with 

this legislation. It‟s the key concern of the opposition in this 

respect, that the legislation is not constitutional. It‟s not 

constitutional in a fundamental way in that it fails to protect 

fundamental freedoms ensured in the Canadian Constitution, 

Mr. Speaker, and we will be continuing to raise this concern. 

But I am, for the moment, finished expressing it in this 

Chamber. Thank you. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would just like to 

take a few minutes to support the arguments that have been 

made by my colleague who‟s just completed his talk, and just 

add a few more questions around this particular legislation. I 

think that he has quite adequately outlined the concerns that we 

have about the Canadian Constitution. 

 

But one of the other concerns that I have is where trespass to 

property Act laws have been used, in what subject areas. And I 

think sometimes people look inward and not outward when they 

bring forward legislation into this Chamber. So I just want to 

point out a few areas where trespass legislation has been used in 

other jurisdictions and point out that there may be some 

particular problems. 

 

One area that trespass legislation has been used in a number of 

jurisdictions relates to air quality and pollution, and the issue is 

dust and other particular irritants or emissions from factories 

and how they end up causing damage to neighbours. 

 

And this is quite a different area than what this particular 

legislation seems to be addressing. And I just want to point out 

that in Arizona there‟s a part of their legislation relating to 

trespassing that deals with fugitive dust emissions on a vacant 

lot or open area, and so therefore there has to be control 

measures that are brought in by the trespasser. So I would just 

say that there‟s a whole area as it relates to environmental rules 

and laws where this Act may or may not apply. We can‟t tell so 

far. 

 

Another area where trespass legislation is used, and I know 

others have talked about this already, relates to protests of 

various kinds. And last year there was a protest in California 

along the Union Pacific branch line by the seaside town of 

Santa Cruz where the railroad tried to enforce trespassing laws 

to keep citizens away from their particular rail line. The actual 

issue was the development of a trail on an old rail line. This use 

of the trespass legislation is quite different, but in fact we have 

many rail lines in Saskatchewan where similar issues may arise. 

 

Another interesting place where trespass legislation has been 

used, and this is in Ontario, and it‟s in some ways the political 

cousins of the present government which is the Ontario 

opposition Conservatives, where their former leader, Mr. John 

Tory, pledged that he would use Ontario trespass legislation to 

crack down on illegal occupations such as the long-simmering 

standoff between Native and non-Native protestors in 

Caledonia. And what he was going to do was to go into the 

province of Ontario trespassing laws to make sure that there 

would be some provisions there that would assist him in that. 

 

We don‟t know whether that‟s part of the intent of this 

particular legislation. I think that that‟s something that we will 

be able to find more out as we go into some of the questions as 

we go into committee. But I just want to identify that there‟s a 

place where this particular trespassing legislation has been 

identified as a tool. 

 

[15:00] 

 

Another rather strange situation where trespassing legislation 

has been used relates to a number of jurisdictions in the United 

States where people have been picketing funerals. And this is 

quite an unusual situation where numbers of people who are 

part of churches in Kansas, but it‟s also happened in other 

states, have gone and picketed funerals of people who have died 

in Iraq or Afghanistan. And basically they are saying — in that 

particular situation, it‟s more of an information type of a picket 

— that the results of US [United States] combat in the Middle 

East and the deaths of American citizens are God‟s punishment 

for the nation‟s tolerance of homosexuality. 

 

And so in that particular situation, the courts have been asked to 

use the trespass laws to try to deal with these informational 

pickets. It‟s quite an unusual situation, but it is a situation where 

we need to know what kind of perspective the provincial 

government has as they bring forward this legislation. 

 

In US labour law — and you kind of get a sense of where some 

of these issues arise, and I think my colleagues have mentioned 

some of them as it relates to Canadian law — but in the United 

States they have a ongoing journal. It‟s called The Developing 

Labor Law, and it‟s continually issued in new editions. It has a 

whole section on trespass law and labour law. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are concerned that any use of this 

legislation, as it relates to some of the perception that we have 

of the province‟s new labour laws, will be in any way damaging 

to the whole process of collective bargaining. And it relates, 

once again, to the ability to communicate with employees and 

with the public and, in fact, which areas are available for 

communication. And, Mr. Speaker, we will continue to monitor 

what kinds of things are said, and will be asking questions 

about this in the committee. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those are just a few of the issues that I wanted to 

raise this afternoon, just to have them on the record and to make 

sure that we get an appropriate response from the government 

as this Bill moves forward. Thank you. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — The question before 

the Assembly is the motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill 

No. 43, The Trespass to Property Act be now read a second 

time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — To which committee 

shall this Bill be referred? 

 



2722 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2009 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — This Bill stands 

referred to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 76 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Heppner that Bill No. 76 — The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Regina Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I rise to discuss Bill No. 76, An Act to Amend the 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Act and to amend the Wildlife 

Habitat Lands Designation Regulations. 

 

The Saskatchewan wildlife protection Act is an important piece 

of environmental legislation in this province that protects our 

biodiversity, the immense variety of plants and animals. We 

know that biodiversity is integral to our province‟s future 

well-being. People of Saskatchewan have the privilege of being 

surrounded with a rich diversity of landscapes, watersheds from 

prairie grasslands to arboreal forest, from sand dunes and sand 

hills to abundant lakes, rivers, and bogs. 

 

Saskatchewan‟s prosperity is drawn from this rich endowment 

of biodiversity demonstrated in our agriculture, forestry, 

hunting, fishing, and tourist activities in our economy. So too, 

Mr. Speaker, is our health, from the safety of our fresh water to 

the air we breathe and the land we walk. It is more than 

aesthetic appeal. Biodiversity allows our ecosystems to 

function, keeping our soil rich, our water sparkling, and our air 

clean with less carbon dioxide. 

 

In developing our economy, Mr. Speaker, we need to do a 

better job accounting for the full consequences to our 

environment and biodiversity in particular. Habitat loss, 

alteration, or fragmentation combined with the invasion of 

exotic species and pollution represent the main sources of 

negative consequences that can result from an economic 

activity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when legislation is put forward by the Sask Party 

government to remove the areas that were once given protection 

under The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, those elected to this 

legislature have a responsibility to ensure that such removal 

considers the potential consequences to our biological diversity 

in plant and animals. After all, these lands are being removed 

from the protection schedule. 

 

In addition to the consideration of negative consequences to the 

removal of protection status from certain parcels of land in our 

province, those elected to this legislature must also ensure that 

public consultation has taken place. Public consultation is not, 

as the Sask Party government routinely demonstrates, just an 

excusable formality. It is how democracy should, on principle, 

function. 

While the NDP was in government, we prepared an action plan 

for the protection and management of Saskatchewan‟s 

biodiversity. The biodiversity action plan supported the green 

strategy that was consequently gutted by the Sask Party 

government upon their election in 2007. The biodiversity action 

plan had an articulated vision of responsibility, effective public 

participation, balanced values, and knowledge-based decisions 

that would guide the conservation and management of 

out-of-province‟s biodiversity. 

 

In particular the biodiversity action plan guided the efforts of 

government to improve policies, programs, planning, 

management systems, and access to information in support of 

biodiversity. Some of this work, Mr. Speaker, has already been 

done, while other initiatives contained in the plan were 

scheduled to continue even now. In essence, the biodiversity 

action plan advanced by the former New Democratic 

government established a prospective to growth that better 

balanced the social and economic needs of productive activities, 

and conversely the fundamental need to protect the integrity of 

the environment. 

 

When reviewing the proposed amendments contained in Bill 

No. 76 to the wildlife protection Act, it is imperative that we 

consider the ideological agenda of the Sask Party government. 

The Sask Party government is already failing on climate 

change. They have spent more time gutting the plans to achieve 

the former NDP carbon emission reduction targets than finding 

an alternative solution that works. 

 

Instead, all Saskatchewan people have received from this 

government is an ideological denial of the problem of climate 

change and a mounting bill for the mega projects like carbon 

capture and storage for coal and the biased nuclear development 

process, that together will still fail to meet the specified targets 

the Sask Party government adopted in their 2007 election 

platform. Indeed, the second budget delivered by the Sask Party 

government on March 18 of this year confirms that conservative 

ideology simply offers no real action on climate change and, 

worse still, an ideological motivation to push through 

environmentally sensitive projects using backroom deals with 

blank cheques of taxpayer money. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party government record in protecting 

the biological diversity is also dismal. In December 2008 I 

asked questions in this legislature as to why the Sask Party 

government decided to quickly include, without consultation, 

the ecologically sensitive area known as Dillon-Vermette. The 

41 000 hectares of land in northwestern Saskatchewan was on 

the verge of receiving protection designation with reports that 

several environmental organizations had reached an agreement 

with the forest company of Mistik Management and the 

Ministry of Environment to designate the area as a protected 

site until it appeared on the list of Crown land to be auctioned 

by the Ministry of Energy and Resources eight months later. 

 

With the Sask Party government, nothing is off limits when 

short-term profit can be gained. Sustainability, to the Sask 

Party, is one of those trendy catchphrases that they need to use 

to appear moderate. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when I view changes made to the very 

environmental legislation that conserves nearly one-third of all 



April 8, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2723 

wildlife habitat in the agricultural region of our province, I do 

so with some circumspection and caution. 

 

New Democrats believe that our natural and cultural heritage is 

simply too valuable to quickly be put up for sale, and the 

government has the ultimate responsibility to manage our 

Crown lands and to protect their unique diversity with all due 

diligence. Thank you. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — The question before 

the Assembly is a motion put forward by the Minister of 

Environment that Bill No. 76, The Wildlife Habitat Protection 

Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a second time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — To which committee 

shall this Bill be referred? 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Deputy Chair, to the Standing 

Committee on the Economy. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — This Bill stands 

referred to the Standing Committee on the Economy. 

 

Bill No. 61 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Hutchinson that Bill No. 61 — The 

Local Government Election Amendment Act, 2008 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

It‟s a pleasure to rise and add some comments to the debate on 

Bill No. 61, An Act to Amend the Local Government Election 

Act. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Bill before us, The Local Government 

Election Act, is interesting because I know we all are aware of 

the rules and regulations that are in place for elections, whether 

municipal or provincial, but we don‟t often think of where they 

spring from or where they are contained in legislation within 

the province. But it is The Local Government Election Act that 

provides the legal framework to enable all local governments, 

and that could be urban or rural municipalities, northern 

municipalities, villages, towns, or cities, and also school boards 

— the rules and regulations for those elections are all contained 

within this Act. 

 

And I know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we all understand that 

there are rules and regulations that are needed to be in place for 

these elections, and that from time to time they will need to be 

adjusted or updated. Or there may be requests from the various 

bodies that are covered by this legislation — changes that they 

would like to see. This seems to be a similar circumstance 

where we‟re seeing a general updating and maybe modernizing 

of this piece of legislation. 

 

There are a number of areas that I‟m sure there will be 

questions for the minister when we finally do move into 

committee. And I know there have been a number of concerns 

or questions that we have been asked from our constituents as to 

the effect of this. And I know one of the first pieces that‟s dealt 

with is that the minister is proposing is allowed within this 

legislation, if it‟s changed, is that in the event of a by-election 

for a mayor or reeve — a mayor in the case of an urban 

municipality, and a reeve in the case of a rural municipality — 

that the changes to the Act would enable councillors to run for 

the vacant position of mayor or reeve without stepping down 

from the seat that they now hold. 

 

And most of us know that in general elections that you can not 

put your name forward for more than one office at a time. But 

when the Bill was tabled and we heard the comments from the 

minister, he made it clear that there‟s been concern expressed 

that if a number of councillors want to run for mayor, then their 

seats would have to become vacant in order for them to do that 

with the current legislation. And then you may have to have 

further elections to fill those vacant seats. And if enough 

councillors ran, then you would have a council that would not 

be able to constitute a quorum to conduct business. 

 

So I don‟t know if this has ever happened. I have never heard of 

an instance where, because of changes in the elected officials 

and a number stepping aside to seek the position of reeve or 

mayor, that it in effect has made the councils unable to operate. 

It‟s not something that I‟ve ever heard about happening in 

municipalities. So I guess we have to question what really is the 

extent of this issue in Saskatchewan, and is it something that 

needs to apply to everyone. 

 

So I guess a little more information in that area is going to be 

one of the things that we‟ll be asking the minister for when we 

are in committee. 

 

[15:15] 

 

And one of the other changes that are proposed in the 

legislation, I don‟t think anyone has any concerns with. We 

look at the city of Saskatoon, after the municipal elections that 

were held there, have put in place a bylaw that requires 

campaign contributions to be disclosed. So that if someone is 

running for councillor, someone‟s running for mayor, the city of 

Saskatoon has taken the position that those who run should 

disclose contributions from whatever the source. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you look at this, there have 

been a number of changes right across the country at a variety 

of levels of governments — whether municipal, provincial, or 

federal — where we have looked at the issue of democratic 

reform. And financing and the declaration of financing through 

a campaign is often a priority in many of the changes that are 

put forward. And I think all of us would applaud Saskatoon in 

the changes that they went ahead and initiated through their 

council and with one of their bylaws. So now what we see is 

there will be changes in the legislation, and the Saskatoon 

proposal may spread quite a bit farther than what was initially 

intended. 



2724 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2009 

One of the other requirements in this legislation is a request by 

rural municipalities that they also be allowed to adopt or to put 

in place voters lists. And here again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, all of 

us are accustomed to dealing with voters lists, whether we‟re 

running in a provincial election or a by-election, or whether we 

are helping out with a federal. And there are some of our 

colleagues in this House that have also ran in a federal election. 

So we‟re used to dealing with voters lists. 

 

But this is something that the municipalities are looking to have 

the ability to adopt or put in place, voters lists for their 

communities. And I know there is always a fair bit of 

discussion that when you get into an election, the issues that 

may arise when you‟re discussing eligible voters and what 

identification you may have to take with you to the polling 

station to make sure that you are able to vote, causes a bit of 

problems. 

 

So my understanding is that the municipalities, the rural 

municipalities feel that this may make it easier and may do 

away with the whole identification process, or at least a 

cumbersome identification process. And I‟m sure that that‟s 

very appealing to a number of the rural municipalities. 

 

I know by law we have to carry around our driver‟s licence and 

the Saskatchewan driver‟s licence does have a picture on it 

now, but they may not be in the best shape all the time. And I 

know there was other instances where other pieces of 

identification have been required. So it may simplify the 

process if this is allowed to happen in a number of the RMs 

[rural municipality]. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think the notion of a voters list to clearly 

determine upfront who may or may not be eligible would be 

welcome by those municipalities as a way of reducing some of 

the conflict that they have seen in the past. I‟m sure it won‟t do 

away with all of it, but it does help and it does make things a 

little easier at the polling stations and on election day. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think probably the most controversial 

item that has been commented on and has concerned the 

municipalities is not in fact something that‟s contained in the 

Bill. The minister had indicated that the provincial government 

is not proceeding with a request from the municipalities to 

move from a three-year term for urban and northern 

municipalities and school board officials, because at this point 

those locally elected officials from urban municipalities, 

northern municipalities, and school boards are elected for a 

three-year term. 

 

There was a fair bit of discussion over this issue and add to a 

few more complications into the whole issue is that rural 

municipalities operate differently. And their people are elected 

for two-year terms. And now the associations and those that are 

responsible for some of the urban municipalities — I think 

primarily the urban municipalities — are requesting that we go 

from a three-year term to a four-year term. And they felt that by 

the time a newly elected councillor was getting to understand 

the system and the issues that they were dealing with, it was 

almost time to run for re-election again. And they felt a 

four-year term may be more appropriate. 

 

And I guess also, there was a point when people . . . Well when 

people are elected to the provincial legislature, it‟s a four-year 

term. And I guess there were some that were questioning why 

should it be any different for urban municipalities as the issues 

that they deal with on a day-to-day basis are getting to be more 

and more complicated. It‟s interesting that the minister in his 

remarks, in speaking to this when he moved the Bill, said that 

while there was support from the municipal and the education 

sector, other stakeholders expressed concern. So I guess the big 

question was who are these other stakeholders who expressed 

concern and are obviously in a position to change the minister‟s 

mind. 

 

This was really a collective decision by the municipalities and 

the education authorities who had requested that their terms be 

extended. But someone else has been able to stop that collective 

decision that had been put forward, that both the municipalities 

and the education authorities thought was a good idea. 

Obviously the minister is listening very closely to other 

stakeholders. So we really need to ask those questions as to who 

is opposed to changing it from a three-year term to a four-year 

term, and how does one sector have a say over what others will 

be doing when the others have both agreed. The ones that are 

impacted with the decision and had made the request were in 

agreement with it. 

 

So we‟re seeing some hesitation on behalf of the minister and I 

know he has often talked about his role as a member of the 

Regina City Council. And Regina City Council has taken the 

position that we ought to be moving forward to a four-year 

term. But obviously once the minister moved away from 

municipal politics, he also seemed to change a number of his 

opinions and take a different view on a number of things. So 

it‟ll be interesting to see how he lays out his decision to pull this 

piece out of the Bill and take a totally different view on 

something that previously — not that long ago — he would 

have supported. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know there‟s a couple of comments 

in the minister‟s statements where the minister said that he and 

the government have conducted extensive consultations with all 

of the organizations that represent municipalities, not just the 

organizations that represent elected officials — such as SUMA 

[Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] or SARM 

[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] — but also 

with the associations that represent the officials that work for 

those local governments such as the Association of City Clerks, 

the Urban Municipal Administrators‟ Association, and the 

Rural Municipal Administrators‟ Association, and on and on the 

list goes. 

 

So obviously there‟s been some extensive consultations on the 

changes that are being proposed in this Bill. We have had a 

number of discussions on it and, Mr. Speaker, I think, while all 

of my colleagues or most of my colleagues have had an 

opportunity to express their views and make comments on the 

legislation, I think in all in all, the major changes that are being 

put forward in the Bill, there will be some questions that we 

have. Some of the issues of the length of term that have been 

left out for some reason, we will have a few questions on that. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will kind of reserve the rest of my 

comments for when we‟re in committee and we‟re able to ask 

questions and receive responses directly from the minister. 



April 8, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2725 

Thank you. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — The question before 

the Assembly is a motion by the Minister of Municipal Affairs 

that Bill No. 61, The Local Government Election Amendment 

Act, 2008 be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — To which committee 

shall this Bill be referred? 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — To Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — This Bill stands 

referred to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 59 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 59 — The 

Election Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is another Bill 

on which I will be relatively brief — perhaps not as brief as 

members of the government would like. But still a lot has been 

said on this Bill, and I will be somewhat repetitive in respect to 

the Bill because it‟s a relatively straightforward Bill in its 

intent. And the difficulties in actually carrying out the intent, I 

think, are pretty easy to find and have been commented on 

previously. 

 

But just briefly, Mr. Speaker, this Bill clearly is intended by the 

government to work in tandem with the fixed election date 

legislation previously brought forward by this government and 

enacted by this legislature. And this legislation, if adopted or 

when adopted, Mr. Speaker, would purport to limit the amount 

of government advertising that can be placed for a certain 

period of time prior to an election, which one can only 

reasonably even plan to do if one has some idea of when the 

election is going to be so that one can count back from that 

fixed election date. 

 

So this legislation is, in the first place, dependent upon the 

soundness of the previous Act that I refer to — the fixed 

election day legislation — to actually guarantee that there will 

be a fixed election date. 

 

Just very briefly, Mr. Speaker, I‟m sure the intentions of the 

government were good in bringing forward that legislation. But 

that legislation contains the same loophole that the federal 

legislation on a fixed election day brought forward by the 

Conservatives in Ottawa had. And that is, that unless the 

legislature‟s dissolved, earlier dissolved, there will be a fixed 

election day and this would be the date. Well unless the 

legislature‟s earlier dissolved. 

 

Well we saw in Ottawa that parliament was dissolved early so 

there was no fixed election date, Mr. Speaker. And really all for 

naught, even from the Conservatives‟ point of view, because 

after breaking the promise on the fixed election date, there‟s an 

election and there‟s another minority Conservative government. 

So the government did not advance its interest by breaking its 

promise. And I would think that this government probably 

wouldn‟t advance its interest by breaking its promise either, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But this legislation that‟s been proposed here on advertising 

prior to an election day is only as good as the fixed election day 

legislation. And that legislation I think has a caveat to it. And I 

think the opposition, for example, would be foolish to assume 

that that is necessarily the date, although the date set in the 

legislation is probably the date, Mr. Speaker. That all said, the 

intent of this legislation on government advertising as we 

approach the election is, I think, well intentioned; maybe hastily 

drafted, Mr. Speaker. And perhaps there really is no way of 

addressing some of these concerns. 

 

Somehow one has to calculate what will be acceptable and will 

not be acceptable, Mr. Speaker. And the legislation makes that 

calculation by going back to a previous period, and taking the 

average of government advertising in that previous period and 

saying in the next period it can‟t exceed that or cannot exceed it 

except by a set amount, Mr. Speaker. And that, I think, is a 

good concept, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The government has sort of adopted in this particular case — 

unfortunately not in very many cases, but in this particular case 

— at this legislation, sort of the maxim out of the Democratic 

Party in Chicago, as I understand it, “good politics is good 

government” and good government is good politics. And this is 

legislation I think they see is both good politics — certainly on 

the surface it looks good — and good government if indeed its 

intent is carried out. 

 

[15:30] 

 

Some government advertising in respect to programs that 

people want access to, that people should know about, is good 

government advertising. Nobody‟s going to dispute it. 

Nobody‟s going to argue with it, and of course the legislation 

allows that to be done, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But it allows more than that if one manipulates the period which 

one uses as the standard. So, as this has been pointed out by 

members of the opposition, this doesn‟t work very well if it just 

increases government spending in advertising in the period 

before the period set out in the legislation, the period by which 

one sets the standard for what government advertising is 

appropriate. 

 

If indeed the government decides that it does want to ramp up 

advertising prior to an election in 2011 — despite their stated 

intention not to do so — then to do so and to be in compliance 

with this legislation only requires them to ramp up their 

spending on advertising even earlier, Mr. Speaker. And then it 



2726 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2009 

would have, I believe — because I don‟t want to cast aspersions 

here — I believe the unintended effect of having a period in 

which there‟s increased government advertising immediately 

prior to the election and a period before that of enhanced 

government spending primarily for the political purpose of 

increasing what the government can spend on advertising in the 

upcoming period prior to the election. And that would defeat 

the very purpose of the legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That said, if that doesn‟t happen and the government fails to 

comply with the legislation, this Bill contains no penalties. This 

Bill contains no sanctions, Mr. Speaker. And if the legislation 

isn‟t followed, well what does anyone do, Mr. Speaker? So that 

may also be because the legislation was hastily drafted. But it 

becomes more a statement of principle than a legislative regime 

that prescribes certain behaviour and has certain sanctions or 

penalties if that behaviour is not followed. 

 

It seems very strange that the government forgot to include a 

sanction for failing to follow the regime of which they are so 

proud. And the toothlessness of the legislation is one of the 

concerns that the opposition has expressed. 

 

So I suppose concerns are threefold. Having stated that we 

understand the principle, we understand the politics, we don‟t 

have much dispute with the principle and we don‟t have much 

dispute with the politics. Because this is not an empty, symbolic 

Bill in its entirety. 

 

The concerns are three. One is, it really depends upon the fixed 

election date being a fixed election date, Mr. Speaker, and in 

recent political history we‟ve seen that that‟s not necessarily the 

case. 

 

Secondly we have, and actually again, I‟ll say it again, I believe 

unintended consequence. That as political realities become 

apparent to government members, as we get closer to 2011 and 

they realize that their ability to advertise their good programs 

— what they believe are good programs people should know 

about — might be hampered during the period up to the 

election, there will be a temptation to expand what can be spent 

in that period prior to the election by expanding what‟s spent in 

the period prior to that . . . [inaudible] . . . judge. And that is the 

second concern. 

 

And the third concern and the last concern, Mr. Speaker — I‟m 

about to take my chair — the last concern of course is, if one 

wants to bring in a regime and not just a statement of principles, 

and it‟s a regime that says we take this behaviour seriously, we 

want this conduct to be followed, then there are usually, Mr. 

Speaker, particularly, you know, with a party that I think prides 

itself on being a law-and-order party, a party that prides itself 

on being tough on crime, usually if you‟re going to be 

sanctioning conduct because you don‟t think it‟s appropriate 

conduct, you‟re going to have some penalty if people do it 

anyways despite the legislation. 

 

And this legislation strangely, strangely doesn‟t include any 

penalty. And I don‟t suggest any bad intent on the part of the 

members opposite, the government, but it would be legislation 

that we would be more supportive of — not just in principle, 

but more supportive of in its body — if it addressed those 

concerns that I have briefly outlined, Mr. Speaker. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — The question before 

the Assembly is a motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill 

No. 59, The Election Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a 

second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Carried. 

 

Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — To which committee 

shall this Bill be referred? 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the Standing 

Committee on House Services. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — This Bill stands 

referred to the Standing Committee on House Services. 

 

Bill No. 60 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 60 — The Senate 

Nominee Election Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m 

pleased today to rise for the second reading debate on Bill No. 

60, The Senate Nominee Act. Mr. Speaker, I have appreciated 

some of the interventions that have preceded me, particularly 

the intervention of the member from Regina Douglas Park who 

opened the comments for the opposition caucus, and who spent 

a considerable time, Mr. Speaker, outlining exactly the 

circumstances that we find ourselves in today, surrounding the 

future of the Senate in Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I put my own comments on record for 

those watching today, and for those who will be reading my 

remarks independent of anyone else‟s remarks, Mr. Speaker, I 

simply want to spend a couple of moments to review what the 

minister said, the Minister of Justice said when he introduced 

this legislation at second reading. 

 

To be very brief and simple, coming from those remarks, Mr. 

Speaker, the Minister of Justice said that, and I‟ll quote from his 

remarks, the provincial “. . . government is taking an important 

step towards ensuring that in the future Saskatchewan senators 

can be chosen democratically by the people of our province, 

rather than in the backrooms of Ottawa.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I will elaborate on that point later. But I 

think that it goes without saying, Mr. Speaker, that it doesn‟t 

really matter how people get to the Senate; it‟s what they do 

once they get there that matters, Mr. Speaker. And that will be 

the heart of my comments. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this legislation, according to the Minister of 



April 8, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2727 

Justice, is quite simply to ensure that we send more people to 

the Senate in Ottawa — a Senate that‟s not changed in any way, 

the current Senate. The only trouble is or the only circumstance 

is, Mr. Speaker, we will elect those people instead of having 

them appointed by the Prime Minister in Ottawa. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice also outlined that this Bill 

will authorize provincial elections held to elect individuals to be 

put forward as Saskatchewan nominees for federal appointment 

to the Senate. So in fact, Mr. Speaker, the original point, which 

was to elect senators, Mr. Speaker, is actually somewhat 

contradicted in the second remarks of the minister — that in 

fact what we are actually doing is not electing people to the 

Senate, but we are electing them to a list that could possibly be 

available for individuals to be nominated to the Senate in the 

old-fashioned way, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the number of nominees, Mr. Speaker, isn‟t set out by the 

legislation. The legislation quite simply says that there would 

be an order in council, or the cabinet would actually decide how 

many people elected by Saskatchewan people would actually go 

onto the list for consideration by the Prime Minister‟s office in 

Ottawa. And more importantly, Mr. Speaker, this order in 

council would determine a number that depends on the number 

of Senate seats that are available at that given time. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, let‟s just think about this for a second, how 

valuable this little tool is in our arsenal of democratic 

armaments, Mr. Speaker. We‟re currently in a situation where 

the provincial election is two years from now. There is no 

vacancy in the Senate today, Mr. Speaker. As I will say in a 

couple of minutes, Mr. Speaker, that vacancy, one that existed 

when this legislation was first introduced, has been filled by an 

appointment of the Prime Minister, Mr. Speaker, an 

appointment in December of this year. So the seat now, the 

vacancy is filled, Mr. Speaker. And the Prime Minister has 

indicated that that seat now, those appointed senators, will serve 

for eight years. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have no vacancy today. Provincial election 

will be held in two years from now. There would be no point of 

a Senate election because there‟s no vacancy available, Mr. 

Speaker. The next provincial election, because we‟re now on 

fixed election dates, is four years after that. There‟ll still be no 

vacancy, Mr. Speaker. And so the following election is four 

years after that under fixed election dates. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, you have three, 4-year terms before we 

actually likely have a vacancy in the Senate. Three 4-year terms 

is 12 years, plus two years from now until the next election, Mr. 

Speaker. So we‟re looking at a period of about 14 years before 

this Act actually has any relevance to the Saskatchewan people, 

if indeed it has any relevance at all, which is part of the 

argument that I will be making in my remarks. 

 

Just from a practical perspective, Mr. Speaker, we‟re spending 

time on this legislation, and the priority for the Saskatchewan 

people or the needs that the Saskatchewan people have about 

having a second view of what‟s going on in Ottawa from the 

Prairie and Western perspective, Mr. Speaker, this Bill doesn‟t 

actually address it. 

 

The other thing that the Minister of Justice indicated, Mr. 

Speaker, is that pretty much the only criteria for someone to 

stand for election is that the nominee qualifications are those 

established by the constitutional requirements for a senator. 

Well really, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the historic value of 

the Senate and Senate appointments, the criteria that was 

originally set and how the constitution looks at this, the only 

real value, the only real qualification that makes someone 

eligible for sitting as a senator, Mr. Speaker, is the provision 

that they must own property, property within Canada, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So I think some people will remember — those who remember 

their history from high school and some who have taken history 

classes at a post-secondary institution beyond high school. And 

if they‟ve studied the history of Canada or if they‟ve studied 

politics or parliamentary procedure, Mr. Speaker, they will have 

some memory of the fact that when the Senate was first initiated 

or the House of Lords in England, Mr. Speaker, essentially, 

really the only qualification was that you own property. The 

reason for that, Mr. Speaker, was to protect the value of that 

property from those who sit in the elected seats, Mr. Speaker, 

who have a tendency to try to redistribute the value of property. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the history of the Senate or the House of Lords 

in England, was quite simply to protect the propertied classes, 

Mr. Speaker, or more importantly, the wealthy against the 

commoners elected by ordinary people. So that chamber of 

sober second thought was simply a way in which the King of 

England could ensure that the propertied classes had some 

protection from the commoners, those who are generally elected 

by ordinary people, ordinary citizens. 

 

[15:45] 

 

And one assumes that when you‟re elected to a legislature or 

the parliament by the people, Mr. Speaker — and it‟s a direct 

election — and once you‟re elected you take a seat, and you are 

responsible to those who elected you, Mr. Speaker, that indeed 

you are representing the interests of the people of the country or 

the province or your own community, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the Senate, the qualification for the Senate is you must own 

property, protect the value of the propertied class. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I think the history of this country, the history of 

England and other Commonwealth countries, Mr. Speaker, has 

indicated very clearly that what members of the Senate have 

done over the years has not represented, sort of, that chamber of 

sober second thought. The value of what they do have not been 

in the long-term interests of ordinary Canadians. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I do have a few more things to say about 

that too, in a few moments, but just to carry on with what this 

Bill does and to outline again, as I said, for those watching, the 

Minister of Justice in his opening remarks also said a decision 

to hold the Senate nominee election would not be automatic 

with every provincial or federal election. If it‟s not viewed as 

necessary to identify additional nominees, there will be no 

Senate nominee election held at that time. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, as I indicated earlier, just simple 

mathematics would show that we are unlikely to identify a time 

for an election in the very near future, Mr. Speaker. The 

legislation is quite clear — that if it‟s not necessary, it won‟t 



2728 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2009 

happen. And, Mr. Speaker, the legislation quite clearly says that 

the term of a Senate nominee would run from one Senate 

nominee election to the next. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it is entirely possible that someone could stand 

for nomination, could be elected to the Senate, be put on the 

nominee list, Mr. Speaker, and before the next provincial 

election, that Senate nominee could in fact not be nominated to 

serve in the federal Senate or the national Senate, Mr. Speaker. 

And therefore we‟d have to go through the whole process again 

because the legislation prevents this nominee to stay on the list 

for any extended period of time, Mr. Speaker. So we could in 

fact find ourselves looking at quite a number of individuals who 

want to step forward, want to serve their province on a national 

basis and, Mr. Speaker, then find out that it was all for nothing 

— all for naught. 

 

More now to my specific concerns, Mr. Speaker, and let me 

address these things in a little more detail. And I frame this 

from the perspective that over the course of the development of 

the New Democratic Party, both in Canada and in the province 

of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, New Democrats have not felt 

that the Senate does provide value for money for Canadians. 

And our favoured position over the years — and hasn‟t changed 

much ever, Mr. Speaker — our favoured position is to simply 

see the Senate itself abolished. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in many Commonwealth countries, provincial 

governments have senates. Mr. Speaker, we in Canada do not 

have that second level of government within our provincial 

jurisdictions. Mr. Speaker, it could easily be argued that that 

second body, parliamentary body, isn‟t necessary at the national 

level either. 

 

It can be argued, Mr. Speaker, that this Bill really is nothing 

more than an empty gesture, that at the end of the day, we will 

have gone through this process; we have used considerable 

amount of legislative time. We will have engaged certain 

members of the public, and, Mr. Speaker, we have 

communicated messages to the Saskatchewan people. But at the 

end of the day, we have not actually achieved anything. We 

have not changed the way in which this country operates or 

thinks or is able to do business. Mr. Speaker, it is an empty 

gesture. 

 

But what we are seeing is the Saskatchewan Party government 

prepared to expend taxpayers‟ money to obtain very little, other 

than the satisfaction that some of them will receive from some 

of their most conservative supporters. Mr. Speaker, that is not a 

value to the majority of Saskatchewan people. 

 

We know a lot about this process, Mr. Speaker, because the 

province of Alberta has initiated this process already. And as 

we know, members of the Saskatchewan Party have been quick 

to follow the lead of their cousins and friends in the province of 

Alberta, Mr. Speaker. And so what we see here is there‟s been 

an attempt to influence the nomination process in Ottawa from 

the province of Alberta, and Saskatchewan is now simply trying 

to do much the same thing. 

 

It is obvious from the nominations that were made in the month 

of December by Prime Minister Stephen Harper in Ottawa, it is 

obvious that the Prime Minister, the current Conservative Party 

Prime Minister, has no interest whatsoever in a democratically 

elected Senate, Mr. Speaker. To serve his own interests, as 

other Conservative and Liberal ministers have done in the past, 

they have simply used their authority to try to stack the Senate 

to ensure that the Senate supports the wishes of the government 

in power, Mr. Speaker. These efforts being made by the 

province of Alberta and now the province of Saskatchewan to 

try to influence a nomination process that‟s being ignored by 

the federal Prime Minister and federal prime ministers before 

him, Mr. Speaker, simply sends a message to Saskatchewan 

people that this is an empty gesture that comes at considerable 

cost to the taxpayers, the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Bill actually accomplishes nothing in the way 

of meeting Canadian‟s desire for change at the Senate level. If 

you are not one who supports the complete abolishment of the 

Senate, Mr. Speaker, or if you are one who simply 

acknowledges that it will take time to abolish the Senate, Mr. 

Speaker, and that in the meantime effective reforms need to be 

made, well, Mr. Speaker, this Bill doesn‟t address any of those 

people‟s concerns about reforming the Senate. 

 

After all, Mr. Speaker, I remember it wasn‟t that long ago that 

there was a tremendous call for — from the people of Western 

Canada — a call for, from the people of Western Canada, a call 

for a Triple-E Senate. And that Triple-E, Mr. Speaker, was very 

simple. They wanted an elected Senate because they were tired 

of the prime minister‟s buddies managing the system, the 

political system out of the Senate. They wanted equal 

representation, Mr. Speaker. Because as long as the 

appointments to the Senate are based on this population base 

that exists, again from Western Canada‟s perspective, from 

Atlantic Canada‟s perspective, the Senate simply represents the 

population base in Ontario and Quebec as the House of 

Commons does. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some would argue that in the United States, 

whether you live in Rhode Island or whether you live in 

California, you have two senators, Mr. Speaker, and that‟s seen 

as being more equal representation from each provincial 

jurisdiction. If you are electing senators, Mr. Speaker, there 

should also be some recognition that the work they do when 

they get there has to reflect the interests of the provincial 

jurisdictions or maybe even regional jurisdictions because some 

who understood the argument of a Triple-E Senate, Mr. 

Speaker, recognized that equality could apply to regions not just 

provinces. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the other E in the Triple-E — elected, equal 

— the third E, Mr. Speaker, was effective. What is the role that 

the people of Canada want their senators to perform? And how 

do we know that they‟re performing that role, Mr. Speaker? 

They must be effective in what they do. Well many of us also 

understand and remember some of things that have taken place 

in the Senate. And certainly it is not seen, and there is very little 

evidence to establish how the current Senate can be anywhere 

near being considered an effective body. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we can elect people to go on a list all that we 

want. If they‟re still appointed, if there‟s no equality of regions, 

we cannot ever expect that body to be effective in terms of 

responding to the needs of Canadians from coast to coast. 

 



April 8, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2729 

Mr. Speaker, Western Canada does have a lot in common with 

Atlantic Canada. We are not out of line in any of our 

conversations either to each other or to the public, Mr. Speaker, 

when we raise concerns about what happens with our resources, 

Mr. Speaker, or our raw products. 

 

Some have argued that the producers of the Prairies and the 

producers of Atlantic Canada share an awful lot in common, 

Mr. Speaker. Whether you grow wheat or whether you harvest 

fish, Mr. Speaker, someone other than you that is the farmer or 

the fisherman, Mr. Speaker, someone other than you is setting 

the value of your product, is determining the price that you get 

for your product, and is imposing rules and regulations on how 

you can sell that product, Mr. Speaker. So when we are talking 

about the economy of our primary producers, Mr. Speaker, we 

are very similar in nature. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, most recently we have seen our resource 

base, whether it‟s forestry or whether it‟s oil and gas or whether 

it is minerals, Mr. Speaker, Atlantic Canada and Western 

Canada are not treated very differently, except, Mr. Speaker, 

when it comes to the value that provincial governments can 

retain from the sale of those resources. And, Mr. Speaker, had 

we an effective Senate, Mr. Speaker, we would see the regions 

of this country treated more fairly. If there was a energy accord 

signed with Newfoundland, that accord would also apply to the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Was that the case, Mr. Speaker? Absolutely not. Did any of our 

members of parliament stand up for a fair resource return for 

the province of Saskatchewan in recent years, Mr. Speaker? No, 

our members of parliament did not. Did any of our 

representatives in the Senate stand up for Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker? No, they did not. 

 

Is the Parliament of Canada, the House of Commons and the 

Senate, Mr. Speaker, being fair to the regions of this country 

when we are dealing with issues like that, that are clear and now 

in the memories of Saskatchewan people? No, Mr. Speaker. 

The Senate is not an effective body representing the regions. 

The Senate is a body, Mr. Speaker, that is there to represent 

essentially the propertied class of Canada. And, Mr. Speaker, 

that simply means supporting the desires of the majority who 

live in Ontario and the province of Quebec. 

 

We can elect, we can spend money to elect, we can put people 

on lists, we can spend money to put people on lists, Mr. 

Speaker, but the people of Saskatchewan want either the Senate 

gone and our MPs [Member of Parliament] doing the job we‟ve 

elected them to do, or they want to have that Senate body, if it 

exists at all, being effective. This legislation simply 

acknowledges that this government is not prepared to do the 

work that needs to be done to represent to Ottawa what is really 

fair and what is required by the people who live in this 

province. 

 

[16:00] 

 

This Bill actually then, Mr. Speaker, we could argue, reinforces 

the unequal representation of the Senate. It simply 

acknowledges that the status quo works. Well, Mr. Speaker, the 

status quo doesn‟t work and you won‟t find a person in 

Saskatchewan that believes that the status quo works. Therefore 

why are we spending the time and the money to reinforce the 

status quo, give the Prime Minister another opportunity to 

nominate people who will not be able to do the job for us? 

 

And that brings us up to that nomination, most recent 

nomination, Mr. Speaker. The only rule really is you have to 

own property; they don‟t really say where you have to own that 

property. But, Mr. Speaker, we at least are trying to ensure that 

the Prime Minister knows that if you own property — and that‟s 

the rule, Mr. Speaker — that property should be in the province 

in which you want to be a representative. 

 

Now is owning a cottage at the lake that you visit once a year 

adequate to make you a resident of a particular province, Mr. 

Speaker? I don‟t care how much we like certain individuals, if 

you don‟t hold a health card in a province or you don‟t hold 

some identification like a power bill in your name and those 

sorts of things, you aren‟t actually living in the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. A nomination should be for a 

person who lives in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Prime Minister has ignored that in at least two cases in his 

nominations in December of this year. Saskatchewan was one 

of those, Prince Edward Island was one of those. Nominations 

were for people to represent us who, Mr. Speaker, may come 

home once a year to visit friends and neighbours. 

 

And it doesn‟t matter how much they adore the province that 

they were born in, Mr. Speaker, and how much they care about 

that province, Mr. Speaker. The work that they do in the Senate 

requires them to have a working knowledge of what‟s 

happening within their community, within their 

neighbourhoods, within the boundaries of that province on a 

day-to-day basis, Mr. Speaker. And visiting once a year and 

having a cottage inside the community doesn‟t cut it, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So not only have we got a piece of legislation that now 

reinforces unequal representation, we also have legislation that 

allows the Prime Minister to ensure that someone who has an 

affinity towards the community they currently live in, as 

opposed to the community where they once lived, Mr. Speaker. 

A health card, I think, is a useful identification for someone 

who represents a province. 

 

And therefore, Mr. Speaker, not only that, perhaps even 

consideration of where the individual who stands for 

nomination pays their income tax, Mr. Speaker. Do they file a 

form with the taxes coming back to the province of 

Saskatchewan? Or do they file a form where the taxes they earn 

on the income they‟re paid get sent to the province of Ontario, 

Mr. Speaker? I think this is something that we that need to 

consider when we are looking at the legislation in front of us. 

 

I hope that I‟ve made a reasonable case that says that it makes 

no sense to just elect senators in the absence of other reforms. 

This government is ignoring that entire debate, Mr. Speaker, 

simply by saying, let‟s be democratic; let‟s elect people to the 

Senate. Well let‟s be clear. We are not electing people to the 

Senate. It‟s not terribly democratic either, but it‟s not electing 

people to the Senate. We‟re electing people that put their name 

on a list, and then the Prime Minister continues to do whatever 

the Prime Minister wishes to do. He can appoint or not appoint 



2730 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2009 

these individuals as he sees fit. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as we know, the Prime Minister, as the 

Saskatchewan government has done and others, passed 

legislation for fixed election dates. Well, Mr. Speaker, we just 

came through a situation whereby the Prime Minister didn‟t 

listen to that legislation either. He did whatever he felt he could 

get away with. He called an election despite the fact that there 

were fixed election dates, and as a result of that, tremendous 

cost to the Canadian people and the Saskatchewan people, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Tremendous cost with absolutely no change in Ottawa — had a 

minority Conservative government before the election, had a 

minority Conservative government after the election. We 

achieved absolutely no progress. 

 

A Prime Minister who ignored his own legislation. The Prime 

Minister will most likely ignore this legislation as well if we 

ever get to a point where we can have the election and put 

somebody‟s name on a list going forward. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it is interesting that this government has 

talked recently about public consultation. We are currently 

going through what should a broad-based debate in this 

province over the future of energy development in the province 

of Saskatchewan. What are our options for the future of energy 

in this province, this wonderful province of Saskatchewan? 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, this government has said that as far as 

consultation is concerned, all the information they need is out 

there. People can go and look, find their own information. In 

fact, the Premier indicated that because there‟s information out 

there, that people should do their own research to inform 

themselves as to what‟s going on with the future of energy 

options in the province of Saskatchewan. And so the 

consultation process that they have put in place is — correct me 

if I‟m wrong now — nine meetings over a two-week period of 

time across the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Minister of the Environment just concluded a series of 

consultations on regulations which I think we will discuss in the 

Assembly here at some point in the near future, Mr. Speaker. 

But on regulations within the Department of the Environment, 

over a 12-month period, the consultations, there were 18 

consultation meetings, Mr. Speaker. And one of the 

recommendations in this process has been to consult further. 

This is all information released just yesterday here in Regina, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the Minister of the Environment believes that a year-long 

consultation period with 18 meetings is necessary to discuss 

regulations, and the Minister of Enterprise and Innovation and 

the Premier believe that a discussion about the entire future of 

energy production in this province can be handled with seven or 

nine meetings over a two-week period of time. 

 

Not a very clear message that‟s being sent to the people of 

Saskatchewan, unless of course, Mr. Speaker, you understand 

that this government does not believe seriously in broad-based 

consultations. But, Mr. Speaker, they talk frequently about how 

consultation is important to them. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if this government is serious about 

broad-based public consultations, then, Mr. Speaker, they 

should be thinking about this issue of Senate reform in terms of 

what do the people think. 

 

We know, Mr. Speaker, that there is a chance of a public 

referendum on the next provincial election ballot. Members 

opposite have already said, an election promise, daylight 

savings time, we don‟t need to discuss it here in the Chamber 

any more; we‟ll put it to the people. Referendum, Mr. Speaker, 

on the next provincial election ballot. I expect to see that 

coming forward by this government in the near future. 

 

The government, should there be no Senate election, Mr. 

Speaker, could also add to the ballot, what about abolishing the 

Senate instead of this nonsense about spending money to put 

somebody on a list? 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, if they can‟t do that, and if they truly believe 

in public consultation, then when they draft the election ballot, 

Mr. Speaker, and you‟ve got the names of various individuals 

who wish to stand for election for this list, perhaps, Mr. 

Speaker, the ballot could be (a) such-and-such a name, (b) 

such-and-such a name, (c) such-and-such a name, and (d), Mr. 

Speaker, none of the above — abolish the Senate. 

 

Every Saskatchewan resident, Mr. Speaker, who would stand to 

be counted in an election should be given the opportunity to tell 

this government how they feel about not only this legislation, 

this process, but, Mr. Speaker, also the future of the Senate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there‟s no doubt about it that this legislation really 

serves no purpose whatsoever. It‟s going to come at great cost 

to the Saskatchewan people and, Mr. Speaker, at the end of the 

day, the public still hasn‟t had any real say in this. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just a couple of quotes to put on the record today 

in my remarks. An interesting article from May of last year, 

written by a StarPhoenix columnist, Mr. Speaker, in which he 

reviews the possibility of an elected Senate. And he says, by 

golly, there‟s a lot of questions to be asked here. And he says 

this. This is quoting Randy Burton, Thursday, May 22 in The 

StarPhoenix: 

 

There was no mention made of Senate reform in the 

Saskatchewan Party‟s election platform last year and there 

has been no discernible public demand for the concept in 

recent years. Now suddenly we‟re told that Saskatchewan 

is on a course that will see it hold a Senate election in 

conjunction with the next provincial . . . election. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite now in government 

are proud to stand up and say they‟re meeting the promises to 

the Saskatchewan people. We know of several promises that 

they have not yet kept, Mr. Speaker, but here they are 

proceeding with something for which there‟s no outcry in the 

province and for which there was no debate prior to the 

election. Mr. Burton certainly hits the nail on the head there. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, he also says, and I quote, “Perhaps, but 

so far at least, voters really have no idea what they‟re going to 

be getting, other than the possibility that they have a second 

choice to make on the next provincial ballot.” 



April 8, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2731 

In other words, Mr. Speaker, you will elect a provincial MLA, 

and there could be another ballot that suggests a couple of 

names who could be serving in the Senate. The people of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, really will not be able to 

adequately judge the value of the contributions of a senator, Mr. 

Speaker, when they are debating issues of provincial interest in 

a provincial general election Mr. Burton alludes to. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, a question asked by Mr. Burton, and again I 

quote from his column. It suggests: 

 

For example, if senators are to be elected under provincial 

laws . . . [this would] suggest there will be 10 different 

dates for Senate elections across the country. If the prime 

minister then appoints the winners to the Senate when it 

strikes his fancy, there will be no relation [whatsoever] 

between elections for the House of Commons and the 

federal Senate. Does that make any sense? [Mr. Speaker, 

when we‟re dealing with issues that are common to our 

federal situation.] 

 

Then, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Burton also asks, “Will there be riding 

boundaries established, or will candidates be elected through an 

at-large system?” Well it certainly appears that Saskatchewan is 

looking at an at-large election, Mr. Speaker. So you‟ve got 

campaigns that could possibly run from Estevan to Cumberland 

through La Ronge, Uranium City, and Swift Current, Mr. 

Speaker. One heck of a constituency to represent and to 

campaign in, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This suggests — and let‟s be very clear about this, what this 

suggests, Mr. Speaker — if candidates are elected in this 

fashion, obviously, the larger population areas will have the 

larger influence over the outcome of this election. One therefore 

can argue that this process favours those who represent or live 

in or have their base in urban Saskatchewan as opposed to rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

This legislation, it could be argued, Mr. Speaker, is very 

urban-oriented in a province where the representation in Ottawa 

is required primarily from a resource and primary producer 

perspective, as opposed, Mr. Speaker, to the interests of the 

larger communities where many of the senators currently live, 

as they‟ve been appointed from those communities, Mr. 

Speaker. So I think Mr. Burton raises some very interesting 

questions, and we would be wise to keep those in mind. 

 

[16:15] 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, I think there was also some interesting 

comments made, could be made by a fellow by the name of 

Troy Lanigan who‟s arguing we need to abolish the Senate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Troy Lanigan writes, and again I quote, and he‟s 

speaking primarily from a federal prospective. We need to keep 

this in mind when we are thinking about it from a provincial 

prospective. Troy Lanigan says: “. . . Prime Minister Harper‟s 

earnest attempt to address the concerns by appointing senators 

elected in the provinces is wrong-headed for three main 

reasons.”  

 

And then he argues one of the points that I‟ve made already: it 

legitimizes the current ineffective Senate. Mr. Speaker, he also 

says it rekindles the regional disparities that exist, for the points 

that I‟ve already made, and then he says, “. . . it takes focus off 

reforms [that could be] more important and more realistic.” 

 

So in other words, instead of debating the issue about how do 

we make a second body more effective or getting rid of it all 

together, instead of that debate, we are debating whether or not 

we should elect or not elect the people who will be appointed. 

So Mr. Lanigan‟s comments are very wisely put on record, Mr. 

Speaker, that this takes away the focus on real reform of the 

Senate and we simply are talking about the simple matter of 

how do you get people to be there. 

 

The other point, Mr. Speaker, and I think this is very useful for 

the public to know, and again this comes from Troy Lanigan‟s 

comments. And I quote him: 

 

If you elect them, you legitimize them. Suddenly we‟ll 

have another 105 politicians running around the country 

— with all the trappings of office — telling us there is no 

problem that can‟t be solved with more tax dollars. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this was one of the criticisms of the appointed 

Senate, that you have unelected people who are simply 

assuming office and spending money, taxpayers‟ money. Now 

you‟re electing them to do exactly the same thing — more 

people who are unrepresentative, Mr. Speaker, of the very areas 

that they‟re supposed to be representative of. 

 

Mr. Speaker, “Strengthen the role of the regions by 

strengthening the role of the provinces,” is the last argument 

that I wanted to bring forward from Mr. Lanigan. Let me repeat 

that: “Strengthen the role of the regions by strengthening the 

role of the provinces,” is an important issue that we should be 

discussing, Mr. Speaker. It‟s another area of focus. If there are 

concerns about the regions not being well represented in the 

elected House of Commons, and if the Senate can‟t do that, Mr. 

Speaker, then they should get out of the way and give some real 

strength to the provincial governments, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have the Council of the Federation that meets. This is, in 

some cases, the first step towards legitimizing provincial 

representation at the federal level. And perhaps we need to be 

thinking about focusing on that debate as well. 

 

And actually, Mr. Speaker, one of my colleagues indicates that 

Harper ignores — Prime Minister Stephen Harper ignores — 

the wishes of the Council of the Federation at this time as well. 

So, Mr. Speaker, as long as you have prime ministers who are 

not willing to accept the wishes of the provinces, their citizens, 

or the regions in which they live, Mr. Speaker, no amount of 

reform will actually have any real value across the country. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we will see this legislation proceed through its 

normal course here. It is interesting, of course, that this Bill will 

soon go to committee for study. It is interesting, Mr. Speaker, 

that the government members have brought the Bill in. The 

Minister of Justice made some short remarks about what the 

Bill appears to do, and we‟ve had no debate, inside or outside 

this Legislative Assembly, by members of the government 

since, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This Bill will proceed because the government has the majority. 



2732 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2009 

The Bill will likely pass. And, Mr. Speaker, as a result of that, 

we are actually adding to the costs for the Saskatchewan 

taxpayers of electing members to go on a list for this — in 

effect to be appointed to this ineffective body in Ottawa. 

 

This legislation really does nothing except increase the costs of 

democracy to the Saskatchewan people. The government has 

not addressed that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think our leader has indicated, the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale, and our critic, the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin, has indicated that there‟s an opportunity to provide 

some amendments to this legislation in committee. I look 

forward to that process, but at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, I 

hope Saskatchewan people will realize that this government has 

simply increased their costs, done nothing else for the people of 

Saskatchewan. And at the end of day, nothing in Canada has 

changed as a result of the efforts of this government. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with that I close my remarks, and I look 

forward to the committee meetings as this Bill proceeds through 

the legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion that Bill No. 60, the senate nominee election committee 

be now read the second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, to the Standing 

Committee on House Services. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on House Services. 

 

Bill No. 51 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 51 — The 

Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I last 

spoke on this Bill last week. I think I spoke to 5 o‟clock. And I 

believe, Mr. Speaker, you cut me off in mid-sentence, but I will 

not — I will not, despite the encouragement of my friends on 

this side of the House — start over, Mr. Speaker. I do have a 

few more remarks to make about the Bill. 

 

Previously I had been commenting — and I will not repeat all 

my remarks — but previously commenting on the importance 

of the provincial court, Mr. Speaker, and the fact that it deals 

with so many issues of the vast majority of people who appear 

before court. It deals with the vast majority of criminal cases. It 

deals with all the small claims cases and so, Mr. Speaker, it sees 

most accused, most victims of crime, and most self -represented 

litigants. And although there is appeal often from Provincial 

Court, the means for appeal and the means relative to the 

matters involved, Mr. Speaker, mean that that sometimes — 

and often actually, Mr. Speaker — is more theoretical than 

actual. 

 

And so the face of justice for many, many people who go to 

court is the Provincial Court, Mr. Speaker. They don‟t see the 

superior courts. They don‟t see the appeal courts. They don‟t 

see the Supreme Court of Canada. And it‟s the interpretation 

that Provincial Court gives to the law — established by 

legislatures; established by parliament; established by the 

superior court, particularly the Supreme Court of Canada in its 

interpretation of the Constitution, interpretation of our Charter 

of Rights and Freedoms — it‟s the interpretation given to that 

by Provincial Court judges that has a real effect in people‟s 

lives.  

 

If Provincial Court doesn‟t understand those laws, those rights, 

those freedoms, then to a certain extent — to a large extent, Mr. 

Speaker — they are illusory. They are not really there. Because 

people who can ill-afford arbitrariness or negligence or 

harshness, undue and unnecessary harshness on the part of a 

judge, really have in many, many cases no actual appeal from 

the Provincial Court. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, in many western democracies, people would 

be surprised by the powers of this Provincial Court of 

Saskatchewan that possesses many, many of the powers that 

what we call superior courts possess. And to a certain extent, 

Mr. Speaker, it is a misnomer to call the Provincial Court of 

Saskatchewan a lower court. The Provincial Court of 

Saskatchewan is a trial court, Mr. Speaker. And it‟s a trial court 

from which many people have no — because of varying 

circumstances; monetary mostly I‟m referring to, Mr. Speaker, 

but otherwise as well — have no actual appeal. 

 

And so the way that we as legislators, and the way that we as 

government treat all our courts, including our Provincial Court, 

is extremely important as well. When I previously spoke on this 

matter, I spoke about an issue that gave rise to the part of the 

amendment to which I am addressing my remarks. And that‟s 

the part of The Provincial Court Amendment Act that allows the 

Judicial Council the power — rather empty power — but the 

power to pursue investigation of a judge who is no longer a 

judge. 

 

And I don‟t think it escaped the attention of anybody that was 

listening that it was highly critical of what is a political 

exercise, Mr. Speaker. The Judicial Council is not going to 

pursue a person against whom they have no sanction, and the 

legislation gives no other sanction here, and highly critical of 

putting into legislation what is really political face saving on the 

part of the Minister of Justice and the Attorney General. 

 

And I said previously when I spoke on this matter that I did not 

wish any of my remarks to be taken as condoning or excusing 

behaviour that resulted in an investigation by the Judicial 

Council, that legislation can never be a replacement for the 



April 8, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2733 

exercise of character or good judgment. My remarks are not to 

excuse or explain away any error in judgment that would result 

in an investigation by the Judicial Council of Saskatchewan. 

And I don‟t care to do that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I also want to put my concerns about the actions of this 

government in respect to the court and the rule of law and the 

independence of the court in perspective as well, Mr. Speaker. 

And I am going to be somewhat critical of the Minister of 

Justice and the motives behind the provision which is contained 

in this Bill. But before I am, I want to say a couple of things, 

because I don‟t want to be misunderstood. 

 

There‟s no question in my mind that the current Minister of 

Justice is intelligent and capable, and one of, one of the more 

capable ministers of the Crown in this government. There is 

also no question in my mind that he has a sincere interest in 

human rights, a progressive interest in human rights, which I 

don‟t believe are necessarily shared right across the government 

benches, Mr. Speaker. But there‟s no doubt of that in my mind 

as well. And there‟s no doubt in my mind that it is certainly his 

preference that the office of the Attorney General and the 

Ministry of Justice not be subordinated to political concerns. 

And I believe that all those things are true. 

 

[16:30] 

 

What I am somewhat concerned about, Mr. Speaker — given 

my time in this Legislative Assembly, these five going on six 

years — is that the minister doesn‟t necessarily always have the 

fortitude to withstand pressure from within his caucus, now the 

government caucus, in respect to some of these important issues 

of the rule of the law, judicial independence, and independence 

of other bodies, Mr. Speaker. And this provision in this Bill is 

symptomatic of that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I know that the Minister of Justice understands his role, I think, 

in a constitutional democracy. But I know also that he‟s 

sometimes not able to fully explain the importance of that role 

to some of his colleagues because of things that have happened 

in this legislature in the few years that we have been here and 

years preceding the contribution of the current member from 

Saskatoon Northwest. And again this is one provision, this is 

one symptom of that, Mr. Speaker, that we would even have 

this provision here and the reasons that we have it here. 

 

But I know that the current Minister of Justice knows that this 

legislature should respect judicial independence, Mr. Speaker. I 

know that because when someone rose from the Saskatchewan 

Party benches, when they were in opposition, to attack the 

decision of a judge, it wasn‟t the Justice critic, Mr. Speaker. He 

wouldn‟t do it. It was actually, on one occasion, the member 

from Swift Current who is now the Premier. But the Justice 

critic, the member from Saskatoon Southeast, wouldn‟t do it. So 

I know he knew better, Mr. Speaker. But I also know that he 

wasn‟t able to stop it from happening, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And what is in this Bill is also symptomatic of that. As I stated 

last week, when this investigation arose and it became public 

that there was an investigation, the current Justice minister said 

to me . . . volunteered to me, Mr. Speaker; I didn‟t ask for this. 

When you‟re government minister, as the ministers across there 

know, you wait for questions and you have to anticipate any 

number of questions because nobody‟s going to tell you what 

they are and nobody‟s going to tell you what they aren‟t, as a 

rule. And that‟s one of the funs of being on that side of the aisle 

and I guess that‟s part of the fun of being on this side of the 

aisle as well. 

 

But the Justice critic volunteered to me when we were 

discussing another matter, right behind where I stand right now, 

that he did not think it was appropriate to ask questions about 

the investigation taken by the Judicial Council. Well that‟s fine. 

I agreed with him, but I didn‟t rely on it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Then within days he gets up in his seat — the Justice critic at 

the time — and asked questions about the Judicial Council and 

implies in his questions that the government-appointed lay 

people on the council should report to the Minister of Justice, 

which was then me, about the investigation which had not been 

completed, which was in progress, Mr. Speaker, and that I 

should report in question period to the legislature. Entirely 

inappropriate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I note that now the Minister of Justice agrees with the 

police chief in Saskatoon that investigations of police officers 

should not be disclosed and discipline of police officers should 

not be disclosed. Mr. Speaker, I said some very kind things, 

which I believe about the Minister of Justice. I‟m not sure he 

was listening at the time I was saying them. But this, this is 

hypocrisy, Mr. Speaker. It is. 

 

To say that the investigation of a judge by an independent 

Judicial Council should be subject of the debate in the 

legislature, but the discipline taken against a police officer 

following an investigation should be kept secret, that is not — 

that is not — two positions which one can reasonably hold and 

explain against each other, Mr. Speaker. It simply is not. 

 

So outside the House, outside the House, the Minister of Justice 

no longer wants to take the position that the Judicial Council‟s 

investigation should be subject to debate in the legislature. But 

he has to say something. So what does he say? Well we 

shouldn‟t allow judges to simply resign and escape sanction 

from the Judicial Council, the investigation should be able to 

continue, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well that‟s the origin of the provision in the Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

That‟s the origin of the provision in the Bill. That‟s what he 

said. And I don‟t know if he would have — I doubt very much 

if he would have — independent of the other changes that have 

to be made to bring this forward, Mr. Speaker. But how could 

he — I think he should have by the way — but how could he, 

without losing some face, have brought forward these changes 

in respect to benefits and pensions and the other the matters 

dealt with by the Bill which we will deal with in committee, and 

which I do not wish to diminish by not addressing them in the 

Chamber. 

 

But he would have been asked the question: well you said in 

opposition you would make this change; now why isn‟t this 

change in the Bill now that you are amending it, in the 

legislation now that you‟re amending it? So it is, Mr. Speaker. 

But that‟s what it is. It‟s political face-saving that we are going 

to put a provision in a Bill because of ill-thought-out, 

ill-considered questions that fail to show respect for the 



2734 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2009 

independence of our court and the legislature, that we‟re going 

to put a provision in our Bill which will never be used, in 

legislation which will never be used, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That‟s not appropriate. That‟s not right. It‟s what‟s going to 

happen. And by itself it may be meaningless, may be irrelevant, 

superfluous, little section of the legislation that‟ll never be used, 

that will never be brought in by this government in respect to 

any other profession or any other occupation, Mr. Speaker. But 

it is indicative of a tendency to put politics above good 

governance. And it‟s particularly troublesome and problematic 

when it‟s dealing not with this branch of government, the 

legislature, which can take care of itself in this Chamber, and 

not with the executive branch of government which certainly 

can take care of itself, Mr. Speaker, but dealing with the judicial 

branch of government which should be treated with more 

respect. 

 

The party opposite when they were in opposition liked to use 

the Legal Aid Commission as a political football, on occasion 

judges as a political football; in this particular case, the Judicial 

Council as a political football, Mr. Speaker. I hope that they 

would not carry this on into government. And in part, the length 

of my remarks and the seriousness of my remarks are to raise 

the concern that they not do that. 

 

I was very interested in the Minister of Health‟s comments 

today that Dr. Lemstra‟s firing had nothing to do with the 

government, that it was entirely the decision of the health 

region. 

 

I remember when Mr. Hillson was terminated by the Legal Aid 

Commission, members opposite would not, would not accept 

that that was a decision of the Legal Aid Commission which it 

certainly was, Mr. Speaker. The independence of that 

commission was not accepted then, and the independence of the 

Judicial Council was not accepted then. 

 

I want to return in concluding my remarks in saying that I know 

that the Minister of Justice understands what I‟m saying. I know 

that the Minister of Justice agrees with what I‟m saying. And I 

want to encourage the Minister of Justice to have the fortitude 

and strength in the debates and discussions within his caucus 

and within his government to stand up for the specific and 

important role of an Attorney General within a cabinet to ensure 

that the rule of law is respected, to ensure that the constitution is 

respected, to ensure that judicial independence is respected. 

That is a role that falls to one minister at the table in particular. 

 

And I have said in private conversations with the Minister of 

Justice, that if there‟s anything that I can do to ensure that he is 

more able to make the right decision — even it‟s a politically 

unpopular decision — I would do that. I say that today so that 

he and I both know that I‟m accountable. It‟s in Hansard, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

He has a special role within his government. I‟m not sure that 

his government appreciates the special role of the Attorney 

General. I hope that they do from here on in. I said last week 

when I spoke to this Bill, that I think there was a road being 

walked down in this legislation that is not a road that the 

government is committed to, that I hope they do not walk down 

any further, Mr. Speaker. 

I cannot support the provision that‟s in the Bill in respect to the 

direction being given to Judicial Council for entirely political 

reasons. I‟m concerned about what motivates it and what 

motivated it, Mr. Speaker. That concern‟s expressed. I trust I„ve 

been heard. There are a lot of important mechanics to the 

legislation that actually brought the legislation itself before the 

legislature that need to be dealt with by the appropriate 

committee and we will now allow that to happen. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 51, The 

Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2008 be now read the second 

time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this Bill be referred to the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 87 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Gantefoer that Bill No. 87 — The 

Income Tax Amendment Act, 2009 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

didn‟t hear the member opposite, Mr. Speaker, so I‟ll just 

ignore what he‟s saying or trying to interject here. But I would 

point out that we provide all members with an opportunity to 

get on their feet and to contribute to debate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Bill in question is The Income Tax Amendment 

Act. The minister tells us this Bill makes amendments to the 

existing research and development tax credit to convert it to a 

refundable tax credit. It proposes amendments to recognize a 

new federal small-business tax limit and to maintain the 

$500,000 provincial small-business tax limit. 

 

We in Saskatchewan have a corporate tax rate but for small 

businesses that have, how shall I say, revenue or a business less 

than $500,000 a year, we‟ve reduced the corporate tax rate 

significantly for small businesses. The federal government also 

did that for small businesses for federal taxes. They have now 

made change in the tax limit from 400,000 to 500,000 to 

correspond to ours. So to ensure that businesses are not 

adversely affected by that, the Bill proposes some amendment. 

And we agree with that. 

 

Also the federal government recently announced a series of 



April 8, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2735 

changes to the taxation of dividend income. These changes will 

have an unintended impact on provincial taxation of this 

income. In order to ensure that the provincial tax on this 

dividend income does not increase, this Bill proposes 

amendments to maintain the current dividend tax credit rate for 

eligible dividends. 

 

And significantly this Bill also — and this probably will be of 

greater interest to at least young people in Saskatchewan — this 

Bill introduces an amendment to expand the definition of 

eligible tuition fees under the graduate retention program. And 

these changes are to include people who are enrolled in 

post-secondary institutions out of province so that they are 

extended the same graduate tax credits that are available to 

people who are enrolled in universities in Saskatchewan, or to 

Saskatchewan people who are enrolled in institutions out of 

province. This change will now be extended to all those from 

out of province who graduate and want to move to 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So that is the change. I might point out that the change does not 

extend to Saskatchewan people who are enrolled in master‟s 

and Ph.D. [Doctor of Philosophy] programs. So we may have 

some questions about why the government would extend a tax 

credit to people from outside of Saskatchewan — not to 

residents or students from Saskatchewan but would extend it to 

people from outside of Saskatchewan — but not extend that to 

master‟s and Ph.D. level graduates that are Saskatchewan 

citizens, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[16:45] 

 

So we have some questions about that, about the fairness of that 

that we will be dealing with in committee, as I understand it, 

and I would leave it to my colleague, the critic for 

post-secondary education, to deal with this in some greater 

detail in the committee when we get to it. 

 

There‟s also some technical amendments to the former R & D 

[research and development] tax credit provisions that have been 

requested by the Canada Revenue Agency in order to clarify 

administrative issue to that credit, and we don‟t see any 

problem with doing that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I just might say that the government very apt, very 

fond of trumpeting all the changes they have made in tax 

regime in the last 18 months or so that they‟ve been the 

government. And I would just point out that these are not the 

first tax changes that have occurred in Saskatchewan, point out 

that the previous NDP administration made hugely significant 

changes in taxes, starting with a very major change and reform 

of the income tax system both to ensure that our income tax 

system was more competitive with other jurisdictions; to ensure 

that our income tax system was fairer than had been the 

previous system, so that the load was lessened for people of 

lower incomes; and also to ensure that whatever changes were 

put into place were done in an affordable way. Because it‟s not 

as if the NDP administration had the wealth of revenues that the 

current government has had to play with. We had to be a little 

bit more circumspect and a little bit more planful in terms of 

what we did. 

 

And I know that the other members always like to mock us 

about doing things in small, measured steps, but, you know, we 

took the approach that you start small but smart, and that‟s what 

we did in terms of significant tax change. Might also point out 

that over time we were able to reduce the provincial sales tax to 

the current level of 5 per cent which is usually significant for 

people. Also point out that the previous NDP administrations 

started with major changes to corporate income tax and also 

changes to royalty revenues in some of our industries to 

facilitate, encourage, promote expansion both in some of the 

resource extraction industries and also, significantly, in other 

corporations. 

 

And I think we‟re seeing the fruits of some of that development 

now, especially as I look at the announcement by a company to 

expand warehousing of grocery items outside of Regina. And 

one can trace that decision back to changes that were made by 

the previous government or initiated by the previous 

government in the area of corporate taxation. 

 

So you know, the government can say all it wants about 

everything that they‟re doing and how wonderful it is. I‟m 

always reminded that this is a government that is doing so little 

with so much, Mr. Speaker, as opposed to the previous 

government that was able to do a great deal with very little. So 

there‟s a big change here, Mr. Speaker, in terms of, you know, 

when you have the revenues to make things happen, this is a 

government that, frankly, has done very little, given all the 

wealth that it has. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don‟t want to go on. We look forward, as I 

indicated, in committee, to put the questions to the minister 

about how some of these specific provisions will be 

implemented and how they will affect Saskatchewan people and 

Saskatchewan interests. And so at this point, Mr. Speaker, I‟d 

say that we‟re prepared to let this item go forward to 

committee. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion presented by the Minister of Finance that Bill No. 87, 

The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2009 be now read the second 

time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, to the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

Bill No. 88 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Gantefoer that Bill No. 88 — The 



2736 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2009 

Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 2009 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, this particular Bill is an 

amendment to The Corporation Capital Tax Act, and the 

minister‟s explanation, second reading speech was very brief in 

terms of what the Bill is hoping to accomplish. 

 

He stated that the amendment provides the authority for 

remission of corporate capital tax to those financial institutions 

that acquire, through amalgamation, the assets of a 

non-financial corporation and create a capital tax liability as a 

result of that acquisitioning. Tells us that the amendment 

applies to those amalgamations occurring on or after July 1, 

2008, and that this coincides with the elimination of the general 

corporate capital tax. 

 

And he says that this particular amendment provides a remedy 

for an, I think, unintended tax consequence of a financial 

institution which did not have a permanent establishment in 

Saskatchewan prior to, again, acquiring the assets of a 

non-financial corporation. He points out that this step is 

necessary because it will help to encourage a business to 

expand in Saskatchewan or businesses to expand in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So we‟re trying to read between the lines as to exactly what this 

specific change is intended to do, if there is simply a very small 

group of businesses that he‟s not in a position to deal with in 

committee. So we look forward to an opportunity to get a 

briefing on this matter so we know what specific questions we 

can and should be asking in committee. 

 

But having said that, Mr. Speaker, at this point we‟re prepared 

to let it go forward. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion presented by the Minister of Finance that Bill No. 88, 

The Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 2009 be now 

read the second time. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, to the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. I recognize the 

Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, it being near the time of 

adjournment, I move this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. This Assembly stands adjourned until 

tomorrow morning at 10 a.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:54.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2705 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2705 

  Bjornerud ...................................................................................................................................................................... 2705, 2706 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2705 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2706 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2706 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2706 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2707 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2707 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2707 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2707 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2707 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2708 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2708 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2708 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2708 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Technology Safety Workshop for Parents 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2708 

 National Archery in Schools Program 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2709 

 Hockey Star from Northern Saskatchewan 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2709 

 Humboldt Broncos Win Championship 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2709 

 German Language School Easter Celebration 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2710 

 Provincial Championship Hockey Teams 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2710 

 Regina Community Living Spring Fling 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2710 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Drinking Water 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2711 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 2711 

 Curriculum Materials 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2713 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2713 

 Health Disparity in Saskatoon Report 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2713 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2714 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2714 

 Nuclear Development 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2715 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2715 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2715 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on the Economy 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2716 

 Standing Committee on House Services 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2717 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 46 — The Labour Market Commission Amendment Act, 2008 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2716 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

 

 



 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 79 — The Education Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2) 

 Loi n
o
 2 de 2009 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2717 

  Gantefoer (referral to committee) ......................................................................................................................................... 2719 

 Bill No. 49 — The Ambulance Amendment Act, 2008 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2719 

  Gantefoer (referral to committee) ......................................................................................................................................... 2719 

 Bill No. 43 — The Trespass to Property Act 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2720 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2721 

  Gantefoer (referral to committee) ......................................................................................................................................... 2722 

 Bill No. 76 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2722 

  Gantefoer (referral to committee) ......................................................................................................................................... 2723 

 Bill No. 61 — The Local Government Election Amendment Act, 2008 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2723 

  Harpauer (referral to committee) .......................................................................................................................................... 2725 

 Bill No. 59 — The Election Amendment Act, 2008 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2725 

  Gantefoer (referral to committee) ......................................................................................................................................... 2726 

 Bill No. 60 — The Senate Nominee Election Act 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2726 

  Gantefoer (referral to committee) ......................................................................................................................................... 2732 

 Bill No. 51 — The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2008 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2732 

  Gantefoer (referral to committee) ......................................................................................................................................... 2734 

 Bill No. 87 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2009 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2734 

  Gantefoer (referral to committee) ......................................................................................................................................... 2735 

 Bill No. 88 — The Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 2009 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2736 

  Gantefoer (referral to committee) ......................................................................................................................................... 2736 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 


