




















































Hansard: March 23, 2009


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 37A  MONDAY, MARCH 23, 2009, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2397 

 March 23, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you to all members of the House today I would 

like to introduce 30 members from the public service who are 

participating in the parliamentary program for public servants. 

These fine employees of the public service represent 14 

government ministries as well as an employee of the Legislative 

Library. And after our proceedings today, I‟m going to have an 

opportunity to talk with them and field some of their questions. 

I‟m sure the discussion and conversations will be interesting 

and fruitful. 

 

This program also includes an extensive tour of the building, a 

session on the Legislative Library here in the legislature as well, 

and a session on the functions of government and cabinet. So, 

Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to extend a warm welcome to these 

participants today, and I‟d like to ask all members to join me in 

doing so. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟d like to 

join with the minister and on behalf of the official opposition 

welcome our civil servants or public servants to the Assembly 

today. I hope you have an enjoyable afternoon. The minister 

will be spending some time with you. I‟ll have an opportunity 

later on this afternoon as well, and I think the Speaker is going 

to be joining you for another session. The next couple of hours 

will be exciting and fun, and I hope you enjoy your visit here. 

Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you, through 

you, and to all the members of the Assembly, I‟d like to 

introduce three people in your gallery. Two of them are the 

Co-Chairs of the Yorkton Film Festival: Janet Hill of Yorkton 

— just give us a wave there, Janet, or stand — and Dean Sauer 

of Regina. Along with them is executive director of the film 

festival, Randy Goulden of Yorkton. Unable to be with them 

here today is Ruth Shaw — a very notable person, Mr. Speaker, 

in that she‟s 90 years old last year and she has been with the 

film festival all 62 of its years. 

 

They‟re in the city today to attend the Sask Tourism Awards of 

Excellence, and I‟d ask all members to welcome them to their 

Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join with 

the member from Yorkton in welcoming those who are in the 

gallery representing the Yorkton Short Film Festival. I have had 

opportunity to attend that festival, Mr. Speaker. I recommend it 

to all members, and I congratulate those who have kept this 

long-standing tradition very much alive in Yorkton. 

 

I also want to extend a very special welcome to Ms. Randy 

Goulden, who has served on Yorkton City Council and who 

came very close to occupying a seat in this legislature. Now the 

next time we expect to see Ms. Goulden sitting on the floor of 

this legislature as opposed to in the balcony, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Southeast. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 

gives me great pleasure to introduce to you, and through you to 

the members of the legislature, four visitors. I‟ll ask them to 

stand or wave when I mention their names. They‟re sitting in 

your gallery. All of the them are articling students with the 

Ministry of Justice. 

 

First, Ms. Erin Schroh. Erin studied law at the University of 

Saskatchewan where she edited the Saskatchewan Law Review, 

and is both a teaching and research assistant. Erin Schroh was 

active in the Law Students‟ Association and Pro Bono Students. 

 

Ms. Courtenay Phillips also worked on the Law Review at the 

University of Saskatchewan. Courtney also worked as a 

research assistant in the area of Aboriginal rights theory. I‟m 

very pleased that we have an Aboriginal student in the articling 

program this year and look forward to the perspective that she 

will bring to the ministry, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Next is Ms. Deena Wahba. Deena also comes to us from the 

University of Saskatchewan. Prior to studying law she obtained 

her Bachelor of Science degree, double majoring in criminology 

and psychology, from the University of Toronto and graduating 

with high distinction. Deena grew up in Estevan and has 

worked as an immigration officer as well as being an active 

volunteer. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, Jana Linner. Jana graduated from the 

Faculty of Law at the University of Saskatchewan with great 

distinction. She also holds a bachelor‟s degree in co-operative 

education from the University of Regina. Jana‟s an active 

volunteer and athlete, a former captain of the University of 

Regina women‟s basketball team. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can remember well how hard it was when I 

articled, which was, I think, seven or eight years ago. The 

member from Meadow Lake tells me that as soon as he gets 

around to articling in Saskatchewan, he‟ll be able to compare 

notes with them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m very proud of our articling students and know 

that they will be a great asset to the Ministry of Justice. And I 



2398 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2009 

would ask that all members join me in welcoming Erin, 

Courtenay, Deena, and Jana to their Assembly. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a pleasure to 

introduce to you, and through you to all members of the 

Assembly, three guests that are seated in the gallery today — 

three student leaders from the University of Regina Students‟ 

Union. Our caucus had an enjoyable lunch with them today. 

 

And I would like to introduce Kristy Fyfe, VP [vice-president] 

external affairs of URSU [University of Regina Students‟ 

Union]; Sean Dunham, VP student affairs; and Craig Fink, VP 

operations. We‟re sad the folks from the University of 

Saskatchewan Students‟ Union could not join us today, but 

we‟re glad they‟re safe and sound in Saskatoon. I would ask all 

members to join me in welcoming these students. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to 

join with the member opposite in welcoming the students from 

the University of Regina. We met with them earlier today. We 

had a very frank and I think productive discussion on a wide 

range of topics. And I certainly encourage these young leaders 

to continue the good work that they are currently doing. And I 

would ask all members to join with me in welcoming them. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have today a petition 

in support of addressing high tuition fees. And the petition 

reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to addressing the burden placed by 

high post-secondary tuition fees on Saskatchewan 

students. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s my honour to present these petitions on behalf 

of people from Bruno and Saskatoon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 

petition on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens that support the 

government‟s policy on green vehicles. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government 

ministers named in this petition to follow their own 

platform and government policies and trade in their Jeep 

Libertys for vehicles that are on SGI‟s 2008 list of 

recommended fuel-efficient vehicles. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good citizens of 

Regina. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition that speaks to the issues with the housing 

market that have translated into many challenges for renters, 

which includes senior citizens, and that more affordable 

housing options would definitely be beneficial to our seniors, 

especially those on fixed incomes. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to act as quickly as possible to expand 

affordable housing options for Saskatchewan‟s senior 

citizens. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of Saskatchewan residents, I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

a petition in support of expanding options for student housing. 

The petition addresses the concerns of the people of 

Saskatchewan that they hope will be addressed by the 

government. Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to aggressively working with 

partners to expand on-campus housing options for 

Saskatchewan students. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by people from Regina, 

Langenburg, Esterhazy, Saskatoon, Cut Knife, Fort Qu‟Appelle, 

Macdowall, Moose Jaw, Dundurn, Canora, Prince Albert, 

Humboldt, White City, Langham, Perdue, La Ronge, Spruce 

Home, Abbey, Maple Creek, and White Fox, Mr. Speaker. I so 

present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 



March 23, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2399 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for wage equity for CBO 

[community-based organization] workers. And we know that 

many of these folks have traditionally been underpaid and many 

continue to earn poverty-level wages. I‟ll read the prayer for 

you, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the development and 

implementation of a multi-year funding plan to ensure that 

CBO workers achieve wage equity with employees who 

perform work of equal value in government departments. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And these petitioners come from a wide range of communities 

in Saskatchewan, including Kennedy, Wapella, Maryfield, 

Moosomin, Whitewood, and Assiniboia and Saskatoon. Thank 

you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise on 

behalf of the rural residents of Saskatchewan who again feel 

like they‟re being left behind by this government and are having 

to deal with the cost burden of providing quality drinking water 

on their own. The prayer reads as such: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to financially assist the town of Duck Lake 

residents for the good of their health and safety due to the 

exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency, and that this government fulfills its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And these petitions are signed by the good folks of Duck Lake, 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of affordable housing in 

The Battlefords, Mr. Speaker. The petitioners note that the 

vacancy rate for rental accommodation in The Battlefords is 

very low, and the cost for rental accommodation is increasing, 

Mr. Speaker. The petitioners ask that: 

 

. . . the Legislative Assembly call upon the Government of 

Saskatchewan to invest in an affordable housing program 

that will result in a greater number of quality and 

affordable rental units to be made available to a greater 

number of people throughout The Battlefords and across 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petitioners all come from The Battlefords 

constituency. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a pleasure to 

stand and present a petition in support of fairness for students 

through the expansion of the graduate retention program. The 

prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately expand the graduate retention 

program to include master‟s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are 

students from the University of Regina as well as students from 

the University of Saskatchewan as well as a number of citizens 

of Saskatoon, some of whom hold graduate degrees and work in 

the health care field. Thank you so much. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

to repair Highway 135 that runs through Pelican Narrows, 

Saskatchewan. This petition is signed by leadership and 

community members of Pelican Narrows First Nations and the 

village of Pelican Narrows and area. The prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to pave the 7 kilometres of Highway 135 

through the community of Pelican Narrows, as committed 

on August 24, 2007. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

They are signed by good citizens of Pelican Narrows. I so 

present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Week of Solidarity Against Racism 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, on the United Nations 

calendar, March 21 marks the beginning of a Week of 

Solidarity with the Peoples Struggling Against Racism and 

Racial Discrimination. It is an important week, Mr. Speaker, 

because racism is a fact of life for far too many in our society. It 

demeans and dehumanizes its victims, at the very least causing 

them hurt, shame, and embarrassment. Mr. Speaker, this is a 

time for people from all different races and cultures to share 



2400 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2009 

their views and work together to help overcome racism. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the North is mostly comprised of First Nations 

and Métis people who have willingly shared their traditions, 

culture, and knowledge. And yet First Nations and Métis people 

know the damage that racism can do better than most. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know all members of this Assembly recognize 

the terrible consequences of racism and racial discrimination. 

As legislators, we have the opportunity and the responsibility to 

take whatever action we can to help stop it. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Yorkton Film Festival 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On a 1950 

October evening, a projector whirred into action. The screen lit 

up. The sights and sounds of life filled the stillness of the 

Yorkton city hall. This was the scene as the first Yorkton 

International Documentary Film Festival became a reality. And 

this May the Yorkton Film Festival, with its Golden Sheaf 

Awards being sought after by filmmakers and industry leaders 

nationwide, is celebrating a landmark anniversary — 62 years 

of hosting world-class films. 

 

[13:45] 

 

Many years ago, a small but visionary group of Yorkton 

volunteers had a goal: to host a national film festival that would 

put Yorkton and Saskatchewan on the map as a leader in the 

film industry. The festival was the brainchild of James 

Lysyshyn — often referred to in the years to follow as the 

father of the Yorkton International Documentary Film Festival. 

 

The first meeting of those volunteers met with little success. It 

was felt there was not enough new films being produced in 

Canada, and Lysyshyn could not take no for an answer. He 

persisted and the Yorkton International Documentary Film 

Festival was born. And tonight the Yorkton Film Festival will 

be honoured as a finalist in the Saskatchewan Tourism Awards 

of Excellence in the promotional marketing campaign. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like all members to join me in 

congratulating the many volunteers and organizers of the 

Yorkton Film Festival, including those in attendance here 

today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Radiothon for Neonatal Intensive Care Unit 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. From 6 a.m. Thursday 

to 6 p.m. Friday, Rawlco Radio Z99 hosted their 22nd annual 

radiothon in support of the neonatal intensive care unit at the 

Regina General Hospital. 

 

CC, Lorie, and Buzz led the raging masses to incredible 

success. Few of us stay awake for 36 hours without sleep, Mr. 

Speaker, let alone host radio that is entertaining, educating, and 

brings out the very, very finest in people, and raises $329,052 

for a worthy and needed cause. 

 

Regina and district‟s raging masses are amazing people. Our 

collective generous giving goes to much-needed equipment for 

babies‟ care at the Regina General neonatal intensive care unit. 

 

Join me, Mr. Speaker, as we thank every person involved in this 

22nd annual Z99 radiothon. CC, Lorie, and Buzz, you amazed 

us again. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Saskatoon Student Tae Kwon Do Champion 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Mr. Speaker, I am proud to rise in the 

House today to recognize Ashley Foster, a 17-year-old student 

from Saskatoon. Ashley has participated in Olympic-style tae 

kwon do for 13 years, and is a third dan, world-certified black 

belt. 

 

She began structured classes at the age of four and a half. She 

achieved her club black belt at six and her WTF [World 

Taekwondo Federation] black belt at the age of 10. She has 

participated in more than 50 tae kwon do championships, and 

has been an eight-time provincial champion. 

 

In 2008 Ashley participated in a number of tae kwon do 

tournaments, resulting in a phenomenal record. She won a silver 

at the Canadian Junior, a gold medal at the Canadian 

Championship. Ashley was a member of Team Canada at the 

World Championships where she won bronze. She also won 

bronze at the last Commonwealth Games. 

 

Ashley is a junior assistant instructor at Kee‟s Tae Kwon Do 

where she also trains under Grand Master Kee Ha and Master 

Duk Ha. Ashley has also furthered her knowledge by qualifying 

as a provincial WTF referee. Through her own physical training 

and mental discipline, Ashley remains committed as a teacher, 

coach, student, and competitor. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join with me in 

congratulating Ashley on her achievements. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Water Challenges in Saskatchewan 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

yesterday nations around the world recognized World Water 

Day. This day reminds us that water is essential to human life. 

Without water, there is no life. Without access to clean water, 

our health is at risk. 

 

While many in our province have regular access to safe, 



March 23, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2401 

affordable water, the residents of Duck Lake, a town of just 

over 600 people north of Saskatoon, are unable to afford their 

soaring water bills, increasing from $32 a month to upwards of 

$167 a month. 

 

Refusing to offer assistance to the residents of Duck Lake, the 

Sask Party government is permitting 11 families — some with 

children, others seniors with fixed incomes — to go without 

water service. Meanwhile, other Duck Lake families are forced 

to make choices no Saskatchewan family should have to make 

— the choice between paying the water bill or purchasing 

groceries for their loved ones. 

 

The people of Duck Lake are not alone in facing serious water 

challenges in accessing safe, affordable drinking water. As of 

March 6, there remain more than 140 precautionary drinking 

water advisories and 54 emergency boil-water orders in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in recognition of World Water Day, the New 

Democrats reaffirm our conviction that people have a right to 

safe, affordable drinking water. Accordingly, New Democrats 

stand with our rural communities, including the 11 families of 

Duck Lake who are left without water by a Sask Party 

government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Meadow Lake. 

 

Understanding of Potash Revenues 

 

Mr. Harrison: — “It is better to keep your mouth closed and 

let people think you are a fool than to open it and remove all 

doubt.” So quoted the Saskatoon StarPhoenix weekend editorial 

regarding the member from Regina Douglas Park‟s lack of 

understanding of the way Crown corporations are financed. 

 

It could just as well have applied to the same member‟s lack of 

understanding of how potash revenues work in this province. 

It‟s simply stunning that the former NDP [New Democratic 

Party] Finance minister does not understand the most basic 

concepts of public policy. Last week, over and over again, he 

made the false claim that a 10 per cent cut in potash production 

means a 10 per cent drop in potash revenues. To put it bluntly, 

he‟s dead wrong. 

 

According to Darrell Swarych, vice-president of finance for 

Mosaic Potash, sales, not production, is by far the biggest factor 

in potash revenues. He said, and I quote: 

 

The vast majority of the revenue that the government gets 

is not from potash production . . . it‟s from potash sales. 

And, at current inventory levels, there‟s enough inventory 

to make up for any shortfall in production. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s truly alarming that someone could occupy the 

office of minister of Finance and have such little understanding 

of one of the province‟s most important revenue sources. Today 

I would call on that member to do the right thing — 

acknowledge his serious blunder and publicly correct the false 

claims he made to the people of Saskatchewan about how 

potash revenues are calculated. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Prince Albert Native Decorated 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, Captain Marcel Halle was 

recently inducted as an officer into the Order of Military Merit. 

This is recognition of his work in the Canadian navy as an 

engineer and a soldier. What makes this honour even more 

special to Captain Halle is that the nomination was made by 

fellow naval officers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Order of Military Merit is awarded to regular 

and reserve members of the Armed Forces. It recognizes the 

work and achievements of the recipient in his or her military 

career. Colleagues in the military nominate members, and a 

ceremony is held at Rideau Hall in Ottawa and hosted by 

Governor General Michaëlle Jean. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Captain Halle is originally from Prince Albert and 

still has family at home. He attended St. Mary High School — 

which, Mr. Speaker, I am proud to say is my alma mater — and 

as loyal as he is to his birth city, Captain Halle says that his 

career has given him experiences he would not have had in any 

other job. He says that being in the military is truly like no other 

profession and offers tremendous opportunities to its members. 

 

His sister, Dianne Kopchynski, is St. Mary High School‟s 

community school coordinator. She and her family, which 

includes two other siblings and her parents, and indeed all of us, 

are very proud of Captain Halle and of the great honour 

bestowed upon him by the Governor General. Mr. Speaker, I 

ask that all members join with me in extending our 

congratulations to Captain Marcel Halle upon receiving the 

Order of Military Merit, and to extend our deepest appreciation 

to him and all that he has done in service to our country. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Support for First Nations and Métis People 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Last week 

we had a $10 billion budget and a 12 per cent spending 

increase. And in that budget, Mr. Speaker, the members 

opposite took no end of pleasure in their self-congratulation and 

how they thought this was just fine. In fact, on Thursday in the 

budget speech, Mr. Speaker, the member from 

Melville-Saltcoats, the Agriculture minister, said that only 20 

people in this province were disappointed with this budget. 

 

And I guess I wonder if he could perhaps talk with his seatmate, 

the First Nations and Métis Relations minister, and perhaps get 

an explanation of a quote from Morley Watson, FSIN 

[Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations] Vice-chief, who 

says, “„As one of the largest stakeholders in the province, First 



2402 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2009 

Nations are extremely disappointed‟ . . .” 

 

Mr. Speaker, why were First Nations and Métis people left 

behind in this budget? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for First 

Nations and Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to 

the members opposite, I‟m pleased to answer this question 

because First Nations and Métis people were not left out in this 

budget. In fact they were looked at, not just through the 

ministry that I represent, but through every ministry within our 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to make sure that the members opposite 

realize that on top of the 25 per cent increase that we have 

within our ministry for First Nations and Métis people, we also 

have $5.9 million for the Aboriginal workforce development 

fund that‟s through Advanced Education. We have $250,000 for 

First Nations health and well-being through the Health budget. 

We have $265,000 for the Prince Albert Grand Council for their 

new youth addictions facility. And the money goes on and on 

because First Nations and Métis people are seen right 

throughout our whole community and our province. And every 

dollar we spend is for every person in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, Vice-chief Morley Watson, about 

the same time that the Minister of Agriculture was singing the 

praises of the budget with the amen chorus over there, 

Vice-chief Morley Watson was talking about how this budget 

was a missed opportunity to address Aboriginal issues, 

including poverty, education, and the duty to consult with First 

Nations groups affected by resource exploitation. 

 

We know that the Minister for First Nations and Métis 

Relations has sort of a round and round table going on, duty to 

consult and accommodate. I guess the question is when does 

that round and round end, and when will she be coming forward 

with a budget that actually puts real dollars on the table to 

address the issues that First Nations people face in this 

province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for First 

Nations and Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I‟m very 

pleased again to answer questions about First Nations and Métis 

people who are going to play a significant part of our growth in 

our province. I want to make sure that the members opposite 

realize that the largest income tax reduction in Saskatchewan‟s 

history also affected the First Nations and Métis people. The 

increased low-income tax credit also affected the First Nations 

and Métis people, whether on-reserve or off-reserve. 

And as far as the consultation table that talks about round and 

round, I‟m just absolutely amazed that members opposite can 

even bring up the issue because they never bothered consulting 

at all with the First Nations and Métis before they brought 

forward their discussions. And the round-table discussions that 

we are having, the deadline is June 1, and I‟m very much 

looking forward to the opportunity to discuss with the leaders 

with other issues in this regard. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 

minister released a press release that stated, “This budget . . . 

allows us to begin the exploratory phase which involves parties 

participating in a collaborative process to discuss issues 

including sharing in the economic growth . . .” The quote goes 

on, but I want to rest there, Mr. Speaker: “including sharing in 

the economic growth.” 

 

In a $10 billion budget, Mr. Speaker, with 12 per cent spending 

increase, what they‟ve offered up for First Nations is an 

exploratory phase so they might begin to explore. And round 

and round it goes. Vice-chief Morley Watson talked about how 

they were extremely disappointed with this budget. Mr. 

Speaker, does the vice-chief have it wrong or does the minister 

have it right? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for First 

Nations and Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the First Nations people in 

this province understand that our government‟s priority is to 

work with the First Nations, and not just within my ministry, 

but within the other ministries. And I‟m pleased to say that 

within Education, K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] education, 

there‟s an increase. And this ministry has introduced a First 

Nations and Métis language strategy to support the retention 

and revitalization of Saskatchewan First Nations-based 

languages and dialects. 

 

We have within Justice, we have Touchwood File Hills 

Qu‟Appelle safe shelter, $548,000. We have money for the 

Battlefords Interval Society. We have Prince Albert Shelter for 

Women. We have the Friendship Centre in the Northwest. We 

have Muskeg long-term care. And I‟m sure if the member 

opposite has more questions, I‟ll be delighted to tell him about 

other money that this government is spending for First Nations 

and Métis to ensure that they can be part of the economic 

growth of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, I find it passing strange that this 

is a minister who introduced the draft guidelines for the 

members opposite, on duty to consult, on almost the night 



March 23, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2403 

before Christmas, Mr. Speaker — on December 22. She wants 

to talk about a meaningful consultation process. I think that 

would have been a good place to start, Mr. Speaker. 

 

She talks about, you know, the dollars that are flowing in in her 

budget. The biggest amount of money in that budget — new 

dollars, Mr. Speaker — originates with the NDP gaming deal 

that those members fortunately haven‟t reneged on. So it‟s kind 

of funny that the member would portray themselves as the big 

friends. 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, a budget with 10 billion plus a 12 per 

cent spending increase, how is it that First Nations and Métis 

people get left behind? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for First 

Nations and Métis Relations. 

 

[14:00] 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, our government, the 

government that I‟m proud to be part of, wants to ensure that 

First Nations and Métis people are not separate from . . . We 

realize their cultural standards and different life that they have, 

but also we have the same goal. I‟ve yet to speak to a leader of 

the First Nations and Métis community who are not pleased for 

the economic opportunities we have in this province. 

 

We are working to make sure that everyone can be involved in 

the economy. And I‟m very pleased when our Minister of 

Advanced Education shows us about the increase in number of 

First Nations and Métis people working within our province. 

The best social program you have is a good job. We know that; 

the chiefs know that; and the leaders of the Métis community 

know that. The only people that don‟t know that are the people 

on the other side of the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, the Métis people of 

Saskatchewan were also disappointed with a $10.2 billion 

provincial budget that left them behind. Robert Doucette, 

president of the Métis Nation of Saskatchewan, believes the 

Sask Party must provide sustainable and meaningful solution to 

the issues facing Métis people and the communities, and this 

budget has failed to do that. Mr. Doucette said, „“From our 

view, there was nothing [sustainable] . . . in this budget, except 

for the status quo.”‟ 

 

Mr. Speaker, the status quo simply isn‟t good enough. To the 

minister: will she provide adequate core funding to the MNS 

[Métis Nation of Saskatchewan] as a first step to providing real 

solutions to the issues facing the Métis people? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for First 

Nations and Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I‟m very 

pleased to have the relationship we have with the Métis Nation 

in this province. In fact our Premier has had the opportunity to 

talk to the president of the Métis Nation many times and talk 

about the relationship and the fact that we have, that the Métis 

Nation again have a very good professional attitude, and they‟re 

respected across our province. 

 

Last year with the Métis Nation, we honoured our tripartite 

agreement with 285,000 people. We‟ve honoured the bilateral 

process with 100,000. We are pleased to give the Métis Nation 

of Saskatchewan $200,000 to offset the consultation capacity 

funding they have. And we also have funding for Batoche, 

funding for the senate, funding for round tables. And every 

opportunity we have to meet with the Métis people in our 

province gives us an opportunity to make sure they‟re involved 

in the economy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Consultations with First Nations and Métis People 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, if real solutions are going to be 

found to address Métis issues, the Métis people must be 

consulted. The minister‟s last attempt to come up with a 

consultation policy framework was soundly rejected by both 

Métis and First Nation groups. The MNS has found . . . The 

MNS held a round table March 14 and 15 to discuss duty to 

consult, and the minister was nowhere to be seen. 

 

To the minister: how is this new policy coming along? And 

since she was nowhere to be found at a recent Métis round 

table, will she simply be injecting into the framework what she 

thinks the Métis people need? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for First 

Nations and Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, to the members opposite 

and to the Métis and First Nations people in this province, no, I 

will not be doing, nor will my government be doing what the 

NDP did, and that is develop a consultation at night around a 

coffee table and throw it on the table and say this is how we‟re 

going to consult with First Nations. We are going to continue to 

consult with them. 

 

I was not able to attend the last conference, but I did have the 

opportunity since the round table to meet over 80 times with the 

First Nations and Métis people in our province to discuss the 

duty to consult. And that is not just my . . . that‟s just my 

meetings, not the meetings with my ministry. In fact on March 

5, I met with 16 members of the Métis Nation council, right 

here in this building and discussed many of the consultation 

issues we talked about. 

 

Two weeks ago, I was in Beauval and met with a group of 

Métis in that area. Last week I had the opportunity to go to 

Cumberland House and meet with the Métis in that area. And 

yes, we are listening to the Métis people in this province. 



2404 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2009 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, if the minister had bothered to 

attend the Métis round table, she would have heard that Métis 

people need the financial resources to travel to consultation 

meetings and to hire legal counsel. Without the money to do the 

things, the Métis people will be left out of the consultation 

process. 

 

To the minister: will she provide MNS and its members with 

the funds they need to participate in the consultation process in 

a meaningful way? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for First 

Nations and Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m very pleased to be able 

to stand in this House today and say that yes, the consultation 

funding that was in place last year is again in place. The First 

Nations and Métis people have the opportunity to apply for 

capacity funding. We are very pleased to look at the proposals 

that are brought forward. 

 

Last year there was approximately 18 proposals that were . . . 

There‟s 18 proposals currently under review still at this time; 

that‟s about $1.4 million in requests. That‟s on top of the $1.1 

million that‟s also been committed from the funds. About 

800,000 of that went to the First Nations and 300,000 for the 

Métis Nation. 

 

And yes, there is more money to come as we‟re working with 

the First Nations and Métis people to make sure there is a true 

consultation policy, which never happened under that . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Support for Northern Development 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 

minister mentioned that she had the opportunity to meet with 

the Métis and First Nations 80 times, and obviously she had 

ample time to understand what they wanted. And, Mr. Speaker, 

they are not convinced in the least bit that they got anything in 

this budget, and northerners are feeling the same way, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

It should be pointed out that the First Nations and Métis people 

and northerners sat with this minister on numerous occasions 

expressing to her their desires, their wishes, and ambitions for 

their children in their community, and of course the people that 

they represent. And, Mr. Speaker, we‟re finding that pain 

happening all over the place with no reaction from this minister 

and that government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, whether it‟s First Nations or Métis people or 

northerners, they are not buying her explanation one bit. Mr. 

Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party chose to slash funding to the 

northern economic development program by 20 per cent in last 

week‟s budget, and with 100 layoffs in one of our northern 

mines, the mood is grim. 

 

To the minister: with a $10.2 billion budget and spending 

increases of 12 per cent, why are northerners not part of your 

plan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for First 

Nations and Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, to the member opposite, 

I‟m very pleased to say that northerners are a huge part of the 

plan in this province — not just within this ministry, but again 

across the various ministries. The Minister of Highways, the 

Minister in charge of Enterprise, the Minister in charge of 

Resources, understands the opportunities we have — not just 

the people resources, but the natural resources in the North. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have a quote from the member opposite who 

spoke about what it was like in the North. I believe this was in 

1996 when he was sitting in opposition, and he made this 

statement: “If I was in government, I would get the taxpayers‟ 

money out of business . . . because business can survive and 

thrive without government . . . if the government simply 

provides the right climate . . .”  

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that‟s exactly what this government is 

doing, is providing a climate to make sure that everyone in our 

province can benefit from being in our province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, it should be known that 

northern Saskatchewan suffers to a 75 per cent, 85 per cent, 85 

per cent unemployment rate. And then the minister gets up and 

makes some comment I made 10 years ago about business 

development and the opportunity. Well that‟s quite an answer 

for a very stark position that I put forward when I asked that 

minister a question about northern development funding and 

also the fact that she is sitting on $10.2 billion. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that minister sat around the cabinet table 

while all the allocations were handed out, and guess what? She 

didn‟t speak up for the Métis people, didn‟t speak up for First 

Nations people, and didn‟t speak up for northern people, Mr. 

Speaker. So again, the point that I raise again, whether it‟s 

northern fishermen, whether it‟s northern fishers, trappers, or 

wild rice growers, Mr. Speaker, we are finding that even those 

traditional resource users, their budgets are being slashed . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I ask the member to place his question. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why didn‟t the 

Sask Party consult with northern fishermen and fishers, 

northern trappers, and wild rice growers on how to improve the 

traditional programs in northern Saskatchewan? With spending 

increases of 12 per cent on a $10.2 billion budget, why did this 

minister choose to provide less support to these northern 



March 23, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2405 

fishermen, trappers, and wild rice growers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for First 

Nations and Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, to the member opposite, I 

am sure when he has the opportunity to review the budget, he‟ll 

see that the one part of the Northern Development Fund that 

was cut was the area where there was one loan application last 

year, and it cost just about as much to administer as it did to pay 

out for the loan. But the rest of the Northern Development Fund 

is still there. We are definitely wanting to look at the 

opportunities for the First Nations and the Métis people in the 

North if we can help them out in this area. 

 

But he mentioned that I read a quote from 10 years ago about 

northerners. I think maybe I should remind the member 

opposite what one of his colleagues said on March 2. The 

member from Regina Northeast said, “. . . I think that perhaps 

not enough attention has been paid in the past to the plight of 

the northern residents and the needs of the northern residents.” 

 

That‟s what this government did. The people that were sitting 

there for 16 years did absolutely nothing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to tell you that our government 

has the opportunity to have enterprise regions in the North, and 

I‟m looking forward to the opportunity we have to deal with 

them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, the northerners know that in the 

16 years that this government‟s been in power, we paid $11 

billion in interest payments alone and paid down almost $6 

billion in debt. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger: — We didn‟t sit, Mr. Speaker, we didn‟t sit on a 

$10.2 billion budget with a 12 per cent increase and forget 

northerners, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — There‟s a big difference . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — The opportunity for us was rarely there. 

However when that opportunity to do something was there, we 

took it, Mr. Speaker. We didn‟t sit on a $10.2 billion budget 

with a 12 per cent increase across the board and ignore 

northerners. Mr. Speaker, once again I‟m going to ask the 

minister, whether it‟s Indian or Métis or northerners, you have 

forgotten them, you have abandoned them, and you‟ve turned 

your back on them. When are you going to change your 

position and start backing up what you say at these meetings, 

Mr. Speaker? 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for First 

Nations and Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, I think that First Nations and Métis people do believe 

that there is opportunities, otherwise they wouldn‟t have asked 

to meet with me 80 times since last May. 

 

And I think that also maybe the member opposite should talk 

. . . when he talks about opportunities, the government and the 

members opposite sat on this side of the House for 15 years and 

they talked about opportunities. Their opportunity was to invest 

money in SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 

Company], not the North; in Navigata, not the North; in 

dot-coms, not the North. 

 

I didn‟t see the interest that we had, Mr. Speaker. There was 

opportunities. It‟s what you make of the opportunities. And they 

did not decide that First Nations, Métis people, and the 

northerners were part of the growth of our province. We not 

only have solved that, we believe it, and every action that we 

take shows it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Support for First Nations and Métis People 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. This budget 

fails to address the marginalization of First Nations and Métis 

people in Saskatchewan. And that marginalization plays out in 

some terrible ways — in poverty, in violence, and in drug 

abuse. 

 

This morning we heard about an HIV [human 

immunodeficiency virus] crisis in Saskatchewan. CBC 

[Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] reports there were 174 

new cases in Saskatchewan in 2008 — a 40 per cent increase 

over the previous year — and they‟re expecting it to go up to 

about 300 next year, Mr. Speaker. Fifty per cent of the new 

cases are among Saskatchewan women, with the single largest 

affected group being made up of young First Nations women in 

the inner city. One-third of all new cases are First Nations 

women under the age of 29. 

 

To the First Nations and Métis Relations minister: this 

government has a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to take a stand 

and provide meaningful support to address issues that 

disproportionately affect First Nations and Métis people. In a 

$10 billion budget that increases spending by 12 per cent, why 

did they fail First Nations and Métis people? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, our government is very concerned with the recent 

trend of HIV infections that we‟re seeing in the province. That‟s 



2406 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2009 

why I‟ve asked the ministry to act quickly. We have struck a 

committee . . . We will be striking a committee with the chief 

medical officer as the Chair, including First Nations groups, 

including representatives from the federal government, 

including individuals from addictions groups, as well as other 

provinces that have seen HIV rates spike in their provinces, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

In fact we‟re acting so quickly, the meeting will be held 

tomorrow to see what we can do, on top of the needle exchange 

program, to address that problem. 

 

[14:15] 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, the budget was held last week 

and that debate goes on. And in that budget release, the Minister 

for First Nations and Métis Relations said, “This budget also 

allows us to begin the exploratory phase which involves parties 

participating in a collaborative process to discuss issues 

including sharing in the economic growth . . .” 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, why I raise this again is that this is 

a life-and-death issue, Mr. Speaker. In terms of the participation 

of First Nations and Métis people in the economy, the budget 

should tell a lot about what‟s going to happen there, Mr. 

Speaker, and there was nothing in that budget. 

 

To the Minister for First Nations and Métis Relations: you 

know, when is she going to stop the exploring and start 

delivering for First Nations and Métis people in this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for First 

Nations and Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the exploratory table that 

we‟ve put forward as an opportunity to deal with some of the 

issues that weren‟t dealt with through the framework on 

consultation is the opportunity we have as a province and for 

industry to say how can we best involve First Nations and the 

issues beyond consultation — stewardship, the opportunity to 

be involved in the wealth of the province, traditional land use 

and mapping — those are the issues that we‟ll be talking about 

at these exploratory tables. 

 

And I think the member opposite, if they‟ve read the budget, 

will see we‟ve got $500,000 earmarked for that very important 

issue. It will give us a chance to talk and sit around the table 

with people who know that there is more that can be done, that 

we cannot continue to repeat the mistakes of the past when it 

comes to dealing with First Nations and Métis and having them 

involved in the economy. There‟s a respectful relationship that 

we have, and I‟m looking forward to this opportunity as we go 

forward. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s so respectful that the member 

opposite had to deliver the draft guidelines on December 22 — 

you know, almost the night before Christmas. The fact that she 

comes forward with $500,000 for more sitting around the table 

and talking, when in fact there‟s been a year-plus go before and 

a year before that, Mr. Speaker, on the whole concept of duty to 

consult and accommodate, the fact that the budget came down 

last week, with no significant new dollars in it for First Nations 

and Métis people, indicates pretty clearly to First Nations and 

Métis people that if they want to get action in this province, 

they‟re increasingly drawn to things like blockades and court 

action, instead of a negotiated political process. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when is the minister opposite going to come 

forward with a real offer, with real negotiations, with a real 

process that delivers for First Nations and Métis people, instead 

of leaving them behind? Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for First 

Nations and Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I find it absolutely 

unbelievable that the members opposite can stand and talk 

about our relationship with the First Nations and Métis people, 

when for 15 years when they sat on this side of the House, we 

never saw an increase in the number of people working. We 

never saw an increase in their health issues. Mr. Speaker, we are 

talking to First Nations and Métis people. We did bring down 

the guidelines at the end of December as we had said, as was 

promised. And we gave until the end of February for . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Minister Responsible 

for First Nations and Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Not only did 

we bring forward issues on consultation and the exploratory 

table, and many of my colleagues brought forward issues, we 

have things like the children‟s hospital. Do the members 

opposite believe that there won‟t be one First Nations or Métis 

people in this province happy that we will have children‟s 

hospital in this province? What about the announcement on 

Friday where we have partnerships for First Nations and Métis 

people on homes in Saskatoon? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite have no realization what‟s 

happening with our First Nations and Métis people. We do. 

We‟re proud as a government to have partnerships. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

SaskPower Capital Spending 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much . . . 



March 23, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2407 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Minister Responsible 

for Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. I rise today to inform the House of a very important 

and positive development for the people of our province. 

 

On Friday, March 20, it was my pleasure to announce, on 

behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan, SaskPower‟s 

capital spending plans for the year. It is SaskPower‟s 

responsibility to ensure that the economic growth continues, 

and it is my responsibility to ensure that the government is able 

to do just that. As evidence of its commitment to the people of 

Saskatchewan, SaskPower will be investing $954 million in 

2009 to meet the growing demand for power in our province — 

nearly $1 billion in one single year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The capital budget for 2009 is the most significant investment 

the corporation has made, the most significant investment made 

by any government in any corporation ever, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As a result of thoughtful planning, SaskPower will fulfill its 

service mission to make the necessary investments in our 

province‟s infrastructure and in doing so, Mr. Speaker, help 

sustain our province‟s economic momentum. 

 

When the Saskatchewan Party government took office, we 

discovered SaskPower was in a serious infrastructure deficit, 

Mr. Speaker. The only solution going forward is shown by this 

significant reinvestment in SaskPower‟s system, one that is 

essential as we continue to attract new industry to the province 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize one member who has the 

floor right now, and I‟d ask other members to respect the 

member‟s opportunity to present his statement. The Minister of 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s 

essential that we continue to attract new industry to the 

province, support the expansion of existing industry, and 

accommodate the growing demand from our residential 

customers. 

 

Our government is committed to having SaskPower remain a 

public corporation — not only that, Mr. Speaker, it‟s going to 

be a strong corporation. Simply said, Mr. Speaker, our 

government truly values the role our Crown corporations play 

in our province‟s future. 

 

This single largest investment ever in the provincial electrical 

system is evident as we invest in adding 100 megawatts of 

natural gas-fired generation at the Ermine switching station near 

Kerrobert; adding 100 megawatts at the Queen Elizabeth power 

station in Saskatoon; adding 141 megawatts of natural gas-fired 

generation near North Battleford; building a 230-kilovolt 

transmission line between Poplar River and Pasqua switching 

station just east of Moose Jaw; completing the Boundary dam 

spillway project; expanding the ash lagoon storage facility at 

the Poplar River power station near Coronach. Spending, Mr. 

Speaker, $95 million connecting new electrical services and 

upgrading existing customer services; spending $10 million to 

replace wood power poles throughout the province; and, Mr. 

Speaker, overhauling the Boundary dam power station‟s unit 2 

and the QE [Queen Elizabeth] power station‟s unit 2. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a responsible government makes infrastructure 

investment necessary to ensure Saskatchewan people have safe, 

reliable, sustainable power at the lowest possible cost. And, Mr. 

Speaker, in order to make that investment, SaskPower needs 

capital. And that is why I am very pleased to announce that our 

government, through the Crown Investments Corporation, will 

not take a dividend from SaskPower in 2009. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, suspending the 

dividend requirement shows just how serious our government is 

about investing in Saskatchewan‟s future. Obviously this isn‟t a 

job that‟s going to be completed overnight. We will continue 

the process of renewing and reinvesting in our province‟s 

electrical infrastructure. 

 

I am pleased to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that all possible 

generation options will be on the table for consideration — 

renewables, imports, coal, nuclear, polygeneration — the full 

gamut, Mr. Speaker, along with all possible owner/operator 

scenarios. SaskPower, Mr. Speaker, is turning a new page in its 

history. SaskPower will be fulfilling its mandate to serve. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in closing let me say that the 2009 capital 

expenditure announcement is an exciting one: not only for our 

government not only for SaskPower, but for the entire province, 

Mr. Speaker. The people of Saskatchewan will continue to see 

the tangible benefits of our new economic strength through a 

renewal and expansion of our province‟s infrastructure that will 

create more jobs — more jobs at home here in Saskatchewan — 

and generate more investment in our province. Thank you very 

much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to start by 

thanking the hon. minister for the advance copy of his 

ministerial statement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is very easy to spend other people‟s money. If 

you have debt, you have to pay for it. As you add debt quickly, 

you add payments equally quickly. The minister calls this, “this 

single largest investment ever in the provincial electrical system 

. . .” Well, Mr. Speaker, along with the largest investment 

comes the larger payments. SaskPower customers will foot the 

entire bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister spoke about an infrastructure deficit. 

Why is it, Mr. Speaker, that when the minister worked so hard 

supporting the Devine Conservatives, he supported them adding 

government and Crown debt? Why did he support stripping the 

Crowns and leaving them with so much debt when the 

Conservatives left office? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister brags about not taking a dividend. Let 

me tell you, the very first year that Roy Romanow sat in the 



2408 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2009 

premier‟s chair, not only was there no dividends available 

because they‟d stripped and gutted the Crowns, but we had to 

pump in tens of millions of dollars into the Crowns so they 

could continue to operate. That was in the first year. Never 

mind no dividend — money came out of the General Revenue 

Fund to support the Crowns. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is a shame that, as the minister says, he says 

Crown debt was trending down, and the operative word is, was. 

Crown and government debt is clearly now going up under the 

latest iteration of a right wing government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many questions about the spending at 

SaskPower and in the Crowns. There are many questions about 

this and we will be asking them in Crown Corporations 

Committee and in other areas. But the biggest question is, does 

the single largest investment in the electrical system lead to the 

single largest increase in SaskPower rates? Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Gantefoer that the Assembly approves 

in general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 

proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. Van 

Mulligen.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m 

pleased today to rise to speak to the motion and the amendment 

concerning the 2009-2010 budget of the government. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I‟m very pleased to follow my colleagues 

from the two Regina constituencies who spoke so eloquently 

last week. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, I may, before I conclude 

my remarks today, quote from the speeches that were raised by 

the members from Regina Douglas Park and Regina Coronation 

Park who, as I said, put some very eloquent comments on the 

record, Mr. Speaker — comments that mean as much in The 

Battlefords and across this province as they do to the 

constituents who live within the city of Regina. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s my intention to divide my comments today 

into a couple of categories: number one, to address issues 

related specifically to The Battlefords; and, Mr. Speaker, 

number two, to take a look at the budget as a whole, and how 

the impact of what is in or what is not in the budget, Mr. 

Speaker, affects people throughout the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

But first and foremost, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of 

things that people in The Battlefords are most interested in, and 

to a certain extent, Mr. Speaker, are most concerned about and 

in fact disappointed in this government in this budget. Mr. 

Speaker, I was home this weekend as I am all weekends, Mr. 

Speaker, and I attended a number of events — events that are 

held by community organizations that attract people from all 

sectors in the economy that is The Battlefords, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:30] 

 

One of those events was a chamber of commerce event on 

Friday, and another was a United Church event on Saturday, 

Mr. Speaker. And even though I had no specific role to play in 

either meeting, Mr. Speaker, I was approached by numerous, 

and I think the word dozens would easily describe the 

approaches that people made to me, Mr. Speaker. And those 

approaches were almost universal in their subject matter of 

concern. 

 

I think that the members in the Chamber will not be surprised to 

know that people were approaching me at those meetings and 

phoned me at home on a couple of occasions, Mr. Speaker, to 

talk about their disappointment in this government in not 

addressing the need for a new Saskatchewan Hospital in North 

Battleford. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you know, the members opposite have on a couple 

of occasions mentioned that — I know that the people at home 

can‟t hear the members opposite — but they talk about why 

wasn‟t this addressed when I was minister of Health, Mr. 

Speaker. But the fact of the matter is, every single North 

Battleford, Battleford, and surrounding area resident knows, 

Mr. Speaker, that this issue was addressed when I was the 

minister, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We provided the commitment to proceed with the project and 

more importantly, Mr. Speaker, we provided the regional health 

authority with the money necessary to advance this project 

through the most significant part of the planning process. And 

that, Mr. Speaker, is site selection, concept identification, and 

more importantly, Mr. Speaker, the facilities review. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, the next step, which was to occur after the election, 

was the approval of funding for the specific design work, Mr. 

Speaker. And for a year and a half now, this government has sat 

on the approval for funding for specific design. 

 

Everybody in the health field knows, Mr. Speaker, you go 

through these steps. I was responsible for the first two steps, 

Mr. Speaker. This government is responsible now, because of 

the election, for all subsequent steps, Mr. Speaker. So the 

responsibility is now for this government to recommit funding 

— funding that was committed previously — but recommit 

funding, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that this project continues along 

the lines that Prairie North Regional Health Authority had 

started, and actually as far as concept and facility and program 

review, Mr. Speaker, had completed. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what is taking place now in The Battlefords 

. . . And I think the members should realize, should recognize, 

Mr. Speaker, that actually even though I spend a great deal of 

time promoting and supporting the development of the new 

Saskatchewan Hospital, members opposite might be surprised 

to know that the hospital is not in The Battlefords constituency, 

Mr. Speaker. The hospital is in Cut Knife-Turtleford 



March 23, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2409 

constituency, Mr. Speaker. And I would think that the member 

from that constituency would be as interested as the member 

from the neighbouring constituency, Mr. Speaker, in this 

particular project. So, Mr. Speaker, I certainly hope, I certainly 

hope that this government will do what it needs to do with 

regards to this project. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it was universal in the people who talked to 

me about their disappointment that this project did not proceed 

in this budget. But, Mr. Speaker, I did what members of the 

government could have been and should have been doing, Mr. 

Speaker, and that is quite simply explaining the next steps in 

this process. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what I said to the people in The Battlefords 

this weekend was quite simply, you know, let‟s not take the 

government . . . our disappointment too seriously, Mr. Speaker, 

because the process of determining long-term capital, health 

capital, has not yet been concluded by this government, Mr. 

Speaker. I explained that prior to the election in 2007, the New 

Democratic Party government initiated a facilities review of all 

facilities in the . . . 

 

The Speaker: — There‟s a lot of conversation and debate 

going on on my right, making it difficult to really hear, for the 

member to present his speech. I‟d ask members to respect the 

rights of members to speak. Member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m sure 

that members opposite will be glad to hear what response they 

should be giving to the Saskatchewan people in regards to 

health facility review. But I will continue, Mr. Speaker, in the 

hopes that they are listening and learn something here. 

 

So New Democrats commissioned the study of all health 

facilities in the province, Mr. Speaker. And we recognize that 

the government will at some point release a list, whether it‟s a 

three-year or a five-year or a ten-year program, to address acute 

care and provincial facilities to be funded, whether it‟s design 

approval or construction approval. We anticipate, Mr. Speaker, 

that this government will release a list, as I say, three years, five 

years, ten years, within the next two months or four months or 

eight months, Mr. Speaker, but certainly before the next budget 

a year from now. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the circumstances we find ourselves in The 

Battlefords, Mr. Speaker, is we are simply waiting for the 

release of the three-, five-, or ten-year plan with regards to the 

future funding of acute or provincial care facilities within the 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government has to recognize of course that 

because this study was done, well two years ago now, Mr. 

Speaker, that they have an obligation soon, not only to the 

people of The Battlefords, but to the people in Moose Jaw and 

the people in Beauval and others across this province, to know 

where funding, where funding is going with regards to acute 

and provincial care. The overall expansion of the hospitals in 

Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker, the expansion of the hospital in 

Lloydminster, the new Saskatchewan Hospital, Mr. Speaker, the 

new hospital or renovations in Moose Jaw — Mr. Speaker, 

there are a number of acute or provincial care facilities that this 

government has not yet identified on their priority list for 

funding in the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they‟ve known about the list for a while. They 

have a good idea of what their long-term funding projections 

are and what their potential for revenue is, Mr. Speaker, so they 

have no excuse really about releasing this information in the 

near future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in The Battlefords we know that a project like the 

development of Saskatchewan Hospital is, for all intents and 

purposes, Mr. Speaker, this is a shovel-ready project. It needs 

the design work completed, the tenders put out. And, Mr. 

Speaker, then we‟ll see our hotel rooms filled, our gas stations 

active, our . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Mr. Speaker,. the new 

Minister of Health says something that I‟m saying here is 

absolutely false, Mr. Speaker. I have no idea what he‟s talking 

about as what is being false here. 

 

Certainly, Mr. Speaker, he will have a chance to speak. And I 

hope when he speaks he will address the issue of Saskatchewan 

Hospital, because when he visited the Saskatchewan Hospital, 

he recognized the conditions that exist there, Mr. Speaker. And 

he said, Mr. Speaker, that this facility certainly needs replacing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there‟s no doubt at all that people with psychiatric 

needs in this province . . . And they‟re not just in The 

Battlefords, Mr. Speaker; their families are in every one of our 

constituencies across this province, Mr. Speaker. This is a 

provincial facility that requires provincial interest and 

provincial attention. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I will be interested to find out what it is that 

I‟m so wrong about that the Minister of Health has expressed 

here. Mr. Speaker, we need this facility addressed by this 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other things, of course, that the people in The 

Battlefords are interested in are housing issues, Mr. Speaker. 

We have a growing population. Mr. Speaker, we have new 

programs at the North West Regional College. Students can‟t 

take full advantage of them because there are few places that 

they find accessible for accommodation. Mr. Speaker, we have 

one of the largest components of immigrants in the province 

coming to The Battlefords, Mr. Speaker. Accessible, affordable 

housing for an immigrant taking an entry-level job position in 

The Battlefords, Mr. Speaker — hard to come by. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also have a lot of people from First Nations 

communities. And there are 22 of them within about a four-hour 

drive of The Battlefords, Mr. Speaker. We have young First 

Nations people coming into The Battlefords for school, for jobs, 

Mr. Speaker, to be closer to families. And there are few, very 

few affordable accommodations for them, Mr. Speaker. Rents 

are rising, the number of rental units are decreasing, but the 

need and the desire, Mr. Speaker, has increased. 

 

We‟ve had commitments from this government to address some 

of those issues in The Battlefords, Mr. Speaker, but we have not 

seen in a year and a half any concrete provision for new rental 

accommodation, affordable accommodation, in The Battlefords. 

Mr. Speaker, there was nothing in this budget to address that or 

give us reason to be hopeful, Mr. Speaker. That‟s another 

message from the people of The Battlefords with regards to 



2410 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2009 

what this government should be concentrating on for priorities. 

 

Now let‟s take a look at this budget, Mr. Speaker. Because in 

addition to our disappointment over some of the commitments 

that we felt had been made, need to be made, and should be 

made in this budget, Mr. Speaker, to the people of The 

Battlefords, what are the abilities, Mr. Speaker, of the members 

opposite, particularly those in cabinet, to manage this budget so 

that what they are saying will be of benefit to us, Mr. Speaker, 

are actually able to come true? 

 

They have said, Mr. Speaker, quite a number of things about the 

outcome of this budget, Mr. Speaker. But they have failed to 

actually address their management capacity in order to achieve 

those things. We, Mr. Speaker, throughout The Battlefords and 

throughout Saskatchewan, do want to see a government that is 

able to do what it says it can do. Confidence, Mr. Speaker, is 

what is going to ensure new investment in this province, and 

confidence comes from trust. So, Mr. Speaker, can you trust a 

government that has its assumptions for developing a balanced 

budget out of whack, Mr. Speaker, with the assumptions that 

have been developed by everyone else other than this 

government, who is looking at the provincial economy? 

 

Really what I‟m getting at here, Mr. Speaker, is when you build 

a budget, you build that budget based on certain assumptions. 

Now the private sector forecasters, those people who are 

employed by the banks and the bond rating agencies and others, 

Mr. Speaker, they are always engaged in the business of 

forecasting — what do you think is going to happen in the next 

six months, the next twelve months, the next two years, Mr. 

Speaker? Those forecasters universally, Mr. Speaker, across 

Canada and North America, have looked at the Saskatchewan 

economy and they have said that the GDP [gross domestic 

product] growth in this province should be around point six one 

per cent — let‟s make sure we get that clear, Mr. Speaker — 

point six one per cent, less than 1 per cent growth over the 

course of the next year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So one would think that a prudent manager, taking a look at 

revenues generated by that economy, Mr. Speaker, should fall 

in line with the projections of those whose business it is to 

project. So, Mr. Speaker, when one is looking at this budget, 

one thinks that the revenue should be projected at around point 

six one per cent, less than 1 per cent, Mr. Speaker. But lo and 

behold, in order to ensure that not only is this budget balanced, 

Mr. Speaker, but that it produces a surplus, what do we see the 

assumptions based on, Mr. Speaker? That revenues will grow 

based on a GDP increase of 2.1 per cent, Mr. Speaker, 2.1 per 

cent. 

 

To trust this government, to have confidence in this 

government, one must trust that the economists who sit on those 

benches opposite, Mr. Speaker, are able to project revenues by 

three times what the private sector is projecting, Mr. Speaker. 

This is a very, very troubling circumstance, Mr. Speaker, 

because this government has promised balanced budgets, it‟s 

promised surpluses, and it‟s promised to apply surpluses against 

the debt, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But if, if, Mr. Speaker . . . And at this point in time we‟re all 

talking about ifs. This government has set up a circumstance, 

Mr. Speaker, in which they are gambling with the future of 

Saskatchewan taxpayers‟ money. They are saying that if the 

economy gets to 2.1 per cent, Mr. Speaker — grows by 2.1 per 

cent — if it does that, then we have a balanced budget, we have 

a surplus, we‟ll pay down debt. 

 

[14:45] 

 

But if they are wrong, Mr. Speaker, and the private sector 

forecasters are correct, then at the end of the year we look back 

and we find out, Mr. Speaker, that the budget was not balanced, 

that there is no surplus, and that the debt has increased. 

 

So this is all a question of, when the budget comes forward, Mr. 

Speaker, where is the trust? And frankly, Mr. Speaker, I would 

prefer to trust the private sector forecasters than I would trust 

the members opposite to manage this economy in these very 

volatile times. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other piece that is interesting when we look at 

our projections is that the government is saying to us that they 

are going to take approximately $2 billion out of a $10 billion 

budget from the potash sector. That indeed, for this budget — 

again, Mr. Speaker, to balance, to produce a surplus, and to help 

pay down debt, Mr. Speaker — that the potash sector has to 

produce almost one-fifth the revenues that are going to be 

received in the course of the next 12 months. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this is based on the sale of potash and, by 

and large, the sale of potash last year was extraordinary. In fact 

this government had windfall revenues in the last year that were 

substantial, thanks to the sale of potash. But, Mr. Speaker, they 

are saying that those windfall profits from potash last year are 

not only going to be substantial, they‟re going to increase this 

year over what was taken in last year. 

 

Interesting. When we look at potash last year at this time in the 

budget, Mr. Speaker, potash revenues were projected last year, 

by this government, as being less than $400 million. Very 

conservative estimate, Mr. Speaker — 400 million. They 

actually brought in about $1.5 million now forecast to the end 

of the year. But, Mr. Speaker, in this budget, potash is expected 

to bring in more than 1.9 billion, close to $2 billion in revenue, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So when you consider budget projections year over year, last 

year‟s projection, Mr. Speaker, was less than 400,000. This 

year‟s projection is 1.9 billion, Mr. Speaker. What we do is . . . 

Are we trusting this government, Mr. Speaker, to have made the 

right decisions? Bottom line, bottom line, the gamble is, the 

gamble is at this point in time, Mr. Speaker, balanced budget, 

surplus revenues, and paying down debt. If the government is 

wrong on either of these two points, Mr. Speaker, this is not a 

balanced budget. There will be no surplus and the debt will 

increase. Simple matter, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So when you are projecting, do you not want to project, Mr. 

Speaker, to ensure that you can meet your goals with some 

certainty? Or do you want to project to meet your goals with 

uncertainty? Bottom line, Mr. Speaker, this budget, this budget 

is based on too much uncertainty. The circumstances are 

completely out of whack, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One last point before I conclude, Mr. Speaker, and I realize my 



March 23, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2411 

time is almost up. Members of the public should be fully aware 

when they look at the budget documents, the total amount of 

money received in taxes in this budget, Mr. Speaker — 

corporate income tax, fuel tax, individual income tax, provincial 

sales, tobacco, and others, Mr. Speaker — the total amount of 

money taken in or expected to take in in taxes, Mr. Speaker, is 

$4.4 billion. 

 

Remember this government is saying they‟re going to bring in 

10.6 billion in revenues in taxes, less than half of that 4.4 

billion. But on the other hand, spending, Mr. Speaker, we‟re 

going to have spending in education and health care at 6.1 

billion. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we know that this government needs to take in 

almost 60 per cent of its revenue from sources other than taxes 

in order to balance. But, Mr. Speaker, this budget needs to 

ensure that there is considerable amount of money taken in just 

to pay for education and health care commitments because the 

tax base of this province doesn‟t even cover education and 

health care costs. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it is so important that Saskatchewan people 

trust and have confidence in their government to ensure that 

they are comfortable with the outcomes that are in this budget. 

So regardless of what you think, Mr. Speaker, about the 

programming that‟s being supported in this budget, if at the end 

of the day programs have to get cut, jobs have to be lost in order 

to provide a balance because the assumptions are wrong, Mr. 

Speaker, then this government is telling us they can no longer 

be trusted. 

 

So I conclude, Mr. Speaker, by simply saying that I believe that 

this budget has failed the people of The Battlefords. It has failed 

the people of Saskatchewan. These are uncertain times — a lot 

of volatility in the system. We need certainty in our budgeting 

process. We need to trust our government, and you can‟t trust 

the gambling side of this budget, Mr. Speaker. You can‟t trust 

this government to ensure that the people of Saskatchewan will 

be well served. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I see my time is up. I thank you very much for the 

opportunity to say a few words today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed an 

honour to stand here today and join in this most important 

budget debate. I would like to acknowledge the privilege that I 

have to represent the constituents of Regina Wascana Plains in 

the Saskatchewan legislature. It‟s a great honour to serve them 

as their MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly]. I also 

wish to acknowledge my family for the support that they 

provide on a daily basis. The staff in my minister‟s office and 

constituency office, who work hard serving the citizens of the 

province, deserve acknowledgement also. Thanks to Marie, 

Alicia, Melissa, Bob, Margaret, and Darin for a job well done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the 2009-2010 budget Saskatchewan: Strong and 

Steady is a budget that steers a steady course through turbulent 

economic times. We are not immune from the situations that 

surround us. Our government is full of optimism for this 

province and its future. We are exercising good judgment in 

government expenditures. We are being transparent, strategic, 

and thoughtful. 

 

This budget is balanced and plans for the future of this province 

— and I emphasize plans for the future of this province, Mr. 

Speaker. In fact there is a forecasted surplus of 424 million, 

while keeping 1.14 billion in the Growth and Financial Security 

Fund. 

 

Stable and predictable revenue sharing for municipalities based 

on the provincial sales tax was introduced as the municipal 

operating grant in this budget. This will address priorities set by 

the municipalities for projects that they deem to be important. 

The towns of White City, Emerald Park, Pilot Butte, city of 

Regina, and the RM [rural municipality] of Edenwold, and of 

course other towns and cities, rural municipalities, will now be 

able to move forward with projects from this revenue sharing 

and also from the economic booster shot announced in February 

‟09 through the municipal economic enhancement program. Mr. 

Speaker, promise made and again promise kept. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Mr. Speaker, during the campaign in 2007, 

the promises that this government made in my constituency and 

across the province were so very important. It was very 

important for me as a person wanting to represent them in the 

legislature that the promises be right on, that the promises be 

truthful, and the promises be something that this government — 

now our government — could meet and ensure that we 

followed through and exceed the expectations of the people of 

this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Our campaign promises were about truth. Our campaign 

promises were about accountability. Our campaign promises 

were about confidence that we had, going into the election, in 

our government, our now government, to keep these promises 

and a strong belief in the people of this province to prosper. 

 

This budget and what happened during the campaign was about 

ensuring and perpetuating what the people in my constituency 

believe, and that is we could be so much more than what we 

were. And, Mr. Speaker, we are showing today and in the recent 

past that we can be so much more than what we originally, in 

the past 16 years, what we were under the NDP. 

 

The general thinking of constituents, Mr. Speaker, on 

government in my constituency is that they want government to 

facilitate and assist. Generally they don‟t want government to 

stand in the way. They are bursting with optimism, were 

bursting with optimism in 2007 during the election campaign. 

And, Mr. Speaker, in talking with constituents today and in 

weeks past, Mr. Speaker, they are absolutely ecstatic, if I can 

use that word, as to what this province is doing and where we 

are going. 

 

The potential of this province is within this government. We 

believe in the potential of this province. But also the people that 

live in this province have long since believed in the potential. 

Businesses that I am aware of, that are in my constituency, have 



2412 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2009 

been in Saskatchewan for a very, very long time. And I applaud 

those businesses, Mr. Speaker, and those citizens that stayed 

through the tough times in this province, in spite of the 

members opposite, and continued to persevere. And now, Mr. 

Speaker, they are finally, finally, Mr. Speaker, they are seeing 

the benefits and the rewards of sticking with this province. This 

province always had the potential. They‟re only just realizing it 

today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — The commitment of this side, of this 

government, to excellence, Mr. Speaker, is the budget and our 

campaign promises. And the promises kept, Mr. Speaker, speak 

for themselves. The commitment to excellence on this side of 

the House is unprecedented, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — The people of Saskatchewan are seeking the 

guidance and the leadership that are provided by this 

government. They are seeking it through this government and, 

Mr. Speaker, we are delivering that vision and commitment for 

today and for the future. 

 

This budget also delivers this government‟s commitment to 

achieve a fair balance of education funding to ensure that the 

education system is properly funded and to significantly reduce 

the education portion of property taxes. 

 

I would like to recognize . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . That is 

not true, member opposite. Recognize the work of my 

colleagues, the member of Rosetown-Elrose and the hon. 

member from Canora-Pelly, the Deputy Premier, for their 

tireless work on this important initiative. This change in 

structure will increase the province‟s share of education funding 

by 241 million. This government will now be funding about 63 

per cent of the operating costs of pre-K to grade 12 

[pre-kindergarten to grade 12] system — truly an investment in 

the future. Again we‟re looking at the future of this province, 

Mr. Speaker. Once again — promise made, promise kept. 

 

And last fall our Premier announced we would increase our 

investment in infrastructure to $1.5 billion in 2009; $500 

million of this investment was unveiled last month in our 

economic booster shot — better schools for our children, better 

long-term care facilities for our seniors, better municipal 

infrastructure for our communities, safer highways for our 

drivers, more affordable housing for those with lower incomes, 

and more jobs to build each of these much-needed projects. The 

record tax cuts for Saskatchewan people, the record investment 

in our ready-for-growth initiative has helped to keep our 

economy strong and steady. 

 

Our Premier and this government are committed to creating a 

better life for all people in Saskatchewan through tax 

reductions. Income tax rates for all citizens were reduced for 

2008 and massive property tax reductions take effect in 2009. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Get your refunds right here. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Step right up. 

 

Let me compare taxes from 2007 under the NDP to taxes from 

2009 under a Saskatchewan Party government. In 2007 a family 

with $50,000 income paid $3,382 in provincial taxes. In 2009 a 

family with $50,000 income pays 1,327 in provincial taxes — a 

savings of $2,055, Mr. Speaker, or 61 per cent — under a 

government committed to Saskatchewan and to Saskatchewan 

families. 

 

[15:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, these savings do not include the recently 

announced education property tax program which put back 

more money into the bank accounts of Saskatchewan families. 

To quote Premier Wall: “Overall, we are putting over 700 

million into the hands of Saskatchewan people this year.” 

 

These significant tax reductions are an important part of our 

plan to keep Saskatchewan‟s economy strong and steady and 

make life more affordable for all Saskatchewan people. 

 

Last year we announced $1 billion in our ready-for-growth plan 

to rebuild schools, improve hospitals and health facilities, 

upgrade roads and highways. Last month we announced a $500 

million economic booster shot to get dollars flowing to our 

municipalities, our communities, and to our people We put 

these much-needed infrastructure dollars directly into the hands 

that need it. 

 

With this budget, our government dedicated another $1 billion 

to keep building on what we‟ve already begun, to keep this 

province moving forward strong and steady. Part of this new 

infrastructure program will fund the SIAST [Saskatchewan 

Institute of Applied Science and Technology] Wascana 

Parkway campus for $2 million in facility upgrades. 

 

This $1 billion will fix more schools and health care facilities in 

our province. It will expand child care centres in Saskatchewan 

and improve our post-secondary system. It will fix more 

highways, including a much-needed interchange at Lewvan and 

Highway No. 1. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this $1 billion investment will create more 

affordable housing and a better life for all Saskatchewan people. 

Our government is building on our promise for a better life for 

all Saskatchewan children. We‟re creating 1,000 new child care 

spaces in Saskatchewan for children of parents who work 

outside the home. And over $12 million in added funding will 

go towards space expansion, training programs, and increased 

pay for early learning and child care workers. 

 

We‟re delivering on our promise to provide $18 million for the 

active families benefit. Families will receive a tax benefit of 

$150 for every child registered and paying fees for sport, 

culture, and recreational activities.  

 

Our government will launch a multi-year, $25 million strategy 

to address complex inequities within the child welfare system. 

And, Mr. Speaker, we‟ll deliver on our promise for a new 

children‟s hospital in Saskatoon. Two hundred million dollars 

over two years will be provided for construction of this facility 

dedicated to the health and well-being of Saskatchewan‟s 

youngest citizens. 

 



March 23, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2413 

Mr. Speaker, some members opposite may say that this budget 

contains runaway spending. I wonder if those members will be 

voting against an initiative such as the children‟s hospital; 

perhaps this project is not on their priority list. Well I can assure 

you, Mr. Speaker, it is on the priority list. Children in this 

province are a priority of this government. 

 

The Saskatchewan Party government elected 16 months ago 

committed to improving our quality of life. A new ministry was 

created and given the privilege of bringing substance and action 

to quality of life. Mr. Speaker, I would like to highlight some of 

the important areas in my area of responsibility — the Ministry 

of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

In this budget, the provincial government has committed to 

substantial increase in the provincial regional parks allocation. 

Mr. Speaker, last year we increased the funding from $75,000 

per year to $600,000 per year. I am proud to point out that this 

government once again increased funding to regional parks to 

1,015,000 in the 2009 and 2010 budget. Mr. Speaker, this is 

more than a tenfold increase in two years. 

 

Regional parks are enjoyed by thousands of Saskatchewan 

residents and thousands of tourists from outside our great 

province. Regional parks are a perfect complement to our 

provincial parks system, and this government believes in 

keeping them strong and vibrant. And we are putting our 

money, Mr. Speaker, where our mouth is, in support of the 

many volunteers who manage and maintain our regional parks. 

 

And speaking of parks, Mr. Speaker, I wish to confirm that our 

government is committed to creating world-class provincial 

parks in our majestic Saskatchewan. Our provincial parks are 

the hidden gems of this province, but they will not be hidden for 

long. I am proud to draw attention to an additional capital 

allocation of over $2 million to the parks, provincial parks, in 

2009-2010. This brings provincial park capital spending to 

nearly $11 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟d also like to highlight a few other numbers in 

reference to provincial parks. We have committed to upgrading, 

constructing, and electrifying 442 campsites in one year, in 

stark comparison to 290 sites upgraded in the last four years of 

a backward-looking NDP, always planning for decline and 

hoping that the next downturn was just around the corner. 

 

Well the Saskatchewan Party government is planning for 

growth and a bright future. With over 3.1 million visits to 

provincial parks last year, we are preparing for the best days to 

come for Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, that is commitment to 

tourism, to quality of life, to fix and replace aging and broken 

infrastructure, and to build pride in our parks and in our 

province. 

 

Other initiatives that this government and my ministry have 

introduced, such as the active family benefit, will assist 

thousands of Saskatchewan families with the cost of culture, 

recreation, and sports activity programming. The arts, culture, 

and heritage sector development plan will improve economic 

growth, increase quality of life, and build pride in 

Saskatchewan. Nine hundred and thirty-two thousand dollar 

increase will be made in culture and heritage funding in 

2009-2010. 

Full participation by this province as a contributing partner in 

the 2010 Olympic and Paralympic Winter Games will create an 

opportunity to showcase Saskatchewan‟s high quality of life, 

rich heritage, and diverse culture to the world. My ministry will 

provide support for a Saskatchewan pavilion at the games to 

profile the province‟s business and tourism opportunities to 

Canada and to the world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in conclusion, this government and this province 

are in an enviable position. A budget surplus, a sustainable plan 

for the future, a province full of optimism, a positive business 

climate, an agenda for growth, and a beautiful place to call 

home are all those things that make Saskatchewan the place to 

be in 2009 and into the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting the amendment, but I will 

be supporting the strong and steady budget of this government 

in 2009-2010. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Saskatoon Northwest. 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it gives me great 

pleasure to have the opportunity to rise and speak today about 

the 2009-2010 budget of the government. 

 

It also gives me pleasure to be able to correct some of the 

pernicious bloviating by the pretend opposition over there and 

pretend socialist party in the things that they have, quite 

frankly, in a disingenuous attempt to dissuade the people of this 

province of our budget, to try to play games with words and to 

dissuade with false allegations or illusions of exactly what our 

budget is. We know that the Finance critic has already, through 

the editorials and letters and emails from the potash industry, 

corrected him on what he has stood up and talked about in our 

budget. 

 

And that was the Finance minister on the previous government 

who couldn‟t get it right on the reality of potash revenue, on the 

reality of our government and budgets in projecting in the 

future. But I‟d like to take special challenge to the ingenuous 

statements made by the Deputy Leader of the Opposition as she 

talked about this issue of the tax reduction and property tax, that 

somehow Saskatoon being shortchanged over Regina. And it 

goes to speak, I think, to the lack of information and in-depth 

understanding of finances and how budgets work. She made 

statements in Saskatoon and on the newspapers to talk about the 

difference of 100 to $300; that somehow Regina was getting a 

$300 tax break, and we were shortchanging Saskatoon. 

 

Well I‟d like to correct her, as much as the Finance critic has 

been corrected, in the reality of something called tax assessment 

and values of property. In Saskatoon for instance, there‟s been a 

46 per cent increase in taxable assessment. And when you apply 

what is in our budget in terms of education tax relief against 

property, we have a $682 savings, or 20 per cent, over a real 

estate market that has boomed and almost doubled in the last 

few years. 

 

And yet in Regina, the Regina residential property has also 

boomed. It‟s only gone up though 32 per cent as opposed to 46 



2414 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2009 

per cent. And in that tax relief that is provided in our budget, 

it‟s a 26 per cent tax relief or $862 difference in savings. So, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have a $682 savings in Saskatoon, 

$862 savings in Regina. Not that much different, but a lot 

different when you begin to look at the reality and the structure 

of the real estate market and the assessment value it has gone 

up. 

 

I‟d like to also bring to attention what our government has done 

under the ‟09 and ‟10 budget — $200 million investment in a 

new children‟s hospital in Saskatoon. 

 

You know, as a motivational speaker who travelled across this 

country — in fact across North America — speaking, one of the 

greatest embarrassments that I had as an MLA was to go to 

other provinces to find out that they had a children‟s hospital 

and we didn‟t. Prince Edward Island had the use of three within 

a 15-minute radius. And under this pretend socialist 

government, we were the only province in Canada that didn‟t 

have a place where our children could go for cutting-edge 

treatment and operations. 

 

They took 23 . . . and they were going to do it. They were 

always going to do things. They‟re always going to put money 

into the North. They‟re always going to put money into the First 

Nations and Métis. They‟re always going to do it. But they just 

never got around to it. They always made the excuse that we 

didn‟t have the money. 

 

Well they had the money to grow the government by 30 per 

cent, to the highest level of government bureaucracy in Canada. 

They had the money to go in and invest in SPUDCO. They had 

the money. But they didn‟t have the money to invest in the 

children. 

 

We put $23.3 million into accelerating the twinning of Highway 

11 so that the people of the North could come down to 

Saskatoon through Prince Albert, and we dedicated that money 

for that. We put 15.7 million into the international vaccine 

centre at the University of Saskatchewan, which consists of 9.8 

million in new funding and 5.9 million previously committed 

through the Innovation and Science Fund. We put 5 million, 

into the first year of 27 million overall, for the renovation and 

expansion of Saskatoon Queen‟s Bench court house; 3.2 million 

in the operational fund for SIIT [Saskatchewan Indian Institute 

of Technologies]. So we‟re beginning to look at advanced 

education for our First Nation and Métis people. 

 

The federal and provincial governments provided 86 million to 

build a new $243 million bridge completing Circle Drive in 

Saskatoon. That was asked for year after year after year after 

year for the previous government, and Saskatoon was always 

ignored and told that they never had the money. We put 98 

million in this budget, an investment in Saskatoon‟s Circle 

Drive South project; another 15 million for 400 new on-campus 

residential spaces at the University of Saskatchewan. 

 

Under that previous government, Saskatchewan had the lowest 

ratio of university residence per university than any other 

province in this country under that government. And we have 

begin to build the infrastructure first with this 15 million, in 

partnership, to create 4,400 new on-campus residence. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Saskatoon will receive funding for a new power generation 

plant at the Queen Elizabeth power station in Saskatoon, and 

overall the Queen Elizabeth power station unit 2 from 

SaskPower‟s 950 million investment in the provincial electrical 

system. Under a Crown corporation that was neglected year 

after year after year by that previous government — where 

hydro poles, electrical poles were falling all over in the 

province, where you couldn‟t get up to date an electrical grid 

with power outage under that previous government — we are 

doing the investment in an infrastructure that was allowed to 

virtually collapse under that previous government. 

 

A correctional system that was 150 — 150 — per cent over 

capacity, that had men sleeping in hallways and in classrooms 

and in gymnasiums, and the reality of a correctional system that 

in 16 years didn‟t have one bed added to it. And in fact what 

they would choose to do, and the previous Health minister when 

he was . . . before he was the Leader of the Opposition and 

before he was the premier, closed down White Spruce to free up 

more beds and kick kids out of long-term treatment that they 

needed — all of them First Nations children from the North. 

 

We invested 22 million in Saskatoon through the per capita 

based municipal economic enhancement program that put $100 

million into this province to allow the municipalities to 

understand that they best know where their dollars go — not a 

top-level government like under the NDP, but in fact to partner 

with municipalities and say, here is your money. You know best 

where it goes. And we put 100 million out to the municipalities 

in that partnership, 22 million going to Saskatoon. We did it; 

they didn‟t do it. 

 

Sixteen million in the construction of the new St. Mary 

Community School, daycare, wellness centre, housing in 

Saskatoon Pleasant Hill‟s neighbourhood. You know, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, at one time when the past premier of this 

province, the Leader of the Opposition, made this big 

announcement in the media. And he was on the front page of 

the Saskatoon StarPhoenix, that he was in St. Mary‟s school 

and it needed to be replaced, and the furnace was falling apart 

and it was cold. And it was number one on the list of school 

replacements. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was shocked when we got into 

government and I was to find that they transferred money out of 

that St. Mary‟s project and they bumped it to eight years down 

the list in the most neediest inner-city school in the province. 

We turned around and said, that is not appropriate for our 

children, for the inner city, and we put 16.3 million into that 

construction, for the wellness centre, the day care, and the 

school in the most neediest of Saskatoon‟s area. 

 

To date we‟ve committed 45 million to Saskatoon in projects 

from Saskatchewan Housing, supporting the development of 

nearly 400 social and affordable housing units. The pretend 

socialist government, they kept saying, we care about the 

people, we care about affording living, we care about the folk in 

the province. But they never put these housing units into place. 

They allowed the reality of no rental properties and no assisted 

living properties in there. 

 



March 23, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2415 

We just submitted the 345 million to be able to do so. That is 

our record. We know what their record is. 

 

Another 30 million to twin 35 kilometres of Highway 11 

between Saskatoon and Prince Albert; 20 million for the centre 

of mental health in Saskatoon, the Irene and Leslie Dubé, 

funding for the construction of that. We did it. They didn‟t do it. 

 

Upgrades to Saskatoon‟s Nutana Collegiate, improvements 

totalling $8.5 million. Now I was shocked when I saw this, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, because it‟s actually in Nutana, and that is the 

riding for the Deputy Leader of the Opposition. They never did 

it. We turned around and we did it for one of the best high 

schools in Saskatchewan. I guess they were going to get around 

to it. But, you know, the fact is they were just going to get. 

They were just going to get. Well we‟re doing it, and we‟re 

doing it in Saskatoon. 

 

And not to neglect the rest of the high schools — 3.7 million for 

the E.D. Feehan Catholic High School renovations and 

upgrades, 100 million in funding for the University of 

Saskatchewan academic health science project, 4.7 million for 

safety equipment and training in improvements to hospital 

surgical equipment for Saskatoon health regions. 

 

Now I can listen to the other side, all three of them over there 

beaking. I guess they don‟t like what I‟m saying, but the reality 

of it is, is that these are the figures. This is the reality of it. 

 

The province today announced 3 million commitment to the 

city of Saskatoon for seating expansion and capital 

improvements to Credit Union Centre. We‟re getting it done — 

500,000 for the Saskatoon downtown youth centre, Egadz, from 

the Ministry of Social Services to purchase two more houses 

that follow in the my housing. Egadz, one of the best 

recognized inner-city programs in our province that deals with 

child prostitution, the highest level of child prostitution in 

Canada under that previous government with the youngest age 

being nine, with the highest gang recruitment. We‟re getting it 

done by partnering with Egadz to create more housing. 

 

The Saskatoon regional health . . . [inaudible] . . . management, 

43,000 for recycling projects under our green initiative. The 

installation of sound barriers in Saskatoon roads and freeways 

to cut down noise, another 1.5 million; the opening of Columbia 

Manor affordable housing for low-income seniors in Saskatoon, 

and with the feds and the municipal funding, that total 3.5 

million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and that‟s just in Saskatoon. I mean that‟s not 

even covering the rest of the province. An area that they 

ignored, not only the rural area of our province — which we 

know — but also the urban area, that they played the games at, 

that somehow they were a socialist party who pretended with 

the rhetoric that they were going to take care of the most 

neediest and leave nobody behind. Well they left everybody 

behind. 

 

And then just to prove that, just in third party endorsements, 

let‟s talk about SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities]. “This (the Municipal Operating Grant) 

increase, along with the school tax relief, makes this the best 

budget for rural Saskatchewan in history.” 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Now I‟ve got to tell you, Mr. Speaker, when I 

read this in the StarPhoenix by Murray Mandryk . . . Now 

Murray Mandryk, you know, has not been at all times a Sask 

Party supporter, or in favour of . . . He‟s supposed to be in the 

middle, but most times he shows himself leaning to the left 

somewhat. And he has taken issue with us many times, which I 

thought was unfair. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I‟ve got to tell you, in this statement Murray 

Mandryk said, “Mission near-impossible: NDP‟s budget 

criticism.” I mean the only way they can criticize is to bloviate, 

to be pernicious, to be ingenuous, to bend the facts in a almost 

mission-impossible statement. And this is what Murray 

Mandryk went on to say, “. . . the Sask Party government has 

now addressed so many long-standing concerns that one really 

wonders if the NDP has anything legitimately left to criticize.” 

 

Now I happen to agree — one of the few times — with Mr. 

Mandryk because I have trouble understanding why the 

make-believe games that the opposition is playing, especially 

with this amendment that they want to put forward. 

 

. . . accountant at Meyers Norris Penny: 

 

Generally speaking I like it. I am going to give it an 

overall rating of 9 out of 10. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — There‟s something for everyone, and I believe 

that it‟s a fiscally responsible budget. 

 

Finally we are seeing some real progress here in the K to 12 

funding assessment. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I need to once again point out, fiscally 

responsible budget, cautious, under a Finance minister that 

spent an enormous amount of time being very reserved and 

cautious as he went forward with this budget, as opposed to 

what the critic said — who the newspapers proved wrong the 

next day, that he didn‟t know what he was talking about — in 

the potash mine, and that we somehow were going to go into 

deficit and . . . This is a balanced budget. 

 

Allan Earle from SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 

Association] said: 

 

So the predictability of it (revenue sharing) is just 

unbelievably good news. Administrators all across the 

province have got to be jumping up and down. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — You know, I have to say that this is third party 

endorsement. This isn‟t us that‟s saying it; these are people 

across the province. The CEO [chief executive officer] of the 

Children‟s Hospital & Health Foundation in Saskatchewan, 

Brynn Boback-Lane: 

 

Really today is about and dedicated to the children that 

have been challenged and lost and the children that are 



2416 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2009 

challenged and winning their fight with illness and injury. 

This day is for them. 

 

In that placement of $200 million for a Saskatoon children‟s 

hospital that they never got around doing . . . They just never 

got around, not even building a ward, not building a wing. They 

just ignored it and they would say, go take your children to 

Alberta if they want good hospital care. 

 

Mayor Don Atchison, a man I know well: “. . . this has been a 

huge step, truly monumental in the sense of provincial 

government acknowledging what cities have been asking for 

and so this has been very, very good news for us.” 

 

Mayor Don Atchison again: 

 

Well there‟s affordable housing that‟s in there as well. 

There‟s police officers that are in there. There‟s a lot of 

good things in here for the city of Saskatoon and I‟m sure 

for a lot of other municipalities as well. 

 

. . . this has been a huge step, truly monumental in the 

sense of provincial government acknowledging what cities 

have been asking for . . . 

 

You know that proves, when you put that against the Deputy 

Opposition Leader, it puts it against what she has been saying 

completely erroneously. She has been shown to be disingenuous 

in not only not knowing the reality of the finances of the 

education tax reduction and what it means for the people of 

Saskatoon, but also going against the people of Saskatoon and 

people like the mayor. Not only against people in Saskatoon, 

but Mayor Pat Fiacco of Regina, a very good man. I think I 

could have been a better boxer than him, I think, except I‟m a 

little older than him. 

 

A Member: — A little? 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Well I‟m a lot older than him and in a 

different weight category as well. This is what Pat said: 

 

This is a very good day for the city of Regina. 

 

The vision for Regina is to be Canada‟s most vibrant, 

inclusive, attractive, sustainable community, where people 

live in harmony and thrive in opportunity. Today‟s budget 

helps to move our community in that direction. 

 

And so when I listen to the opposition members from Regina 

bloviate and just stand there — and if you don‟t know what the 

word means get into the dictionary. I can‟t apologize for your 

lack of education around the use of literature. But the reality, 

when you begin to sit there and criticize, you got the mayor of 

Regina saying the opposite what you‟re doing. I can‟t dumb it 

down for you. I‟m sorry. 

 

Allan Earle of SUMA, in a news release: 

 

“This budget confirms the Government of Saskatchewan‟s 

commitment to share the responsibility for making all of 

our villages, towns and cities better places to live” . . . 

 

. . . “With these tax cuts, our cities, towns and villages 

become more attractive to new businesses and families.” 

 

. . . “Over the past year, the provincial government has 

listened to the concerns and ideas of municipalities. Today 

they have delivered a budget that goes a long way to 

address those major concerns.” 

 

. . . “We enjoy a harmonious relationship with this 

government, and we are seeing top municipal priorities 

being addressed. Today‟s budget is another strong signal 

that the province and municipalities — together — are 

working to build a strong future for Saskatchewan.” 

 

We think we have come very close to putting two items to 

bed with today‟s budget. That being the reduction of 

education tax and the second one being revenue sharing or 

as this government would like to call it, the municipal 

operating grant. We‟re very excited. 

 

And that is shown with the in-migration back within our 

province during the time that we have formed government, and 

the out-migration of 35,000 young people under the same time 

span of that government in the 16 years, in the 16 months that 

we have taken. Sixteen years — sixteen months. They had 

out-migration. We have in-migration. We had weak economy 

under them. We have strong economy under ours. 

 

Of SARM, “This (Municipal Operating Grant) increase, along 

with the school tax relief, makes this the best budget [best] for 

rural Saskatchewan in history.”They are: 

 

. . . pleased and excited about today‟s budget, we are 

pleased with the increase in municipal support grants and 

the additional help on the school tax issue. 

 

We are excited about the opportunities for growth this 

investment in the province will trigger. 

 

With this budget, Saskatchewan is truly open for business. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[15:30] 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — You know, you sit there and you listen to the 

opposition, the doom and the gloom and this can‟t possibly last 

and we‟re going to go in a deficit and the potash industry is 

going to fall apart and the oil industry is going to fall apart. I 

mean they just, they go on and on. They can‟t wait for it to go 

bad for the people, the folk, because they‟re looking for it, for 

doom and gloom, as a political opportunity for their party 

regardless of the expense to the folk of this province. 

 

We are positive about our province. The people of Canada have 

seen us being positive. We have produced the only balanced 

budget without a deficit in all of Canada. And I mean they 

speak in doom and gloom; we speak about the reality of the 

opportunities that is reinforced by every major grouping of 

people in this province. 

 

Les Cannam, accountant at Meyers Norris Penny: “Generally 

speaking I like it.” It gives an overall rating of 9 out of 10. A 

responsible budget, 9 out of 10. 



March 23, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2417 

Saskatchewan construction industry, Michael Fougere said, 

“There‟s a lot more in this budget that signifies more 

competition for the province . . . We are very pleased that the 

budget is going in the right direction.” 

 

Saskatchewan Stock Growers Association, Ed Bothner: 

 

“We are pleased to see that agriculture is back on the 

provincial government‟s radar” [after being ignored] . . . 

“It‟s been decades since our industry has received this 

level of attention and support from the provincial 

government.” 

 

“We applaud Premier Wall, Agriculture Minister 

Bjornerud, Education Minister Ken Krawetz and their 

government for recognizing that agriculture continues to 

be a backbone industry for the province that offers 

credible potential over the long-term” . . . 

 

What a difference. What a difference in 16 months. In the 

industry and the segment of our society, of our province, that 

grew this province way back from the early 1900s when people 

came here to farm and to work the land, that of 16 years being 

ignored under that government, they finally have a government 

that is treating them with respect and equality in how we begin 

to address their concerns and needs and issues. 

 

Again, Murray Mandryk: “. . . the Sask. Party government has 

now addressed so many long-standing concerns that one . . . 

wonders if the NDP has anything legitimately left to criticize.” 

 

And I tell you they don‟t. They have nothing. It‟s bloviating. 

It‟s a matter of trying to twist things. Bloviating. Fear and 

smear. I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, that I am not a wolf in 

sheep‟s clothing. I am exactly who I am. I say the truth as I see 

it, and the fear and the smear that that other side did, not only 

before the election but now in their referral to this budget. 

 

You know, the CFIB [Canadian Federation of Independent 

Business], Marilyn Braun-Pollon, said this: “. . . too . . . [far] 

we‟ve been tinkering around the edges when dealing with . . . 

[our] high education taxes.” The highest in Canada, by the way, 

Mr. Speaker, under that government. The highest in Canada. 

 

We‟ve done studies. We‟ve done rebates. We believe this is a 

step in the right direction. Reducing property taxes were our 

members‟ number one priority, and gone are the days of a 

patchwork of education mill rates all over the province — gone. 

That happened 16 months ago when this government was 

elected. They‟re gone. And now they want to stand up there and 

go back to the past — that is absolutely meaningless — of dark 

and gloom. 

 

Reducing our property taxes is one of the things I think we 

scored a pretty . . . [inaudible] . . . Mr. Speaker, I think you get 

the general drift of my thoughts and feeling and feedback and 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . More? 

 

You know, I got to tell you, you know I ran as an MLA as a 

social advocate in this province because I saw the mess that the 

previous government was doing, to the highest level of 

bureaucracy, you know, per capita in all of Canada — that they 

had enough finances to grow government by 30 per cent during 

the 16 years that they were in play. 

 

You know, they had the highest level of government 

bureaucracy, but they had the least amount of services. The 

highest addiction rate of our youth, the least amount of 

resources. The highest level of youth gang recruitment, no 

programs. The highest level of government involvement, but no 

solutions. 

 

Under this budget we have produced solutions. We have 

addressed those most in need of a compassionate government, a 

government who will bring a balanced budget forward, and 

begin to address the issues and the ills left behind by a 

government way out of step of a mandate that they went into 

government first. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am proud today to stand and support this budget. 

It is the best balanced budget in all of Canada. And to speak 

against the idiotic motion brought forward — I apologize for 

calling it idiotic — misguided motion put forward by the 

opposition. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I would like to remind 

members, when you‟re speaking, to choose your words 

carefully. I found the last comment from the current speaker 

just to not really be a comment that would be acceptable in this 

Assembly, and I‟d ask the member to withdraw that comment. 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — I already withdrew it and apologized before I 

sat down, Mr. Speaker. That‟s why I called it misguided. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 

enter into the debate concerning the budget delivered by the 

Sask Party government on the 18th of this month, that places 

Saskatchewan‟s prosperity at risk while concurrently leaving 

struggling working families to largely fend for themselves in 

what is rapidly becoming an economy that does not share the 

rewards and opportunities of economic progress with its 

citizens. 

 

As my other New Democrat colleagues rightly discern, the 

budget delivered by the Sask Party government is premised on 

shaky economic and revenue assumptions combined with a 

short-sighted political spending that places Saskatchewan in a 

potentially precarious future position. It is that same old 

conservative-style accounting, Mr. Speaker, where the 

perceived political payoff never matches the risk to 

Saskatchewan people and Saskatchewan taxpayers. 

 

The Sask Party like to call this a balanced budget. Yet the only 

way they could balance the budget was to draw on the rainy day 

fund, down to $1.2 million from the $2 million rock that the 

Premier only announced last year, that he wanted to ensure that 

this province had in the event of an economic uncertainty. That 

fund is now at $1.2 billion versus the $2 billion rock that the 

Premier promised the taxpayers of this province that it would 

have to rely on. That‟s how they balanced this budget, Mr. 

Speaker. So how they call it a balanced budget is again part of 



2418 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2009 

that creative accounting process that the conservatives like to do 

so much. 

 

Contrary to the public relations campaign of the Sask Party 

government, their second budget only confirms the worst 

aspects of the first — working people left to fend for 

themselves and a blatant ignorance to the problem of climate 

change. The second budget delivered by the Sask Party 

government is nothing but short-sighted conservative 

accounting that gambles on economic forecasts, that provides 

limited short-term relief to government-imposed inflation and 

hardship, and that repeats the same old conservative-style 

thinking that the environment should be treated as an annual 

expense rather than an asset on which to build tomorrow‟s 

prosperity. 

 

One only has to look at what is being announced in the US 

[United States] by President Barack Obama and at the recent 

European Union gathering to see that the focus is on 

infrastructure spending that benefits the environment through 

the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions and advances in new 

technology. 

 

When one looks for instance at President Barack Obama‟s 

campaign platform, one can see that, under the heading 

investing in the new energy economy, it says that President 

Barack Obama will invest $150 billion over 10 years that will 

create 5 million new green jobs, including highly skilled 

manufacturing jobs, to produce the first wave of green 

technology. 

 

He will also require that 10 per cent of electricity come from 

renewable resources by 2012, and 25 per cent by 2025. He 

believes that the amount of electricity consumed in the US 

should be derived from clean, sustainable energy sources like 

solar, wind, and geothermal. 

 

Obama also goes on to say that he would extend the production 

tax credit to spur renewable energy for five years to encourage 

the production of renewable energy. There is many, many more 

initiatives in his campaign platform, but unfortunately there‟s 

limited time so I‟ll only mention those few. 

 

The second Sask Party budget delivered on March 18 offers the 

same as the first — an ideological refusal to meaningfully 

address climate change. Mr. Speaker, climate change is 

happening. The Prairie region is experiencing warming that 

exceeds the global average. Saskatchewan is already 

experiencing lower summer stream flows, falling lake levels, 

and declining soil moisture. Our climate is becoming warmer 

and drier, and destabilization will undoubtedly result in more 

floods, more severe storms, more extreme drought. Yet the Sask 

Party government already has a record of ideological dithering 

on climate change, leaving Saskatchewan in a difficult place. 

 

When one looks at the Speech from the Throne delivered last 

October 22 in 2008, the Throne Speech refers to “Saskatchewan 

residents also have an opportunity to do their part — and save 

money — by accessing a comprehensive list of energy 

conservation programs.” It‟s interesting that this is part of the 

Throne Speech so shortly after they got the Office of Energy 

Conservation. 

 

The Throne Speech also points out: 

 

Fresh, clean water is essential for a high quality of life in 

our province. 

 

People all across Saskatchewan need to know they will 

have access to safe and reliable water, now and in the 

future.” 

 

And again, the Sask Party government has failed to follow its 

own Throne Speech in terms of what it‟s delivering to the 

public of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The NDP put into place a $320 million fund to deal with issues 

around climate change. It was called the Green Futures Fund. 

And what did the Sask Party do with that fund when it was 

elected, Mr. Speaker? Not only did they not have a plan on how 

to address the issues around climate change, not only did they 

not have a plan as to how they were going to meet their 

greenhouse reduction targets despite the fact that they adopted 

them into their campaign platform from the NDP — which put 

those targets in place in the spring of 2007 — not only did they 

not have any way of reaching those targets, but they eliminated 

all possibilities of doing so by removing the funding that is 

necessary to introduce the technologies and initiatives necessary 

to achieve those targets. They ended up gutting that $320 

million fund that was put in place by the NDP to a mere $40 

million — $40 million. 

 

That is completely contrary to what we‟re seeing for instance 

— where? — oh in Alberta, which is where the Sask Party goes 

to for its advice on a regular basis. The Alberta government put 

into place a fund that was $360 million. Doesn‟t sound too far 

off from what the NDP did here in Saskatchewan at $320 

million in terms of adjusting the issue of climate change — $40 

million versus $320 million. No plan to reduce greenhouse gas 

emissions and achieve the targets that they put in their 

campaign platform versus the plan that we were going forward 

with to achieve those targets, or else we wouldn‟t have 

announced them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They also gutted the Office of Energy Conservation, despite the 

fact in their Throne Speech they talk about the issue of 

Saskatchewan people needing to access the issues of 

conservation. 

 

The Minister of Environment is chirping from her seat right 

now saying, hey Sandra, it‟s the same old, same old. And 

you‟re right, Mr. Speaker, it is the same old, same old. Because 

until the Sask Party government actually does something — 

anything — at addressing the issues of climate change, I‟m 

going to be preaching the same old, same old. Because they 

need to hear that we had a plan. We had issues in place. We put 

our money where our mouth is. And they have done nothing. 

 

I will take that back. They‟ve introduced a low-flush toilet 

program. And if that‟s their way to address the issues around 

climate change in this province, then they have a long, long way 

to go. 

 

They also completely annihilated the office of the Climate 

Change Secretariat. The Climate Change Secretariat was put in 

place by our government to address the issues of climate 



March 23, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2419 

change. It was going to be a stand-alone office to deal 

specifically with issues of climate change all throughout the 

entire government — all government programs and offices and 

ministries. What did they do? They gutted it. Why? Not because 

they have a superior plan. Simply because they didn‟t like the 

fact that it was our idea. They didn‟t like the fact that the NDP 

came up with that idea. 

 

So if you‟re going to gut that because you don‟t like the fact 

that it‟s an NDP idea, what are you going to do? Well typically 

they rebrand. They take what is, for instance, the Fiscal 

Stabilization Fund and they call it the growth and security fund. 

They could have taken the Climate Change Secretariat and 

rebranded it so it would sound like it was their idea. Who 

knows? That might still be coming, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:45] 

 

But nonetheless, in the meantime, we have nothing. Absolutely 

zilch. We have nothing. The only issue that they haven‟t 

dithered on so far is the issue around expansion of nuclear 

development in this province. They have not done anything 

around having any type of public consultation process on this. 

They‟re proceeding with this the same way they do with any 

other legislation that they want to get in place, which is simply, 

we‟re going to give you what we want to do and you are simply 

going to have to live with it. Too bad, so sad. 

 

They talk about public consultations afterwards, but by that 

point we know it doesn‟t change a thing. We‟ve already seen 

that with the various legislations they‟ve introduced in the 

province that are highly problematic. The public has expressed 

them as being highly problematic and they‟ve done nothing, 

nothing to make amendments to them. They haven‟t taken 

suggestions for amendments. They haven‟t listened to any type 

of public input whatsoever, and that‟s exactly where they‟re 

headed with the issue around nuclear development. 

 

When one looks, for instance, at the Uranium Development 

Partnership, the Uranium Development Partnership has been 

given $3 million over I think it‟s a six-month period of time to 

talk about and to let the government know about how nuclear 

expansion should happen in this province. Not whether it 

should happen, but how it should happen. 

 

They refuse to disclose the work plan that‟s been assigned to 

the Uranium Development Partnership. And interestingly 

enough, the person that they tout as being the 

environment-conscious person on this Uranium Development 

Partnership is none other than Patrick Moore whom they like to 

claim is someone who has an environmental background. Well 

let me tell you what the person who is Patrick Moore, with what 

they claim is an environmental background, let‟s look what he 

has to say in Rolling Stone magazine from November 13, 2008. 

So this is very recent, Mr. Speaker. November 13, 2008, Patrick 

Moore says, what do we do . . . The question by the interviewer 

is: “And what do we do about storing all the nuclear waste?” 

And what does Patrick Moore say? It‟s a very interesting 

answer and I‟m sure all the residents of Saskatchewan would 

love to hear this one: “People who don‟t want to live near 

nuclear facilities should probably move.” 

 

That‟s his answer, Mr. Speaker. Can you believe it? If you 

don‟t like the issue of nuclear waste or a nuclear facility 

anywhere near you, then you have to move. It‟s that simple. So 

he‟s essentially saying to Saskatchewan people, too bad, so sad. 

If you don‟t like the agenda that the Sask Party government is 

going to put forward, you‟re going to have to move, which is 

interesting because they like to brag about the fact that they‟re 

getting people to move here. And in fact what‟s going to 

happen is they‟re now telling people you have to move. If you 

don‟t believe in our ideology, if you don‟t like what we‟re 

doing, then you should move. That‟s what the Sask Party is 

telling people through this panel that they have set up to deal 

with the issue of nuclear power. 

 

Saskatchewan people want meaningful dialogue on the issue, 

Mr. Speaker. They want meaningful dialogue. There are people 

on all spectrums of this issue. There are people that are very 

much in favour of it. There are people that are very much 

opposed to it. There are people that don‟t know, that need more 

information. But what Saskatchewan people want is dialogue. 

 

And we‟re seeing examples of that all over the province now, 

Mr. Speaker. We‟re seeing public groups get together and hold 

their own public meetings to have this meaningful dialogue 

since the Sask Party government won‟t allow the public of 

Saskatchewan to enter into meaningful dialogue on this subject. 

 

In Paradise Hill it was only a week and a half ago that a 

community with a population of 500 had 450 people attend an 

open dialogue on the issue of nuclear development in the 

province of Saskatchewan. Unfortunately a couple of the 

invitees didn‟t attend. The Sask Party government didn‟t send 

anybody to attend this meeting and speak on their behalf. The 

nuclear power company that is talking to Saskatchewan people 

about wanting to set up a reactor here, Bruce Power, also 

unfortunately didn‟t attend. But 450 people out of a community 

of 500 attended, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And just last week, EnerCan West was held here in Regina. It 

was a multi-day conference to discuss various issues with 

respect to sustainable energy, the primary focus of course being 

the issue on nuclear power development. And again we see 

here, whether it‟s community leaders or community activists or 

whether it‟s environmental activists putting together a public 

discussion about the issue or whether it‟s business leaders and 

environmental engineers, etc., putting together a discussion 

forum about the issue, people are hungry for discussion on this 

topic. 

 

Why this government is so afraid of discussion is well beyond 

me, Mr. Speaker. Well unless of course, unless of course, unless 

of course there is something nefarious going on, Mr. Speaker. 

Because why won‟t they allow the public to engage in 

discussion before the decision-making processes have already 

been undertaken? 

 

The second Sask Party government budget merely confirms the 

ideological rejection of climate change built into the first 

budget, offering pennies to a problem that requires adaptation 

and remediation now. The budget advertises $17.5 million 

towards green initiatives. According to page 15 of the budget, 

2.2 million in ongoing funding to energy projects related to 

carbon enhanced oil recovery that does little to address overall 

carbon emissions. And 15.3 million to be administered by the 



2420 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2009 

Ministry of Environment to support carbon capture and storage, 

a technology the Sask Party claims to be cost-effective which is 

a claim that is simply dubious given the findings of 

organizations such as the David Suzuki Foundation who in their 

report, entitled Provincial Power Play released in July 2008, on 

page 25, state the following: 

 

. . . [carbon capture storage] for coal-fired power plants is 

likely the most expensive option for reducing emissions 

from the electricity sector, surpassing even the incredibly 

high cost of nuclear power. The only way to make these 

projects viable is to inject [huge] massive subsidies from 

government, including a public utility such as SaskPower, 

as this project does. 

 

Energy efficiency and conservations. They talk about energy 

efficiency and conservations despite the fact that they gutted the 

Office of Energy Conservation. It‟s like doublespeak . One side 

doesn‟t . . . I mean one side of their brain is not functioning 

with the other side of their brain when they do these things. 

 

And also wants water conservation initiatives. So the whole 

issue for us in terms of dealing with our water issues in 

Saskatchewan is simply conserve water. Well I‟ve got news for 

the Sask Party government. There‟s other issues to deal with in 

Saskatchewan with respect to water issues besides just 

conserving it. 

 

Alongside this pathetic announcement in addressing climate 

change, the budget document on page 15 confidently states that: 

 

A number of [other] ministries are doing their part to 

change their approaches and influence their partners to be 

more environmentally responsible. 

 

And among the list, Mr. Speaker, is the laughable, disingenuous 

claim that: 

 

Government Services is providing leadership to ministries 

in environmental stewardship practices and is undertaking 

several measures to reduce the environmental impact of 

governmental operations and its vehicle fleet. 

 

I‟m glad, Mr. Speaker, that New Democrats reminded the 

Minister of Government Services and his cabinet colleagues of 

their own election promise when the Premier and at least six of 

his cabinet ministers were driving SUVs [sport-utility vehicle] 

that were not on the SGI [Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance] list of fuel-efficient, eligible vehicles as late as 

November of last year. Government-paid-for, taxpayer-paid-for 

vehicles — vehicles that they promised the Saskatchewan 

taxpayers would fall into their campaign guidelines, would fall 

into their guidelines as energy-efficient vehicles, and then they 

did something different. Why? Because apparently they need a 

four-wheel drive, or whatever the excuse was, for Saskatchewan 

roads. 

 

Well what about all the other people in Saskatchewan that don‟t 

have the luxury of those vehicles? Are they simply not 

supposed to drive, Mr. Speaker? I suggest that is not the case. 

This is simply the case of a government not wanting to follow 

its own policies. This is a government of entitlement. This is a 

government that thinks it can set the rules for everybody else 

and then they get to do whatever it is they want. 

 

Just as with their token adoption of our province‟s greenhouse 

gas targets, the Sask Party fails to take their promises on the 

environment seriously. They promised in their 2000 election 

platform to “. . . ensure that all new vehicles purchased by the 

provincial government are hybrid or high fuel efficiency 

vehicles.” Despite their promise, Premier Wall and his cabinet 

ministers decided to drive SUVs that are not considered by SGI 

as fuel efficient. 

 

Hypocrisy on the environment, Mr. Speaker, cannot be covered 

up with glossy print. Whether it‟s gas-guzzling SUVs or having 

no plan or dedicated resources to achieve our province‟s climate 

change targets, the Sask Party continues to harbour an 

ideological rejection of climate change. There‟s just no other 

answer for it, Mr. Speaker. It must be that. Because so far, like I 

said, we haven‟t heard anything from them in terms of any 

meaningful changes that they‟re going to make in this province. 

We haven‟t heard anything in terms of their sound reasoning for 

what they‟ve done to gut the climate change fund of $320 

million down to 40 million. They haven‟t given us any logical 

explanation as to why they cut the Office of Energy 

Conservation or why they gutted the climate change secretariat. 

So it must be ideological rejection of climate change. 

 

And we have plenty of quotes from members opposite in the 

past that would clearly substantiate that that‟s where they were 

at. I was hoping that they would have come further from there 

since then with all the scientific data and research that is 

available, which I‟m sure they could have some researchers dig 

up for them if they needed to access that. But clearly they have 

not changed their position because there‟s just no other logical 

explanation for their decision making. 

 

Saskatchewan people need more than a self-indulgent, strident 

professions of fiscal certainty against a rising tide of global 

economic recession by a government who promises their 

accounting on shaky economic and revenue assumptions. 

 

Saskatchewan people need a government that can put aside its 

insistence on narrow, economic orthodoxy that leaves people 

behind; a government that puts aside its blind ignorance to the 

problem of climate change. Rather Saskatchewan people and 

government . . . Government has the responsibility to ensure the 

rewards and opportunities of our success are more fairly shared 

with the people of this province. And government must ensure 

that our future remains promising and bright with meaningful 

action, not ideological dithering and mishandling on issues such 

as climate change. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m proud to support the amendment moved by 

the member for Coronation Park, and I will now take my place 

and allow others to enter into the debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. There‟s so much to respond to after that last speech 

that I think it would take all my 20 minutes, but I just find it 

very hypocritical that a person would start commenting on 



March 23, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2421 

vehicles that are driven on that side when you look at some of 

the vehicles driven on the opposition side. And how can she can 

stand in her place and say that it‟s, you know, we are so 

self-righteous and we are so green, when they drive some of the 

vehicles that they do. I mean it‟s always the case, when you live 

in a glass house you shouldn‟t be throwing the stone, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and that‟s exactly what started on that side. 

 

But I would like to start my comments not necessarily 

responding to what they had said, but thanking a number of 

people that I want to thank that have made my last year as 

Minister of Health much easier. I‟m going to start, this past 

year, this past year as the Minister of Health, that — and maybe 

many more, we‟re not sure — have made it so much more 

enjoyable and quite a bit easier. First of all, my constituency 

assistant, Nicole Entner-McCullough who runs the office in 

Balgonie that deals with a number of phone calls that come in 

and deals with the day-to-day business that happens in the 

constituency office, does an absolutely wonderful job; has been 

the constituency assistant for the last year and a half, since the 

‟07 election, and as I said, does a very, very good job. If there‟s 

one area in my life that . . . lots of areas in my life that I don‟t 

have to worry about, but that is definitely one of them — 

dealing with the concerns that come in from the constituency. 

 

I also want to thank a number of all the staff in my minister‟s 

office, as well as many of the people in the ministry. But the 

people within my minister‟s office, within the Minister of 

Health‟s office, would be my chief of staff, Perry, who does an 

absolutely wonderful job; Kim and Susan, who do a great job 

on letters and scheduling — that‟s not an easy job; Jennifer, 

who looks after the public relations; and also Sophie and Angie, 

who . . . Sophie accompanies me on most of the meetings that 

I‟m at, and Angie does a great job on all of the concerns that 

come into our office. She‟s a conduit between the calls coming 

in from the general public to the Ministry of Health and has 

done a great job. I know of a number of compliments that have 

come our way after the work that the whole office as a unit has 

done dealing with those concerns. 

 

[16:00] 

 

I think anybody that has been elected will know that this is not a 

one-person job. It‟s definitely the constituency assistant on the 

constituency level, and caucus staff . . . In my position, it‟s 

ministerial staff that keep my minister‟s office working. And so 

I wanted to thank all of those people, because it has sure made 

it, this year, much easier. Even though there are trying times, as 

any minister would realize, they have made it much easier to 

deal with. 

 

I also, when I talk about the budget, the most recent budget that 

our government read last Wednesday and some of the responses 

that have come in, and listening to the opposition criticize, 

which they have done from their place, there has been a few 

opposition members that will point out some of the good things 

that are in a budget. 

 

There are a few that have just been negative from start to finish 

and I really kind of question that. I can remember being on the 

opposition benches for many years and I don‟t know if there 

was ever a budget that the former government didn‟t introduce 

that there weren‟t positives in it. It may not have been 

everything that I wanted to see and certainly couldn‟t agree with 

it all, but there are always positives in it. 

 

But to hear some of the members opposite talk for 15 to 20 

minutes and not see a positive . . . In fact most of them, when 

they‟ll talk, will say, you know, why isn‟t the spending here? 

We should be spending here and we should be spending there. 

 

And it‟s interesting because, you know, you also hear from 

them many, many times, the opposition, many, many times 

they‟ll talk about the ‟80s and how much trouble the province 

got in through the ‟80s. Well I can tell you that — and I‟m not 

going to speak on other governments and how they‟re able to 

handle their finances — but what happened through the ‟80s is 

the government of the day was certainly running deficit 

budgets, and I remember those days through the deficit budget. 

All the opposition or the NDP Party was asking at that time is 

you needed to spend more, you needed to do this differently, 

you needed to do that differently. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, every province pretty much in 

Canada, including the federal government, are running deficit 

budgets, save for one. So the same mindset of just spend, spend, 

spend coming from the opposition is still there. What has 

changed from the ‟80s is the fiscal management of the province, 

of this Saskatchewan Party government — a fiscal management 

that has put us in a positive position, that‟s put us in a balanced 

budget, that is going to speak volumes in the future as to how 

we come out of the end of this economic downturn. 

 

Because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are in a good position in this 

province. There are challenges with oil and gas absolutely, but 

you will see the prices rising right now — over $52 to $53 a 

barrel today for oil and gas. 

 

Potash sales are set at a high record, but it‟s been interesting 

hearing the debate in the House recently, with the former 

minister of Finance not knowing the difference between sales 

and production and trying to tell people, when the galleries 

were full on budget day, that, boy, we‟d better be worried 

because the potash companies are cutting production, as if that 

is going to have a direct impact on revenue, when perhaps he 

didn‟t know, but he should have known that it‟s potash sales 

that will have the direct impact on revenue, not on the 

production. 

 

And it‟s just, it‟s overwhelming to think that the former 

minister of Finance . . . And all of his colleagues, I guess, 

agreed with that. I haven‟t heard anybody stand up and say that 

their critic of Finance is incorrect. Because he was absolutely 

wrong. 

 

But we are in good position. We‟ve not only delivered a 

balanced budget this budget, but in that process of the first 16 

months, we‟ve been able to pay off 40 per cent of the provincial 

debt. A record payoff of provincial debt never seen before in 

this province, especially in one year; it sets the province up very 

good as we move forward. 

 

Unfortunately again, the former Finance minister, or the 

Finance critic from the opposition had it a little wrong again. 

He was talking about debt increasing. He didn‟t quite 

understand the difference between Crown debt — which when 



2422 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2009 

they were in government was always fine — and general 

revenue debt. Big difference. Big difference, and I‟m not going 

to spend my time educating the former Finance critic the 

difference between Crown debt and general revenue debt. 

 

But I think everyone on that side would say that the general 

revenue debt cut by 40 per cent in one year is record across 

Canada, I would think, and Mr. Speaker, sets the province up 

very well. 

 

As well as debt reduction, we had the biggest tax cut of 

personal tax rates. People are seeing that every day right now as 

they are getting their tax returns. I‟m hearing it in my office — 

I‟d be surprised if they‟re not hearing it in their offices — that 

people are seeing a difference in the personal tax that they‟re 

having to pay. 

 

The other area that is record amount of spending on 

infrastructure, and I‟m going to talk more about infrastructure 

when we talk about health infrastructure, but $1.5 billion 

towards infrastructure. And it‟s been interesting over the last 

couple of, I‟d say couple of months, as we‟ve talked in the 

House and with the accelerated infrastructure spending, I‟ve 

heard not only the Health critic in committee, but also the 

Education critic both admit that the infrastructure was in terrible 

shape; it was decaying in our province. 

 

There was an infrastructure deficit, not only in education, but 

absolutely in health care. And unfortunately over 16 years they 

felt not the need to repair it. In fact when we came to power, I 

think the budget for repairing a $4.4 billion capital investment 

of health care was about $8 million, which was shameful, 

absolutely shameful. That‟s why I was certainly glad in last 

year‟s budget we were able to put a $100 million into repairing 

that infrastructure. 

 

But $1.5 billion into infrastructure that will certainly continue 

the, I think the good times that we‟re seeing in the province. 

We‟re seeing people from across Canada looking at 

Saskatchewan as a place to move to because there are jobs, 

there are opportunity, and this infrastructure spending goes a 

long ways to keeping that ball rolling. 

 

The other area that I was very proud of our government in the 

past year, is to put money away in a growth and fiscal stability 

fund of $2 billion, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It‟s a rock that we can 

build on into the future. It keeps our province in good shape, 

keeps the momentum moving, so that when we come out of this 

economic downturn we‟ll be in extremely good shape, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

What I want to talk about is how this budget, how this 

2009-2010 budget impacts the constituency of Indian 

Head-Milestone. And it has a direct impact on the lives of 

individuals within the constituency that I represent. And the 

first piece that I want to talk about is the property tax, the 

change in education portion of property tax. 

 

I want to first of all thank the member from Rosetown-Elrose 

for the work that he has done over the last year to bring forward 

a report that the Minister of Education, the member from 

Canora-Pelly considered, and looked at the proper direction to 

go on. And I couldn‟t agree more with the findings first of all, 

from the member from Rosetown-Elrose, and then also the 

direction of our government — how we‟ve moved on that 

education portion of property tax that will benefit virtually 

every property tax payer in this province. 

 

And even further than that, even into commercial areas, 

residential areas, Mr. Deputy Speaker, so it‟s going to have a 

huge impact. And the reason why I think this is such an 

important piece is when I was elected in 1999 — as many 

members on this side were elected in that election, 1999 — 

what was happening through rural Saskatchewan through those 

times 10 years ago? What was happening through the year 

1999, 2000, maybe into 2001, were tax revolt meetings in rural 

municipalities throughout the province. Anybody elected at that 

time had the opportunity, as you probably did yourself, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, of attending a few tax revolt meetings. In my 

constituency I think there were six or seven RMs that held tax 

revolt meetings, saying that we‟re fed up, we‟re tired of paying 

the proportion of education property tax that we have to. And 

nothing was done. 

 

The previous government, whether they heard the message and 

chose not to react, or they just chose not to react, because when 

you look at the political makeup of the House at the time, and 

certainly the political makeup of the House since that time, why 

would they start reacting to a rural property tax revolt. It wasn‟t 

in their political interests, Mr. Speaker. Even though the former 

premier could stand at SARM, and the main issue at SARM that 

year was the education portion of property tax, and the former 

premier saying, status quo is not on. They failed to address it. 

 

That‟s why I am so proud. And if there is one reason that I 

would be very surprised at members on the opposition side 

would vote against this budget, it would be the piece around the 

education portion of property tax. How will they rationalize, 

when they go to their constituents, when they go back into the 

communities that they represent or the cities that they represent 

— portions of cities — and say, you know, I really didn‟t like 

the way they did that education portion of property tax. We 

were going to get to it some time. I just don‟t think they worked 

it quite right. It‟s a huge savings for the vast majority of 

property tax owners in the province. 

 

And I‟ll be very glad after the budget debate is finished, and we 

vote on the budget and we see those members, how they vote. If 

they support the budget, I‟ll certainly be glad to compliment 

them. In any of the speeches that I give or the articles that I 

write in my local papers, I‟d be more than glad to compliment 

the members opposite for voting in favour of our budget. 

 

But if they don‟t, if they don‟t, I am going to work as hard as I 

can over the next year to mention that every member on that 

side — 20 members — voted against a property tax cut, voted 

against an issue that has been failed to be dealt with for the last 

16 years of their government. Ten years since I‟ve been elected, 

they‟ve failed to deal with it. They finally have an opportunity 

to support it. They can say that there‟s other things in the 

budget they may not like, but stand and support the biggest 

property tax cut in the province‟s history, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — The other area I want to talk about is 



March 23, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2423 

municipal revenue sharing that has a direct impact into the 

constituency of Indian Head-Milestone. Every community in 

my constituency is certainly going to benefit from this. It makes 

a huge difference because it really does create a predictable 

source of funding for municipalities. 

 

Again, we heard over and over again from many of the 

municipalities around the province, and especially the large 

municipalities — cities like Regina, Saskatoon, Moose Jaw — 

were all asking for predictable revenue sharing. They had a 

predictable revenue-sharing formula many, many years ago. 

 

And unfortunately under the previous government, because of 

financial times, whatever it might have been — and I could 

agree with the tough financial times at the start of their 

administration — they decided to take that predictable funding 

away. The problem is is that they took it away for a few years to 

say that we will, once the province turns around and things get a 

little bit better, we‟ll put back in a formula where you will know 

what your funding will be. 

 

The unfortunate part is after 16 years — took the funding 

formula away in the first couple of years — after 16 years they 

had never replaced it with any sort of predictable funding. So I 

was certainly glad to hear when the Minister of Municipal 

Affairs, the member from Regina South lobbied hard for this to 

be in the budget, saying how important it was from meeting 

with the different . . . SUMA and SARM, and how important 

that was for those municipalities. 

 

And all you have to do is look at some of the third party 

newspaper clippings that have come out since the budget. And 

over and over again we hear, we see many of the community 

leaders, many of the representatives from the various municipal 

governments saying how important it is. Allan Earle, for 

example, says: 

 

So the predictability of it (revenue sharing) is just 

unbelievably good news. Administrators all across the 

province have got to be jumping up and down. 

 

That‟s the type of reviews we‟re receiving from around the 

province from municipal leaders. 

 

And you can go on and talk about what Mayor Don Atchison 

said. “Monumental” is one of the words. “A huge step” 

forward. Very, very positive comments regarding municipal 

sharing and the impact that that‟s going to have in their 

municipalities. 

 

Because every municipality I think, whether it‟s urban — and 

when I say urban, the major centres — whether it‟s a rural 

community, such as Indian Head or Milestone or Vibank, all of 

them are struggling with the same issues, is how do we create 

the infrastructure for the growth that we‟re experiencing? 

Because every rural community is experiencing growth. 

 

I was in Milestone a couple of weeks ago, and I was amazed. I 

think there are seven or eight housing starts this year in 

Milestone which would be more housing starts than in the 10 

years that I‟ve represented that community, in the past 10 years. 

 

And you know it doesn‟t matter which community, whether it‟s 

Vibank, they‟re looking at how they can deal with the growth. 

Certainly more and more people looking for lots and to build, 

and the communities are struggling. For now for these 

communities, these municipalities, to have predictable funding 

as we move forward — 90 per cent of the 1 per cent GST 

[goods and services tax] to be expanded next budget — is 

immense for these municipalities. And that‟s why we‟re hearing 

around the province glowing reviews of the budget. 

 

[16:15] 

 

Again I will ask the opposition. They‟re probably going to stand 

in their place and they‟re going to vote against municipal 

sharing. Which is a really interesting concept, how they could 

represent really pretty much all urban centres except save for 

the two northern seats, but everyone else, as I look at the 

benches across the way, represent city seats, and including the 

member from North Battleford. 

 

So I‟m going to be very interested as he goes back to his 

community and says, you know, sorry. Meets with the council. I 

couldn‟t support revenue sharing, something that you have been 

asking for for the last 16 years. I just still don‟t think it‟s the 

right thing to do. It‟ll be very interesting to see how those 

conversations go. 

 

So with property tax has been a huge piece, both residential and 

agriculture. Municipal sharing is huge for all the communities 

throughout the constituency. 

 

The other piece that I want to talk about that directly affects the 

constituency of Indian Head-Milestone is the whole piece 

around agriculture and the work that my colleague, the Ag 

minister, has done, the member from Melville-Saltcoats, and 

has done just an absolutely wonderful job.  

 

It‟s been interesting because, you know, the Deputy Leader of 

the Opposition sure likes to get on her feet, and she likes to 

really kind of raise the debate and raise the volume. But I‟ve 

really been enjoying it from my seat, as quiet as it has been. 

I‟ve really been enjoying how quiet it has been for the Minister 

of Agriculture. Not really, because I just love when the Minister 

of Agriculture stands in his place and answers the questions and 

comes forward with information that really, really quiets the 

critic down. In fact it‟s quieted her down so much that we 

haven‟t seen her stand in the House since the budget. 

 

It was an interesting question period today, but all the areas to 

go after a government on and they picked one area and one area 

only. Never a word about agriculture, not a word about health 

care, not a word about education, not a word about municipal 

sharing, not a word about education tax. And I think it speaks 

volumes for what they heard over the last five or six days since 

the budget was read, because if they are hearing the same 

responses around their constituency as we were hearing from 

our constituents, I can see why they didn‟t bring those subjects 

forward, because it‟s been very, very, positively received. 

 

But the areas in agriculture that the minister has been working 

on and has benefited all of our government, but will benefit 

producers throughout the province. 

 

Agriculture has been a little quieter recently other than in the 



2424 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2009 

cattle and the hog industry, but the grain land has been doing all 

right. But it‟s not the time to sit still and not make the changes 

that need to be made. If there‟s any time to make changes, it is 

now. And that‟s what we have done through crop insurance 

modifications, excellent changes to crop insurance, as well as 

bringing the administration back to Saskatchewan — I 

shouldn‟t say back — bringing it to Saskatchewan which many 

other provinces have done regarding the CAIS [Canadian 

agricultural income stabilization] program. 

 

Most provinces have administration done within their own 

province that . . . they can deal with their own producers — 

have people from Saskatchewan that know Saskatchewan. I 

mean, some of the questions from producers as they‟d phone 

CAIS and they‟d get a person on the other end of the line that, 

quite frankly, really didn‟t know much about agriculture at all. 

Just didn‟t understand how you could seed a no. 1 wheat and 

get a no. 3 as you combined. How would that work? And so, 

you know, it really was I think frustrating for many, many 

producers. It‟s probably about the same frustration . . . Many 

producers phone when they asked the opposition to carry issues 

forward in agriculture. And the knowledge base isn‟t there in 

the opposition benches. 

 

So there‟s the three areas that are really large in the budget that 

again, when the opposition vote against the budget — which 

most of them said they will do — when they go out into rural 

Saskatchewan and start campaigning for votes in rural 

Saskatchewan, it‟ll be interesting to see how they try and justify 

voting against an agriculture budget that is the biggest 

agriculture budget this province has ever seen, that is 

addressing some of the issues into the future that producers are 

really wanting addressed. And, you know, it‟ll be interesting. 

 

The last area that I want to touch on is health care and some of 

the work that we‟ve been doing in health care, and that is 

translated through this provincial budget — $4.075 billion for 

health care. It‟s a huge budget number, but it services the 

province. It‟s usually the number one issue in most people‟s 

minds. I would say probably the shape of the economy is 

rivalling it for the top billing, but still, even with the economy 

the way it is, most of the polling will show that health care and 

the concerns around health care are paramount, and I don‟t 

think it‟s changed a lot. 

 

There‟s two areas in health care that I want to touch on before I 

take my seat. The two areas are human resources and then 

capital, because I do want to answer the member from North 

Battleford and some of his claims about the Saskatchewan 

Hospital in North Battleford, and what he‟s been saying 

recently — which really are out there, quite frankly. 

 

The first issue is human resources though, and in this first 16 

months I think we‟ve done a pretty darn good job. There‟s still 

work to do, but a pretty darn good job in addressing the 

shortage, whether it‟s the nursing profession, whether it‟s 

physicians or other health care professionals. There‟s still more 

work to be done. 

 

And I want to compliment the Legislative Secretary, the 

member from Regina Qu‟Appelle Valley, on the work that 

she‟s done in her work as far as recruitment and retention. And 

I also want to compliment the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland on the work that she‟s done in addictions and 

looking at the problem of addictions in the province. You know 

we had kind of a symptom of it today in question period, the 

issue around HIV and intravenous drug use and the problems 

that that can cause. 

 

But the issue around, for example, nursing — whether it‟s 

registered nurses, whether it‟s registered psychiatric nurses, 

nurse practitioners, licensed practical nurses — the availability 

and the shortage of all those professions. We have moved, and 

again with the Minister of Post-Secondary Education, we‟ve 

moved on increasing the seat. Because the cure — and it‟s 

maybe not a cure but the solution for a reduced workforce — is 

training more of our own. 

 

And unfortunately we‟ve had a lag. And I won‟t say it‟s been a 

16-year lag, but I‟ll say in the last eight years that our . . . when 

we in opposition talked about the importance of increasing the 

number of training seats. Unfortunately when the NDP were in 

power they chose not to do it, and as a result we have slipped so 

far behind that, yes, we have to increase the number of training 

seats. We‟ve done it, but we have to even do more than that. 

We have to go and recruit not only people that used to work in 

the profession and get them back into the profession, but recruit 

outside of Saskatchewan, across Canada, and outside of 

Canada, really around the world. 

 

The trip to the Philippines has been a very huge success, 

bringing a number of registered nurses back to Saskatchewan 

— over 300 right now. And you know how the member 

opposite said, whose idea was it? You can have all sorts of 

ideas, but if you don‟t act on it, it doesn‟t put one nurse on the 

floor, Mr. Speaker. And they didn‟t act on it unfortunately. And 

we‟ve acted on it, and we‟ve ensured that we‟re starting to 

address some of the human resources shortage. 

 

You know it‟s a little bit like, until you can admit that you‟ve 

got a problem, how are you going to fix it or change it? 

Unfortunately the former government could never bring 

themselves, until maybe the eleventh hour of a dying mandate, 

that they had a human resources shortage. Of course they would 

never address it because they couldn‟t admit to it, Mr. Speaker. 

We‟ve been able to move in that direction in the last 16 months 

and have made some, I think, some significant advancements. 

 

The other area is around position recruitment, and we need to 

do a lot more work in that area. We‟ve started by certainly 

training more of our own Saskatchewan residents. It isn‟t that 

we don‟t have smart enough kids coming out of grade 12 — we 

absolutely do — or coming out of post-secondary. We 

absolutely do. The problem was, is we didn‟t have enough 

training seats. We only had 60 seats for medicine in our 

province when Manitoba had been up to 100 for a number of 

years. The former government did nothing about it. They just 

felt, well we‟ll just have an over-reliance on South Africa, and 

that‟s what they did. 

 

They had . . . No, the former Health minister is saying 

something. 

 

An Hon. Member: — The plan was laid out. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — The plan was laid out. The problem 



March 23, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2425 

was, is that you can have all the plans laid out that you want, 

and you didn‟t act on it. You simply didn‟t act on it. And they 

lay out all these plans, but they don‟t act on it. And it‟s exactly 

what I‟m going to talk about, about the former Health minister 

from North Battleford. He could have all sorts of plans about 

the North Battleford hospital, the provincial hospital. But when 

you don‟t act on it, it doesn‟t do anybody any good. And that‟s 

exactly what that opposition did. 

 

And you know, I want them to keep thinking that they‟ve done 

so much. I want the member from Regina Lakeview to keep 

thinking that he did so much, because he‟ll keep sitting on that 

side for the next 20 years. He hasn‟t realized that they‟ve lost 

the election, and they lost the election because they didn‟t do 

anything about human resources or capital for far too long. And 

he hasn‟t learned his lesson yet. 

 

Position recruitment is huge and we are increasing the number 

of training seats, but it takes a while for those number of 

training seats to pay dividends to the people throughout the 

province. That‟s why . . . I don‟t know if anybody read in the 

paper just recently, a delegation that went to Ireland. We had a 

delegation of health regions; the SMA [Saskatchewan Medical 

Association], the College of Physicians and Surgeons, one 

representative from the Ministry of Health, went over to Ireland 

because we have so many Saskatchewan and Canadians, more 

apt Canadians, about nine or ten Saskatchewan residents are 

taking their medical degree in Ireland — so many in Ireland that 

it would be a great place to recruit back to Canada and a great 

place to recruit back to Saskatchewan. 

 

Here‟s what one of the members . . . The recruitment trip went 

last week and here‟s what one of the students in Trinity College 

in Dublin Medical School, Kelsey Fawcett who is originally 

from Regina, had to say. She said, “I went to the meeting last 

night which was great. Very informative and encouraging as far 

as coming back to Canada to practice.” 

 

That‟s the type of work that our government has done in the 

first 16 months. Reaching out to not only other countries to 

attract health care professionals, but reaching out to other 

countries where our own citizens are taking education — 

whether it is college of medicine, whether it is becoming a 

physician — and inviting them back to Saskatchewan. So we‟re 

moving in the right direction, I think, on many fronts. 

 

Other health care professionals . . . It‟s not just about nurses and 

it‟s not just about doctors. We‟re short of occupational 

therapists, physiotherapists, speech pathologists. We need to 

continue to recruit in all of those areas. And, Mr. Speaker, 

we‟re doing that. 

 

The last area that I wanted to talk about a little bit is capital and 

the decaying infrastructure that we were left after a number of 

years of, really, it was just absolutely a shortage of investment. 

I guess they were going to live off the depreciation of our 

buildings, thinking that some day they would have to be paid 

for. Well that day has come and I‟m very proud of our 

government and the work that it‟s done in investing in an 

infrastructure. 

 

Whether it‟s 152.8 million that went into long-term care 

facilities that were neglected . . . And it was interesting, I 

haven‟t . . . You know, the biggest criticism that we‟ve got from 

the opposition is, but why not Saskatoon or why not other 

jurisdictions? And they‟re absolutely right. When you‟re left 

with such an infrastructure that has decayed so much, it all 

needs to be replaced or a lot of it needs to be replaced. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we‟ve started in 13 communities around the province 

that were absolutely neglected for a number of years. 

 

Whether it‟s in Watrous, the facility in Watrous, that when I 

toured there you had to have . . . and it rained, there was pails 

on the floor catching the drips because the roof was leaking. 

 

Whether it was Rosetown, and you go into Rosetown and see 

level 3 and 4 residents that are in the basement of a facility. 

They‟re in the basement of the hospital. And what really stood 

in my mind is they took me down the elevator. And so we saw 

where these residents were in their very small rooms — some 

cases two or three residents to a room — and we kind of toured 

through there and we went back up. 

 

And it was literally, we had to go back up this spiral staircase 

back up to the main floor, the main floor. And they said, you 

know, our biggest concern is if we ever had a fire down here 

and the elevator was out. Of course, fire regulations say you 

have to have two exits, which they do have two exits. The 

second exit is a spiral staircase out of the basement for level 3 

and 4 patients. You can imagine how well that would work. 

 

Unfortunately, it was never addressed. Fortunately enough now, 

we‟re able to address it and fix up a number of the long-term 

care facilities, including the one that happens to be represented 

by my seatmate, the one in Redvers. I was really interested 

when we were going through estimates — I have to tell this 

story because I know a lot of people listen to estimates, but not 

everybody listens to estimates. And so for the people that didn‟t 

get to listen to estimates, I just want to talk about a little bit 

around Redvers and what happened in Redvers. 

 

Redvers is a community, for those that don‟t know, it‟s real 

close to the Manitoba border. And they were fed up with the 

previous government. They wanted to fix their hospital. It was 

outdated, completely outdated, and they wanted a new hospital. 

 

[16:30] 

 

Well the former government wasn‟t going to move on that new 

hospital, so the community — as rural communities do around 

the province — got to work and they raised a lot of money to 

put their 35 per cent share towards a new hospital, thinking that 

the government would follow through with the 65 per cent. 

Well the government wouldn‟t follow through with the 65 per 

cent. So Redvers continued to fundraise, and they raised 100 

per cent of the money. They built a brand new hospital, just out 

of the fundraising done by the community. 

 

And I was talking about that in estimates, and the former 

associate Health minister, who is now the Health critic, said oh, 

I remember that. I remember going there. I don‟t know if she 

knew all the details around it, but she was questioning why we 

were putting a long-term care facility up in Redvers. And she 

said, because I was there for an opening not very long ago. In 

fact I remember cutting the ribbon on that grand opening. And I 

thought, well isn‟t that interesting. You‟re cutting a ribbon on a 



2426 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2009 

grand opening that your government didn‟t put a cent into, and 

now you‟re questioning why we would be replacing a long-term 

care facility that is antiquated and outdated. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we‟re very proud of that $152.8 million into 

infrastructure, including the facility in Kipling that the 

community‟s been working hard on, and we‟re moving in the 

right direction. There‟s much more to do, not only in long-term 

care, but also in acute care. And that‟s why I was so proud, and 

I was glad to see the, I think, the government benches stand — I 

didn‟t see the opposition benches stand — when the Minister of 

Finance read in his place about a $200 million commitment 

going towards a children‟s hospital in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — The only province in Canada, other 

than Prince Edward Island, that doesn‟t have a children‟s 

hospital. That‟s absolutely a crime, and I‟m certainly glad to see 

our provincial government move on $100 million this budget 

and committed $100 million next budget. Now I want to . . . So 

we‟ve committed to a children‟s hospital $200 million. 

 

I want to contrast that to what we‟ve been hearing from the 

member opposite, the member from North Battleford, who 

stands almost every day — not today — but almost every day in 

his place and talks about a Saskatchewan Hospital, a hospital 

that they had funded, that they had committed money to. And 

for the life of me . . . And I‟ve asked every person that I know 

on the board of Prairie North; I‟ve asked the CEO; I‟ve asked 

every person in that health board: how much money did you get 

for the Saskatchewan Hospital in North Battleford? And the 

answer, bar none, has been, none. They have had no money 

committed to that hospital. 

 

Now the member is going to holler from his seat. The member 

is going to holler from his seat that he has put money away in 

the General Revenue Fund. Well I guarantee you, a month 

before a dying government, you can put whatever commitment 

you want in the General Revenue Fund, because they have no 

ability and no capacity to have to follow through on those 

commitments. 

 

And he‟s going around North Battleford, and he‟s reading 

petition after petition saying that he‟s put money away in the 

General Revenue Fund for a hospital in North Battleford, for a 

provincial hospital, when that is absolutely not true. Because if 

he wanted to commit to a provincial hospital in North 

Battleford, all he had to do was take money out of the General 

Revenue Fund, put it in Prairie North, and say, here is the first 

of two instalments — as we have done to a children‟s hospital. 

But he didn‟t do it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — I can tell you that I‟ve heard more 

from the MLA from Cut Knife-Turtleford as far as what needs 

to be done there and the work that needs to be done there and 

the importance of that facility, than I think the former cabinet 

heard out of . . . Eight years I think the member was here before 

he moved to the opposition benches. Maybe not that long. I can 

guarantee you that I‟ve heard more from our member on this 

side about the need for that facility than that opposition when it 

was in power, when their cabinet did from the member from 

North Battleford. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — He‟s got all the things . . . He can say 

an awful lot about it right now, and he talked about it in his 

reply to the budget. But the bottom line is . . . And I didn‟t say 

there had been no planning money. But he said that we 

committed $54 million to building a hospital in North 

Battleford, and we committed to it in the General Revenue 

Fund. And it‟s absolutely wrong; there was no money moved to 

Prairie North. 

 

Just as we‟ve done, whether it‟s a children‟s hospital, just as 

we‟ve done, whether it‟s a long-term care facility in Redvers, 

whether it‟s a long-term care facility in Prince Albert or 

Kerrobert or any of the 13 . . . The money, when you commit to 

it, when you commit to it, you need to put the money behind 

your commitment. Unfortunately that government, when it was 

in power, never did. 

 

And the member from Cumberland is saying about the 

long-term care facilities, and he‟s pointing out where they‟re at, 

which constituencies they are at. I would ask him to stand in his 

place and tell me: which one does he not support? Which one of 

those long-term care facilities does he not support? Please stand 

in your place and say it. If you‟re going to start pointing fingers, 

stand in your place and tell us, which long-term care facility do 

you not support? 

 

And if you‟ve been through them, should we not replace the 

long-term care facility in Rosetown, where people are actually 

living in a basement? Should we not replace a long-term care 

facility that has antiquated windows and no air conditioning, 

and the temperature hits 40 above in there during the summer? 

Celsius. Are those the ones that we shouldn‟t replace? 

 

Now it‟s interesting that he would start pointing fingers, 

because I can guarantee you that every long-term care facility 

that we are replacing absolutely needs to be replaced, as do 

many others around the province. And give us another number 

of years and we‟ll be replacing those long-term care facilities. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — So, Mr. Speaker, I‟m very glad to 

stand and support a budget that not only deals with capital 

issues in health care, not only deals with human resources 

issues in health care, but deals with some of the challenges in 

Ag, deals with the revenue sharing piece, deals with property 

tax. And those are just the highlights of a much more extensive 

budget, a budget that I am going to be very surprised if the 

members opposite can‟t support, because I sure can. I won‟t be 

supporting the amendment. I will be supporting the budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker . . . 

[inaudible] . . . I‟m very pleased and proud of our Saskatchewan 

Party government‟s second budget. It remains a time of growth 



March 23, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2427 

in our province, Mr. Speaker, even though we are feeling the 

effects of global economic challenges. It is critical that we 

continue to accommodate this growth, to encourage this growth, 

and to stimulate even more growth in a sustainable and 

responsible manner. 

 

Through this budget our government has set the course for a 

strong and steady Saskatchewan. By sticking to our solid 

economic plan, by remaining sound fiscal managers, we will 

stay on course. This budget is also about keeping our promises, 

Mr. Speaker. Our government has now delivered on more than 

100 of its campaign promises. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our new budget is a balanced budget. We may be 

the only province that tables a balanced budget this year. And 

although we have maintained a balanced budget, we were able 

to deliver on major commitments to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

As I have said, Mr. Minister, our Saskatchewan Party 

government continues to deliver on its . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the member from Thunder 

Creek. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I have said, 

Mr. Speaker, our Saskatchewan Party government continues to 

deliver on its promises, having now delivered on more than 100 

of our party‟s campaign promises. 

 

What I find most encouraging is that our people across 

Saskatchewan continue to exude confidence and remain 

optimistic about our future. Surveys, questionnaires, and polls 

continue to show that we are the most optimistic and confident 

province in the country. 

 

We will stay strong and steady through meaningful tax 

reductions like the largest education property tax cut in 

Saskatchewan‟s history. We will stay strong and steady through 

meaningful infrastructure projects which keep our province 

working and keep our economy moving forward. This 

government has now invested more than $2.5 billion in our 

highways, schools, hospitals, and other infrastructure to help 

our province move forward. And we will remain strong and 

steady through meaningful investments in Saskatchewan people 

and families and students and children and seniors and First 

Nations and Métis, in those from rural and urban Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this represents the first full budget for Enterprise 

Saskatchewan. Enterprise Saskatchewan has been working 

tirelessly to move the economic development mandate forward 

despite the current global economic concerns that have touched 

Saskatchewan. And I thank everyone at Enterprise 

Saskatchewan for their hard work and for their help in moving 

our economy forward. No agency of government has 

experienced as much change in 15 months, and no staff has 

displayed more commitment to the economy and the people of 

Saskatchewan. And I sincerely thank them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Our province is resilient and diversified and is one of the few 

places in the world that enjoys a positive economic situation, a 

positive future forecast, and more than a positive outlook 

overall for our province and our people. In fact last week we 

received more great news from Stats Canada reporting that 

Saskatchewan is number one in the country in three important 

economic categories: wholesale trade, retail sales, and new 

vehicle sales. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the key highlights for Enterprise Saskatchewan in 

this budget include $5.3 million to the enterprise regions 

program. This is a renewed approach to regional economic 

development that replaces the regional economic development 

authorities. 

 

Economic growth in Saskatchewan will be further stimulated by 

a $5.1 million investment in the Western Economic Partnership 

Agreement — or WEPA, Mr. Speaker — a federal-provincial 

partnership that helps our province strengthen its key sectors 

and provides businesses with . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I find it grossly unfair that the member 

who is speaking does not have the respect of his own members. 

I recognize the member from Thunder Creek. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — WEPA, Mr. Speaker, a 

federal-provincial partnership that helps our province 

strengthen its key sectors and provides businesses with more 

tools to succeed in the knowledge-driven global marketplace. 

The Strategic Investment Fund will receive $3.8 million to 

support initiatives such as research capacity, the development of 

innovative products and processes, and other projects of 

strategic economic importance. 

 

Communities and workers negatively affected by international 

economic volatility will be assisted by $8.4 million in funding 

through the federally funded Community Development Trust 

Fund, Mr. Speaker. This budget will support our enterprise 

region sector teams and strategic issues councils. We will, 

through out sector teams and issues councils, identify, develop, 

and monitor competitive advantages and disadvantages in each 

sector. They will prescribe action, remove barriers to growth, 

and facilitate stronger economic planning by accommodating 

increased leadership and partnerships. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I thank all of the women and men who are 

generously contributing their talents and valuable time to the 

sector teams, issues councils, and enterprise regions to help 

make Saskatchewan a better place to live. Moving forward on 

the economic development front would not be possible without 

their participation, contribution, and sacrifice. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is working towards the 

establishment of Innovation Saskatchewan to build an 

innovation-driven economy in our province. Like Enterprise 

Saskatchewan, Innovation Saskatchewan will bring together 

government, industry, and key stakeholders. There will be an 

exciting opportunity to integrate Innovation Saskatchewan‟s 

work of improved research and development, 

commercialization, and productivity into the practical world of 

Enterprise Saskatchewan‟s economic development strategy. 

 

Consultations will continue with the innovation community and 

provincial stakeholders. One of these events is the innovation 

summit planned for this spring where additional input will be 

received and used to ensure of a most informed structure and 

focus for the newest agency of government. One of the new 



2428 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2009 

agency‟s important functions will be to improve the link 

between the research, development, and commercialization of 

new ideas and technology. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the uranium development partnership is expected 

to deliver its final report later this month. I look forward to its 

recommendations. Our government is committed to exploring 

the possibilities available for uranium development and 

value-added opportunities. We will be moving ahead with 

public consultations and information gathering in order to arrive 

at a decision that is environmentally sustainable and benefits the 

people of Saskatchewan and our businesses. This year we‟ll see 

progress never before witnessed in our province on this very 

important and timely issue, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[16:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m very pleased with the Enterprise 

Saskatchewan board and the work it has accomplished over the 

past number of months. The board has made a significant 

contribution to key items in our budget. I thank each member of 

the board for their valuable contribution. 

 

The Enterprise Saskatchewan board recommended a more 

competitive tax environment, Mr. Speaker, and in this budget 

we see the largest education property tax cut in Saskatchewan‟s 

history. The highest priority and further tax reform in our 

province, Enterprise Saskatchewan will continue to look at both 

personal and corporate income tax reform. 

 

The importance of the innovation climate was highlighted in 

this budget, with a fully refundable research and development 

tax credit. This will help with cash flow for innovation start-ups 

and new commercial innovation. This will also help create one 

of the most competitive research and development tax credit 

systems in Canada. 

 

There are numerous key infrastructure projects in the budget, 

from upgrading of key economic corridors through the Ministry 

of Highways to the critical innovation packages such as 

InterVac at the University of Saskatchewan. The Enterprise 

Saskatchewan board input on this achievement has been 

significant. 

 

The northern enterprise regions initiative comes out of a 

recommendation of Enterprise Saskatchewan board to support 

economic development in the northern part of our province. 

Harmonization of the federally sponsored, labour sponsored 

venture capital corporation rates will bring the federal and 

provincial funds to similar levels, another initiative 

recommended by the board. I thank all members of the 

Enterprise Saskatchewan board for their continued excellent 

work and dedication to the job at hand. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Enterprise Saskatchewan is moving forward in its 

mandate to enhance economic development in the province. To 

that end, a review of the current structure has identified a need 

to streamline and refocus the mandate of the Saskatchewan 

Labour Market Commission. We will soon move from having a 

commission that has complete operational functions including 

staffing and administration of programs to a labour market 

issues council. This will allow a more focused policy advisory 

board to review and address labour market issues in our 

province. This will leave the operational side to business, 

industry, and other organizations such as the enterprise regions. 

 

The changes will allow Enterprise Saskatchewan to continue in 

a lean, nimble, and advisory capacity with its issues councils, 

while still addressing the labour market challenges in 

Saskatchewan and at substantially less cost to our taxpayers. 

 

I also note that the changes come at a pivotal point. The Labour 

Market Commission should be congratulated on achieving near 

completion of a comprehensive labour market strategy. Its key 

goal has been fulfilled and follow-up work will now continue 

through other processes and partnerships. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of this government‟s highest priorities is 

getting the word out far and wide that Saskatchewan is the best 

place to live, work, operate a business, and invest. We have 

everything the world wants. We always did have everything the 

world wants but the former NDP government didn‟t get around 

to telling anybody about it, and the opportunities for our 

province are overwhelming now. Our Premier has done a 

tremendous job of communicating our message to the world and 

we must continue to do this. This budget sends the message to 

everyone across our nation, North America, and the world, that 

Saskatchewan is open for business finally, and it is the best 

place in the world to do business. 

 

Mr. Speaker, 2009-10 will prove to be a very busy and 

challenging fiscal year. However it is also full of promise and 

optimism. Enterprise Saskatchewan will be at the forefront of 

that activity and promoting the further growth of our great 

province. I look forward to a full and prosperous year for 

Saskatchewan. I also look forward to supporting this budget 

which sets the course for a strong and steady Saskatchewan. 

Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the budget and 

not supporting the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m very 

pleased this afternoon to stand and enter into the budget debate. 

Mr. Speaker, this budget is a budget that sees a 12.4 per cent 

increase year over year in expenditure, Mr. Speaker, and with a 

budget that has that great of increase in expenditure, Mr. 

Speaker, there are many things that the people of this province 

are going to like. And you can expect that people are going to 

like a budget that sees that great of expenditure year over year. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, one of the key issues about a budget is, is it 

built on a solid foundation? Is that budget built on assumptions 

and revenue projections, Mr. Speaker, and on a solid foundation 

so that the people of this province can have confidence that that 

expenditure is sustainable over time? 

 

Mr. Speaker, this particular budget, although it is a budget that 

addresses many needs of the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan — and I‟ll acknowledge that — but, Mr. 

Speaker, the real question is, is this budget affordable? Is this 

budget sustainable, Mr. Speaker, and does it truly meet the 

needs of the people of the province of Saskatchewan? And, Mr. 



March 23, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2429 

Speaker, that is the real question of this budget. 

 

Of course, if you‟re getting property tax relief and you‟re 

getting expenditures in a number of areas, people are going to 

like that. But, Mr. Speaker, at this time can we afford a 12.4 per 

cent increase year over year, and is it sustainable? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about a number of things, a number 

of assumptions, and a number of conclusions that this budget 

draws. Mr. Speaker, to start with, I‟d like to talk about the fact 

that the assumptions made on economic growth and growth in 

GDP within our province is far, far higher — the projection 

made by the government — than any of the independent raters, 

Mr. Speaker. As an example, Mr. Speaker, the government‟s 

assumption is for 2.1 per cent growth in GDP next year, Mr. 

Speaker, and not a single, not a single independent agency gives 

anywhere near that rate of growth, Mr. Speaker — not 

anywhere near that rate of growth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the private sector average for economic growth for 

the province of Saskatchewan in 2009-10 is point six three, Mr. 

Speaker, point six three. And the government is saying that 

they‟re going to have an economic growth in GDP of 2.1 per 

cent. Mr. Speaker, never have I seen projections so different, so 

different, Mr. Speaker. I have never seen projections so 

different from those in the private sector analysts, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, that brings into question the foundation on 

which this budget was established. Mr. Speaker, there are also 

many other things that raise concerns about this budget for the 

people of Saskatchewan, and for those of us who are, by our 

responsibility, to ensure that we make sure that the government 

is looking at all their options and all their responsibilities when 

they‟re putting forward a budget, Mr. Speaker, and that they‟re 

accountable to the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in this budget we see an overall increase in 

debt, an overall increase in debt of $922 million. Mr. Speaker, 

the people of the province of Saskatchewan are seeing the debt 

go up this year by $922 million. Now, Mr. Speaker, you can say 

that it — because it‟s in the Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker, 

and it‟s not GRF [General Revenue Fund] debt — that it 

doesn‟t matter. But the total debt, the total debt in the province 

of Saskatchewan is going up $922 million, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that raises curious concern because it has been 

many, many years since we‟ve seen that level of debt increase. 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s more than 14 years since we‟ve seen that level 

of debt increase in a single year — $922 million. Mr. Speaker, 

is this budget sustainable? That‟s the question the people of this 

province need to ask. With an increase of $922 million, does 

that not raise alarm bells? Does that not bring concerns for the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I say it does. I say this budget needs to be 

looked at very, very carefully, and we need to examine very 

carefully the foundation on which this budget was built. And 

can we carry on? Is it sustainable, long term? And that‟s what 

the people of this province need to understand, and that‟s what 

they need to examine out of this budget. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are seeing for the first time, 

debt-to-GDP going up for the first time in 14 years. The 

debt-to-GDP ratio in Saskatchewan is going up. Mr. Speaker, 

we have not seen that for 14 years, the debt-to-GDP ratio going 

up. And what does the government say about that? What are 

they telling the people of Saskatchewan? And do they know, do 

the people of Saskatchewan know for the first time in 14 years, 

the debt-to-GDP ratio is actually going up? 

 

Mr. Speaker, those are key things. These are key building 

blocks in the foundation of a budget. And they know their debt 

is going up. They know their debt-to-GDP ratio‟s going up, Mr. 

Speaker, and they know that this budget is on a shaky 

foundation. And is it sustainable long term? 

 

I want to take a few minutes to talk about a couple of key 

issues, Mr. Speaker, that are outlined in this budget. Mr. 

Speaker, as I indicated earlier, total debt is going up, that over a 

four-year period total debt‟s going up 36.25 per cent, Mr. 

Speaker, by the government‟s own projections in their budget 

document. Over four years — over four years, Mr. Speaker — 

government debt‟s going up 36.25 per cent. A huge increase in 

debt. And each of those years we see an increase in 

debt-to-GDP ratio, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, leaves those of us in the opposition and the 

general public, Mr. Speaker, asking if this budget is built on a 

solid foundation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now there is, you know, without doubt, Mr. Speaker, extensive 

spending in this budget. But is it too much? Is it sustainable? 

 

Mr. Speaker, we hear the members opposite, the government 

saying that they‟re going to get their budget expenditures in 

line, and by the fourth year of their term that it‟s going to be no 

greater than 3 per cent. Mr. Speaker, we have the Finance 

minister saying, by the fourth year of his term expenditures are 

going to be no greater than 3 per cent. Well, Mr. Speaker, with 

12 per cent on top of over 10 per cent in a two-year period, Mr. 

Speaker, it‟s not achievable. How are they going to do that? 

Where‟s their road map to go to get there, Mr. Speaker? It‟s not 

here. It‟s not before us. So is this budget sustainable? That is 

the fundamental question that needs to be asked. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out something to the 

members of the general public as well. We see in this budget for 

the first time in many years a decrease in health spending as a 

percentage of overall budget. Mr. Speaker, we see a decrease in 

health spending as a per cent of overall budget, Mr. Speaker, a 

drop from 44 to 39; a 5 per cent drop in spending in health as 

the percentage of the total budget, Mr. Speaker. That is 

something that we have not seen in many years. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, is this budget what the people of the province 

of Saskatchewan need? Is it what they want? Is it sustainable, 

Mr. Speaker? Those are the questions, those are the questions 

that we in the opposition have. Those are the questions we hear 

in the general public, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And for those very reasons, that this foundation on which this 

budget was built is not sustainable, Mr. Speaker, I am going to 

support the amendment, Mr. Speaker, and not the primary 

motion. Thank you. 

 

 



2430 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2009 

The Speaker: — Being near 5 p.m. this Assembly will recess 

until 7 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly recessed until 19:00.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2397 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2397 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2397 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2397 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2397 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2398 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2398 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2398 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2398 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2398 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2398 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2399 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2399 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2399 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2399 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2399 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Week of Solidarity Against Racism 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2399 

 Yorkton Film Festival 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2400 

 Radiothon for Neonatal Intensive Care Unit 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2400 

 Saskatoon Student Tae Kwon Do Champion 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2400 

 Water Challenges in Saskatchewan 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2400 

 Understanding of Potash Revenues 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2401 

 Prince Albert Native Decorated 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2401 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Support for First Nations and Métis People 

  McCall ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2401, 2405 

  Draude ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2402, 2406 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2403 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2405 

 Consultations with First Nations and Métis People 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2403 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2403 

 Support for Northern Development 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2404 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2404 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 SaskPower Capital Spending 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2406 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2407 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2408 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2411 

  LeClerc .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2413 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2417 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2420 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2426 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2428 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 


