




















































Hansard: March 10, 2009


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 30A  TUESDAY, MARCH 10, 2009, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2195 

 March 10, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce to 

you and through you to all the members of the House a group of 

26 grade 7 students that are seated in your east gallery. And 

they’re from the Henry Braun School in my constituency, and 

they are accompanied here today by their teacher, Caitlyn 

Vancise. 

 

And they have a pretty hectic schedule. They’re going to take in 

part of the proceedings of the House here. Then they’re going to 

tour the legislature. Then we’ll meet later for a photo and some 

refreshments, and I think some, probably some very tough 

questions. So I ask all members to offer a very warm welcome 

to our future leaders of this province. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you I’d like to introduce my son, Markus Zacharius Wilson. 

And he’s in pre-dentistry at the University of Saskatchewan. So 

I’d like you to give a warm welcome, please. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you and to all members in the 

House today Terry Baker who’s in your west gallery. 

 

Terry became a Sask Wheat Pool delegate in ’98 and became 

chairman of the board in 2004. Terry stepped down as Chair in 

April 2008 but has stayed on as a board of directors. Terry 

operates a mixed farm at Denzil and serves as Chair of the 

Canadian Centre for Health and Safety in Agriculture, 

Vice-Chair for the Crop Nutrients Council, and sits on the 

Agrivita and the Saskatchewan Health Research Foundation 

boards. 

 

He’s in the west gallery, sitting with his son, Cam. And I invite 

all members to welcome him to his legislature today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It gives 

me great pleasure to welcome a very special guest in your 

gallery. It’s none other than the world famous Gary Tinker, the 

namesake of the Gary Tinker Federation, and it gives me great 

pleasure to introduce him to the Assembly. I’ll ask all members 

to welcome a very special guest in Gary Tinker of Pinehouse 

Lake, Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Southeast, Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — In the west gallery, I would like to 

introduce to you and through you to all members, Al Thomarat, 

who is Chair of the SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 

Science and Technology] board, active in the new Home 

Builders’ Association, well known in Saskatoon, and been a 

friend of the province for a long time. I would ask that all 

members join in welcoming Al Thomarat to the legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for wage equity for CBO 

[community-based organization] workers. We know these folks 

do important work in our communities right throughout the 

province. I would like to read their prayer. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the development and 

implementation of a multi-year funding plan to ensure that 

CBO workers achieve wage equity with employees who 

perform work of equal value in government departments. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And these souls come from the following communities: 

Weyburn, Estevan, Vonda, Saskatoon, and Regina. Thank you 

very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to present 

a petition on behalf of the residents of Duck Lake who are 

looking for an assistance from the government and would seek 

that the rural areas are looked after as well, as not just 

concentrating on the urban areas. So the prayer reads as such: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to financially assist the town of Duck Lake 

residents for the good of their health and safety, due to the 

exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency, and that this government fulfills its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 



2196 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2009 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And again as I said, Mr. Speaker, these are signed by the good 

residents of Duck Lake. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition today in support of a new Saskatchewan 

Hospital. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners recognize that in 2006 the 

Government of Saskatchewan committed funds and resources to 

the development and construction of a new Saskatchewan 

Hospital at North Battleford. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners ask: 

 

. . . that the Legislative Assembly call upon the 

Government of Saskatchewan to immediately recommit 

funds and resources for the continued development and 

construction of a new Saskatchewan Hospital at North 

Battleford and provide the Prairie North Regional Health 

Authority with the authority necessary to complete this 

essential and much-needed project. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petitioners come from the constituency of The 

Battlefords. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition in support of expansion of the graduate 

retention program. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately expand the graduate retention 

program to include master’s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are from 

the University of Regina, the University of Saskatchewan, as 

well as a number of health care professionals working in the 

province who hold graduate degrees. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions in support of needed expansion of child care 

here in Saskatchewan, and specifically Estevan. The prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately add at least 2,000 new child 

care spaces in Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by good folks and concerned citizens 

down in Estevan, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Community Effort on Behalf of Landis School 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to say that due 

to a number of positive economic developments in and around 

the community of Landis, in addition to the hard work of the 

Landis school review committee, the Sun West School Division 

has decided to keep Landis School open for at least the next two 

years. This two-year grace period allows the community to 

work towards increasing the student enrolment in the school 

which is expected to benefit from new opportunities within the 

community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as you know, Landis is located within the 

constituency of Biggar and has recently seen some promising 

developments that would indicate the community has the 

potential for growth in the very near future. With the Palo mine 

set to reopen and the newly formed Landis and District 

Chamber of Commerce, the community is expected to see a 

number of additional employment, business, and manufacturing 

prospects in the coming days and months. 

 

I would like to take this opportunity to thank those individuals 

and groups that have, through their dedication and hard work, 

given the community of Landis the chance to keep their school. 

The citizens of Landis, the Landis school review committee, 

and the Sun West School Division deserve our gratitude for 

putting in so much time and effort to maintain this vital centre 

of learning located within the community. The people of the 

community and all those involved have demonstrated how 

committed they are to keeping Landis a viable and vibrant 

prairie town for many years to come. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Couple Honoured at Prince Albert Winter Festival 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 

year was the 45th year of the Prince Albert Winter Festival. The 

festival ran from February 11 to 22. It’s one of the longest 

running festivals in Western Canada. 

 

As is customary, the first day of the festival was devoted to 

announcing this year’s Mr. and Mrs. Winter Festival. Each year 

a deserving couple is chosen to honour their years of service to 

Prince Albert and area. They are present at almost all of the 

activities and visit clubs, nursing homes, and child care centres. 

 

This year’s Mr. and Mrs. Winter Festival were Arnold and 

Merle Chester. The Chesters have been involved with the 

winter festival since it started 45 years ago. Arnold was the 

winter festival director for many years, and each year both 



March 10, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2197 

Arnold and Merle have volunteered many hours to the festival. 

Their dedication and contribution have helped ensure the 

success of the winter festival each year. 

 

Arnold and Merle were very surprised and honoured to have 

been chosen. They were a most deserving, if not humble, 

couple. On Sunday, February 15, a tea was held in their honour 

at the Heritage Centre. Many people attended to congratulate 

the Chesters. There was old-time fiddling, bagpipes, and plenty 

of good cheer and laughter. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join with me in 

congratulating this year’s Prince Albert Mr. and Mrs. Winter 

Festival, Arnold and Merle Chester. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Cumberland Regional College Scholarships 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, it was my pleasure to attend a 

Cumberland Regional College scholarship ceremony in 

Nipawin last weekend, last Friday. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the regional college system we have in 

Saskatchewan is a fantastic tool for improving the education of 

our citizens. Allowing this to happen in their own backyard not 

only saves the students money, but also gets rid of the hesitancy 

of moving to a strange and unfamiliar place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, of course none of this could happen if it wasn’t for 

the support of the Cumberland College staff, the community, 

and the government. One of the ways to help these students is 

through scholarships. There was a total of $46,700 in 

scholarships handed out at this ceremony: 34,300 from 

businesses and individuals, and 12,400 from our own Ministry 

of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. I was 

pleased to hand out a total of 13 scholarships from this ministry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there was a bit of humour there. Each of the 

students I presented a scholarship to invariably thanked me by 

name, rather than the minister — so much for the member from 

Saskatoon Greystone. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am proud of Cumberland Regional College and 

its scholarship recipients. I ask all members to join me in 

showing our appreciation for a job well done. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

SaskTel Classic Challenge Cup Race 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, on February 28 I had the great 

pleasure to be asked to participate as team coach for the 

Mission Ridge Winter Park third annual SaskTel Classic 

Challenge Cup race. This ski and snowboard race is a fundraiser 

to benefit the Regina Ski Club alpine adaptive ski program. 

Various businesses and organizations from Regina and 

surrounding area entered teams into the race which consisted of 

five racers, one of which must be an adaptive skier, and a ski 

instructor acting as a coach. 

 

The registration for the race included a ski lesson, as not all 

entrants are experienced skiers. The team that I was assigned to 

was the MEDIchair team which consisted of Venessa Farago, 

Aaron Olson, Rollie Stolz, Jenny Billett, and Marie Wright. 

Marie was our adaptive skier and truly inspired our team to not 

only race well, but she was also determined to win the award 

for the best team spirit. 

 

Our team fared very well, Mr. Speaker, and qualified as one of 

the top four teams which took us to the championship race. 

There were 13 teams that entered the race, and first place went 

to the team from KPMG, second place to Redhead Equipment, 

and third place to URO Medical Supplies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Regina Ski Club alpine adaptive ski program 

functions entirely with the help of dedicated volunteers under 

the direction of two extraordinary volunteers by the names of 

Mark Catterall and Gord Poulten. I would like to ask all my 

colleagues to join me in recognizing the amazing efforts of both 

the organizers and participants for providing us with such a fun 

day of sport and camaraderie, and supporting a program that 

assists people with all types of disabilities to enjoy the 

possibility of learning to ski. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Women in Policing 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past Sunday 

was the International Women’s Day. Therefore I’d like to share 

with this House a story of two very, very special women. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Inspector Shelley Ballard of the Saskatoon Police 

Service is the first commissioned officer to be promoted in that 

police service, and Sergeant Joanne Balint is a pioneer who 

helped pave the way for women in policing. 

 

In 1973 Saskatchewan police service hired the province’s first 

female officer, Joanne Balint. Joanne graduated from police 

college less than 40 years ago, and upon graduation she was 

given a black skirt, a pale blue polyester blouse, a badge — 

which the shirt wouldn’t hold — and a .38 revolver, a pair of 

handcuffs, a purse to put them in, and a really cute pillbox cap. 

Sergeant Balint retired in 2003 after 30 years of service, and she 

truly paved the way. 

 

Inspector Shelley Ballard was hired in 1987. She presently has 

22 years of service, and has served in patrol, bikes, headquarters 

division, and prior to her promotion she was a watch 

commander. Shelley is truly a leader, and she is very fit and 

knowledgeable. I congratulate her on her promotion, as well as 

Sergeant Balint for leading the way. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[13:45] 



2198 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2009 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Proposed Child Care Facility in Saskatoon 

 

Mr. Quennell: — The Greater Saskatoon Catholic School 

Board is working with community partners located near the St. 

Michael Community School on 33rd Street in Saskatoon to 

establish a 50-seat child care facility at the school. Partners 

include the SIAST campus across the street, the nearby Tim 

Hortons, and the Airliner Hotel. Parents served by the school, 

parents who are studying at SIAST, and parents employed at 

local businesses are all in need of quality and accessible child 

care. 

 

And educators in Saskatoon are not the only people aware of 

the value of early learning opportunities that can be made 

available at school-based child care. Long-term studies of the 

first early education programs such as Head Start show 

beneficial effects well into adulthood for those fortunate enough 

to have participated. These include a higher participation rate in 

the workforce, higher incomes, and markedly lower chance of 

being involved in criminal activity and substance abuse. 

 

The child care spaces at St. Michael are needed for the present 

and for the future. However, the school-based child care will 

not be possible without renovations and expansions to St. 

Michael Community School. We all need to understand that 

infrastructure is not all about highways and bridges; it’s also 

about schools and child care. 

 

The plans to build a modern child care facility and make St. 

Michael’s School safer for all its students are prepared. All that 

is needed is for the Government of Saskatchewan to join the 

partnership. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose. 

 

Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities 

Annual Convention 

 

Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, delegates 

from municipalities across Saskatchewan have gathered in 

Saskatoon for the next three days. Approximately 2,000 people 

from across the province are attending the annual convention of 

the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities. SARM 

is the voice of rural Saskatchewan. 

 

One of the unique aspects about SARM, Mr. Speaker, is that 

membership is voluntary. And all RMs [rural municipality] 

belong. Those municipalities don’t have to belong to SARM, 

Mr. Speaker; they want to. I was at the convention this morning 

and the Minister of Crown Corporations gave a great 

presentation that was very well received. Later today the 

ministers of Agriculture and Municipal Affairs will also address 

the delegates. Tomorrow morning the Premier will do the same. 

I had numerous people tell me, Mr. Speaker, how much they are 

looking forward to hearing from our Premier. 

 

Our government has a lot in common with SARM. On their 

association’s web page, you will find their vision. It reads, “By 

being the rural voice, SARM will effectively lead autonomous 

municipalities in creating a vibrant, diverse economy resulting 

in a strong, sustainable Saskatchewan.” 

 

A strong and sustainable Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Our 

government is also committed to building a strong 

Saskatchewan and looks forward to working with the member 

municipalities of SARM. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

The Traffic Safety Amendment Act 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill 72, the 

highway traffic Act, was scheduled to be in front of a House 

committee this afternoon. We have a lot of questions about this 

Bill. This Bill was to create an enhanced identity document for 

all Saskatchewan travellers to carry. This issue has raised 

significant concerns from the Information and Privacy 

Commissioner of Saskatchewan. 

 

According to the Privacy Commissioner’s report that was tabled 

in this House yesterday, this Bill raises “significant privacy 

issues” and it is a “particularly troubling” piece of legislation. 

 

To the Minister of Highways: why was the government so 

willing to put the privacy of the people of Saskatchewan at risk? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill 72 is 

indeed an important piece of legislation that’ll be coming before 

this House. It deals with enhanced drivers’ licences and 

enhanced identification cards. It’s something that SGI 

[Saskatchewan Government Insurance] and the Government of 

Saskatchewan, as all jurisdictions in Canada, are working with 

the Government of Canada and Homeland Security to ensure 

that there can be safe and easy passage across boundaries on the 

ground, going forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we continue to work with the Privacy 

Commissioner. He has said that he has additional concerns. We 

will be addressing those concerns and bringing that legislation 

back before the House once those concerns are satisfied. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, to quote again from the Privacy 

Commissioner: “This [Act] leaves the personal information of 

Saskatchewan residents that may be collected, used or disclosed 

. . . at an unacceptable level of risk.” This is not the NDP [New 



March 10, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2199 

Democratic Party] saying an unacceptable level of risk, Mr. 

Speaker. This is an independent officer of the legislature. He 

claims that “. . . Bill 72 appears to be silent on the privacy 

invasive technology that is part of the . . . specifications.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, when somebody asked the minister . . . The 

question the Privacy Commissioner is asking: why was he 

putting the privacy of the people of Saskatchewan at an 

unacceptable level of risk? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, once again for the 

member opposite, SGI continues to work, as all provinces are, 

with the Government of Canada to satisfy the Department of 

Homeland Security’s qualifications for road passage into the 

United States of America. In order to do that, Homeland 

Security has determined that there has to be a radio-emitting 

diode in the card itself that will enable that passage to work in a 

smooth and efficient manner. 

 

Every province in Canada right now is looking at how they can 

comply with that. As recently as last week, I chatted with the 

minister responsible from the province of Manitoba and the 

minister responsible from the province of Alberta. We’re 

looking at best practices and how to do that. 

 

We continue to confer with the Privacy Commissioner. We’ll 

continue to do that. He has raised some new concerns and they 

need to be addressed. It will be done in an efficient manner, and 

it will be done so in a fashion where Saskatchewan people can 

be assured that their government and SGI is at the forefront. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Of course the Manitoba legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, has safeguards the Privacy Commissioner commends, 

which this legislation does not. This is typical, what we’ve 

come to expect from this government — secrecy and 

non-disclosure. 

 

The Privacy Commissioner requested and says that he was 

assured by the Sask Party government that there would be a 

comprehensive privacy impact assessment, but as of March 5 of 

this year, the privacy impact assessment has not been done. 

 

To the minister: why did the Saskatchewan Party government 

tell the Privacy Commissioner there would be a review when 

clearly the government had no intention of completing such a 

review? What is the government trying to hide? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, SGI, from day one, 

has made a commitment to work with the Privacy 

Commissioner. That commitment was made then. The 

commitment stands today. Legislation has been put forward. 

Legislation will be amended, if necessary, to ensure that those 

concerns . . . 

 

It’s an ongoing process, Mr. Speaker. It’s something that all 

jurisdictions in Canada are facing right now and are taking 

different approaches. We’re looking at best practices. We 

certainly want any input that is possible from the Privacy 

Commissioner. 

 

I also want to tell the House, Mr. Speaker, that the enhanced 

driver’s licence and the enhanced identification card will be 

voluntary. It will be up to individuals. We encourage them, we 

encourage people in Saskatchewan to get a passport because a 

passport would be something that would cover land travel, air 

travel, and travel to other jurisdictions. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, the minister is correct. The 

government did make a commitment to have the privacy 

review. They just did not live up to the commitment. Mr. 

Speaker, secrecy, non-disclosure, refusing to have a privacy 

review which the minister says the government committed to 

do, these are not the actions of an open and transparent 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Privacy Commissioner makes one final plea to 

this government. He calls for public comment and public 

consultation on this Bill. This Bill needs public input. Will the 

minister commit today to allow public hearings on this Bill, or 

will he try to ram this legislation down the throats of the people 

of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, we’re open to public 

consultation. Public consultation is not a problem. I remind the 

member opposite that this is going on in every jurisdiction. 

Privacy commissioners are working with governments, trying to 

ensure that they meet the deadlines that are imposed by the 

Department of Homeland Security. The deadline, for the 

members opposite, is June 1, and we want to ensure that if at all 

possible that Saskatchewan residents are able to have a card that 

will enable them to do that. It’s looking less and less likely 

because of the extreme time frame that things are being under 

right now. 

 

But I can assure you that this government and SGI will continue 

to work with the Privacy Commissioner. I am told that he has 

brought forward some legitimate concerns. Each one will be 

analyzed and addressed, and before the legislation is put 

forward we will ensure that they are taken into consideration. 

It’s the responsible thing to do and that’s what will be done. 

 



2200 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2009 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Before we move to the next questioner, I have 

been hearing a fair bit of kibitzing back and forth, and more so 

from the opposition when the minister is trying to respond to 

the question. I would ask for a little more respect from 

members. I recognize the member from Regina Walsh Acres. 

 

Drinking Water for Duck Lake 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

yesterday in this legislature we had some very serious questions 

about providing safe, clean, and affordable water to the people 

of Duck Lake. While 11 people were getting their water cut off, 

the members opposite laughed amongst themselves, passed the 

buck between the Minister for SaskWater and the Minister for 

Environment, and then tried to blame it all on the town. Later 

they trotted out the Minister of Municipal Affairs to do a song 

and dance number about infrastructure programs for which the 

town doesn’t qualify. 

 

To the Minister of Municipal Affairs: when will the Sask Party 

stop passing the buck and take action to provide seniors and 

families in Duck Lake with safe, clean, and affordable drinking 

water? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Government. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, from my very first day as Minister for Municipal 

Affairs, my goal has been to work with our municipalities in a 

true, strong, and respectful government-to-government 

relationship, something which has never existed in the past. 

 

This recognizes that municipalities have the right, as well as the 

responsibility, to make choices about how they will manage 

their own affairs. I am well aware that many of Saskatchewan’s 

municipalities, including Duck Lake, have serious infrastructure 

needs. There were, in fact, 244 applications for the very first 

intake of the Building Canada program. 

 

We provide municipalities with information to help them make 

appropriate decisions. I know that the Saskatchewan Municipal 

Board has helped Duck Lake analyze borrowing options. And 

within the scope of our Municipal Affairs programs, we assist 

them with funding. 

 

Duck Lake received the maximum grant under the old MRIF 

[Municipal Rural Infrastructure Fund] program of $500,000, 

along with unconditional infrastructure funding, and we will 

continue to work with the town in applying for the Building 

Canada fund’s second intake, which we expect to begin very 

shortly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Well I’m relieved to see the minister knows 

about the situation now, given that he denied that knew about 

the situation yesterday, when in fact the Minister for CIC 

[Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan] in fact told 

the reporters that he did. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister for Municipal Affairs talks about this 

government’s infrastructure programs, but they don’t begin to 

cover the needs of Duck Lake, a town of over just 600 people 

trying to pay for a $2.3 million water system upgrade. 

 

The minister talked about the Building Canada fund, but Duck 

Lake isn’t eligible. He talked about the municipal economic 

enhancement program, which might be worth $66,000 on a $2.3 

million budget. He talked about MRIF, but Duck Lake’s share 

of that money has long since been spent. Water bills in Duck 

Lake are still more than $160 a month. And 11 people, some of 

them families with young children, had their water cut off 

yesterday, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So to the minister: what concrete assistance is the Sask Party 

prepared to offer the families of Duck Lake? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Before I recognize the minister, the request I 

made earlier applies to the government benches as well. I 

recognize the Minister of Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s too bad that the 

Municipal Affairs critic herself isn’t in the House today to 

answer her own questions. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Members are aware that 

they’re not to refer to the presence or absence of members in the 

Chamber. I recognize the Minister of Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 

member opposite is absolutely incorrect, by the way. The town 

of Duck . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Minister of Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

correct the member opposite, who has mistakenly said that the 

town of Duck Lake will not be eligible to apply for the Building 

Canada fund. We are working with them towards making sure 

that that in fact does take place. There’s a second intake of the 

fund coming up in just a few weeks. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, the number of people the Sask 

Party has left behind keeps growing. A senior has her natural 

gas disconnected until volunteers step up to pay her bill. An 

unemployed trucker is forced to burn firewood to keep warm 

after his power is cut off. 

 

Now 11 people, among them families with young children, have 



March 10, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2201 

lost their water service and 20 more are at risk. And the Sask 

Party tries to spin it all by talking about their so-called 

Sask-first policy or infrastructure programs that do nothing to 

provide Duck Lake families with safe, clean, and affordable 

water. 

 

To the minister: when will the Sask Party get serious about 

providing meaningful solutions for the families and 

communities like Duck Lake that are being left behind by this 

government? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Mr. Speaker, there are meaningful 

solutions available to the town of Duck Lake, and we’re 

discussing that with them as we speak. The fact that the 

member opposite doesn’t know about them simply indicates she 

hasn’t done her homework, which is not new at all. 

 

The real question, Mr. Speaker, is follows: why didn’t the NDP 

do something about this when they knew about Duck Lake’s 

problem since 2003? Here are irrefutable facts. November 14, 

2003, emergency boil-water order. They did nothing about it. 

November 25, 2005, precautionary drinking water advisory 

placed. They did nothing about it. June 30, 2006, another 

emergency boil-water order. They did nothing about it. And 

finally on August 14, waterworks protection order, they did 

nothing about it then either, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

SaskWater Services 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The people of Duck 

Lake probably would like some water to wash down the cake 

that will come with any announcements the government might 

make. 

 

Mr. Speaker, SaskWater has a proud history of helping 

Saskatchewan communities supply their residents with safe, 

clean, affordable water, and it can be a real challenge. There’s 

over 50 emergency boil-water orders and 140 precautionary 

drinking water advisories as of last Friday. Mr. Speaker, 

yesterday we heard what happens when communities find 

SaskWater simply too expensive. 

 

To the Minister of SaskWater: what is being done to keep 

SaskWater’s services affordable for Saskatchewan 

communities? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, SaskWater’s job is to 

provide safe and reliable water services to communities in the 

province at a break-even basis, and that’s been done. And that’s 

the policy that was put forward by members opposite when they 

were in government. That’s the policy that was put forward in 

September 2006 when this agreement was entered into by 

members opposite with the town of Duck Lake, and it continues 

to be the process that is followed today. 

 

Services are increasingly costly. It’s something that every town 

and every community in the province is looking at. It’s 

something that I had a chance to talk to a few members about at 

SARM this morning and it continues to be something that we 

will look at as a government. 

 

SaskWater will continue to provide this service to people. It’s 

one of many services that the private sector can provide as well. 

It’s up to the community on how they want to proceed. Duck 

Lake decided to start with SaskWater and decided to proceed 

engaging the private sector on a go-forward basis. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Many communities that 

need to upgrade their waterworks simply don’t have the 

property tax base to pay for that infrastructure. And SaskWater 

has to operate on a break-even basis; it can’t afford to subsidize 

communities. 

 

A study conducted for SaskWater by Meyers Norris Penny 

recommended that it pursue new industrial customers to 

diversify its revenue streams. But we’re told this potential 

revenue stream is drying up because the Sask Party won’t allow 

SaskWater to go after new industrial customers. Mr. Speaker, 

can the minister explain why the Sask Party is ignoring those 

recommendations of Meyers Norris Penny and depriving 

SaskWater of the opportunity it needs to raise revenue to make 

those services to communities affordable? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, the firm of Meyers 

Norris Penny was engaged to do a review of SaskWater when 

we became government. We received that review just a little 

while ago. And it’s under consideration, and it will be done so 

to provide service. 

 

The whole reason of having the review is to address the very 

fact of what the hon. member mentioned earlier, the hon. 

minister: that nothing was done in 2003; nothing was done in 

2004; nothing was done in 2005. In 2006, agreements were 

entered into like they were with the town of Duck Lake. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yes, we have an infrastructure deficit, whether it’s 

highways, whether it’s hospitals, whether it’s SaskPower or 

whether it’s SaskWater. That’s what we were left with by the 

members opposite. That’s what we will continue to address. We 

will engage companies like Meyers Norris Penny to assist us in 

doing so. 



2202 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2009 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, there are real consequences for 

communities that are desperately in need of safe, clean, 

affordable drinking water. And we are concerned that there are 

many other communities that will find themselves just like 

Duck Lake — simply not able to afford SaskWater services. 

And yet the government persists in ignoring the Meyers Norris 

Penny recommendation — in fact directing SaskWater not to go 

after it, not to develop other industrial customers to make the 

water more affordable for the communities that need SaskWater 

services. 

 

To the minister: will he reverse this short-sighted decision? Will 

he give SaskWater the authority it needs to seek out new clients 

and to find revenue streams so it can provide safe, affordable, 

clean water for the Saskatchewan communities? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I can 

assure the member opposite that the Meyers Norris Penny 

analysis will be given full consideration and we’ll be looking 

forward on how we can provide water in a safe and reliable 

fashion. It’s the focus of SaskWater. It’s what SaskWater 

should be doing. And that’s what they will be doing under this 

government. Not like members opposite, what SaskWater was 

doing — $35 million loss under SPUDCO [Saskatchewan 

Potato Utility Development Company]. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s a serious matter. Mr. Speaker, it’s something 

that SaskWater . . . The problems, the problems that the 

member opposite talks about today did not start today. They 

started many years ago and they haven’t been addressed. Mr. 

Speaker, that’s what needs to be done. We will clean up the 

mess. We will make sure that people get the services they need. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

SaskTel Operations 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, my question is also to the 

Minister Responsible for the Crown Investments Corporation. 

Mr. Speaker, this government has been asked at least three 

times since January to provide Saskatchewan people with the 

name of the company that the Sask Party has chosen to 

outsource SaskTel teleconferencing services to. On every 

occasion the question has not been answered. I ask it again. 

 

To the Minister of CIC: which company has received the 

contract for the outsourcing of SaskTel conference calling? 

What is it that he is trying to hide here? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, there are 17 

companies that were in contact with SaskTel — 12 were outside 

of Saskatchewan, five were inside Saskatchewan. SaskTel is in 

the process of contacting all companies to see which ones will 

allow their names to be released. I’m told in Saskatchewan 

three have said that they will agree to it and two have said that 

they will not. Thanks. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Just to be clear, the question is the outsourcing 

of SaskTel teleconferencing, not the email services. We have 

been told that the teleconferencing has already been outsourced. 

The question is, to whom? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I don’t 

have that information at the present time. I will undertake to get 

that information. I don’t have it at this time. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, this question was put to the 

president of SaskTel back in January. It’s been asked now three 

or four or five times now in the House. How can the minister 

stand in his place and say he does not have the answer? What is 

he trying to hide, Mr. Speaker? 

 

My further question has to do with issues being raised yesterday 

about the phone book. Mr. Speaker, when transactions are done, 

according to the Premier, they are following the procedures and 

processes established by the former government. Part of that 

process, Mr. Speaker, was to demand independent, third party 

analysis of every significant transaction. My question to the 

Minister of CIC: was independent, third party analysis 

completed on the transaction involving EZ pages? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, the investment that 

SaskTel entered into under the NDP government lost money 

from day one. It was a $13.4 million investment. It has 

cumulative losses, aggregated losses of some $3.3 million. It 

was losing money in the amount of 50 to $60,000 a week. The 

decision was made to divest of that deteriorating asset. It was 

done. All prospective purchasers were canvassed. One came 

forward with a purchase plan. That plan was accepted. 

 

Yes, thank goodness for the people of Saskatchewan that that 

loss will not be $13.4 million as it would have been under an 

NDP government. We ensured that we got as many taxpayers’ 



March 10, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2203 

dollars as we could. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yes, it was not a good investment to enter into. It 

was one that members opposite chose to enter into and is one 

that this government will not be entering into going forward. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday in this House, the 

Premier of Saskatchewan said to this legislature: 

 

There’s a public policy process in place we’ve inherited 

from the previous administration on significant 

transactions. We follow that same process today. 

 

I’ll give the minister another opportunity to answer the 

question. Was an independent, third party analysis completed 

on the transaction? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, to be clear, $13.4 

million was entered into by members opposite; $13.4 million 

would have been lost if this sale was not made. Mr. Speaker, 

any dollar that was made on this transaction was better than 

having a situation where it . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Members may not agree with the answer, but 

I think the minister has the right to at least respond to the 

question without significant interference. The minister may 

finish his answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. SaskTel 

did gain $950,000 from this sale. There was preferred stock 

options as well, taking the number up to $4.683 million, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s not the full amount that was invested by members 

opposite, but it has lessened the loss in this company. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that’s why we have said that we have a 

Saskatchewan-first policy, where we will use those retained 

earnings to invest in Saskatchewan. That’s why we’re putting 

up 50 new cell towers in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. That’s 

why . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The minister’s time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, it is clear from the minister’s 

response that a third party, independent analysis was not 

completed on this transaction. 

 

So then my question is to the Premier: why is it that yesterday 

he assured this legislature and he assured the people of 

Saskatchewan that such analysis had been done, that this 

process had been followed, when today it’s clear from the 

minister’s response that no such analysis has been completed or 

is available to the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, the analysis was very 

clear. The value of this company would have been zero if it was 

shut down because it did not make money from day one. It did 

not make money at any time through its history, Mr. Speaker, 

and it continued to bleed red ink. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in no way does that help the commitment to the 

Crown corporation that we are committed to — the central 

Crown — to provide service here in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. Yes, from time to time we’ll have to deal with these 

money-losing outfits that the members opposite entered into. 

But more and more you will see a focus from this government 

on providing core services to Saskatchewan people. The 

services that people want, that’s the services that they will 

receive from this government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:15] 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 

 

Toilet Replacement Rebate Program 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a 

pleasure to rise today to inform the House about a new program 

that our government has initiated to help Saskatchewan 

residents go green. I recently announced the toilet replacement 

rebate program as part of our government’s go green plans. This 

program will help to ensure the sustainability of our precious 

water resources. Under this program, the Government of 

Saskatchewan, through the Saskatchewan Watershed Authority, 

will provide a $50 rebate to Saskatchewan residents who install 

low-flush toilets as replacements for older, less-efficient 

models. 

 

This program has definitely captured the interest of the public. 

In the six weeks since the program was originally launched, 

more than 740 applications have been received and, Mr. 

Speaker, 36 municipalities have partnered with us to either top 

up the program, offer a month’s free water bills, or distribute 

information to their own residents. The latest is the city of 

Humboldt which is providing an additional $25 for residents 

who participate in our program. 

 

Municipalities understand the benefits of replacing inefficient 

toilets. First, there is the potential for enormous water savings. 

This will ensure the long-term sustainability of our province’s 

water supply. As our province continues to grow, water supplies 

are becoming more and more important. Secondly, reducing 

water usage at the municipal level by replacing old toilets will 



2204 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2009 

reduce capacity needs at municipal water treatment plants. 

Municipalities in some cases may have the opportunity to 

eliminate or delay expanding capacity and subsequent capital 

costs. 

 

Over the next four years, we anticipate that 200,000 toilets will 

be replaced. Since toilet usage accounts for 30 per cent of the 

water used in homes, making this move to more efficient 

models will see families enjoy reduced water bills, a rebate, and 

the satisfaction of knowing that they’re helping our 

environment by reducing water consumption. 

 

This program is really about investing in our water and a 

greener environment. By the end of the program, residents will 

have reduced water consumption by 15 million litres per day — 

that’s per day, Mr. Speaker — and we will have reduced 

greenhouse gas emissions by 20,000 tonnes of CO2 per year. 

 

And I know, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP will say that they 

introduced a similar program. While the NDP did provide 

limited funding through a one-time $200,000 grant to the 

EnerGuide program, the uptake under the NDP’s program was 

dismal. Only a mere $50,000 was actually expended. 

 

My government is committed to the program that we have 

announced. We have committed $11 million over four years. 

We have mounted an aggressive ad campaign and have 

brochures and information at municipal offices, as well as 

distributed at retail outlets throughout the province. I am proud 

that my government is able to assist residents to go green, and I 

am excited by the response that we have received so far. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is a good 

program as the minister already alluded to. This is something 

that we initiated and felt very strongly about as well. But as one 

can see . . . and as one can see from the uptake of 740 

applications being received in the six weeks since the program 

launch, it is successful. I’m also very encouraged by the 

innovative programs that many municipalities have introduced 

in addition. 

 

The uptake of the toilet replacement rebate program along with 

the additional municipal programs identifies the deep 

commitment that Saskatchewan residents have to ensuring that 

our consumption exhibits long-term sustainability and thereby 

requiring less future financial burden for municipalities and 

taxpayers by needing to expand capacity. 

 

Also experts are predicting drought conditions for 

Saskatchewan which makes water conservation much more 

relevant. In the ministerial statement, the minister said, “This 

program is really about investing in our water and a greener 

environment” and a prediction that “By the end of the program 

. . . we will have reduced greenhouse gas emissions . . .” Well, 

Mr. Speaker, I question the sincerity of the Sask Party 

government on this issue. 

 

The NDP investment in our water and a greener environment 

was $340 million. Under the Sask Party government, that was 

cut down to a $40 million fund. We initiated a climate change 

secretariat. The Sask Party government eliminated it. We had an 

independent office of energy conservation; again under the Sask 

Party it has also disappeared. We made a commitment to 

stabilize greenhouse gas emissions by 2010 with reductions in 

the future which the Sask Party adopted and even put in their 

campaign platform. But the Sask Party government has 

absolutely no plan to achieve those targets — none whatsoever. 

And they have been in government now for over a year and a 

half. 

 

Saskatchewan residents would very much appreciate the 

Minister of Environment and the Sask Party government make 

serious its commitments to reducing future greenhouse gas 

emissions and other projects that need to be addressed in the 

province, not the least of which is conservation on all aspects. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Saskatchewan Rate Review Panel 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to inform the House of an important and positive 

development by one of our Crown utilities. Today SaskEnergy, 

at the request of the Saskatchewan rate review panel, provided a 

market update to its April 1, 2009 commodity rate application. 

This revised rate of $5.96 a gigajoule represents an overall 21 

per cent decrease for the average residential customer. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — That means if approved, Mr. 

Speaker, homeowners would see savings of $23 a month or 

$276 annually. Mr. Speaker, this is the lowest applied rate for 

natural gas. Mr. Speaker, I want to make sure all members hear 

this. This will be the lowest applied for natural gas commodity 

rate by SaskEnergy since May 2003 — something I know all 

members of the House will appreciate. 

 

I think it is important, Mr. Speaker, to recognize that this is part 

of the independent review process. The members of the 

Saskatchewan rate review panel do outstanding work with their 

examinations of applications from all of our Crown utilities. 

The request by the rate review panel made to SaskEnergy 

shows how panel members understand the volatility of today’s 

commodity markets. 

 

As Minister of Crown Corporations, I am encouraged to see the 

process work as it is designed to do. In this way, we know as 

government that the recommendation brought forward by the 

panel later this month will contain the most up-to-date 

information possible. Others also recognize the important work 

that this independent panel does, Mr. Speaker. A March 5 

editorial in the Saskatoon StarPhoenix stated that SaskEnergy’s 

delivery and commodity rate applications in 2008 were vetted 

and approved by the independent rate review panel. 

 

I would also like to make a very important point, Mr. Speaker. 

Over the past decade, eliminating any government rebate 

program from the calculation, Saskatchewan natural gas 



March 10, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2205 

consumers have paid $90 million less than those in Alberta and 

$120 million less than those in Manitoba, Mr. Speaker. The 

panel continues to work with our Crowns to make the rate 

review process better. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the current SaskEnergy commodity rate 

application is based on a 12-month market projection, 

something asked for by the panel. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, in closing, I commend the professionals at 

our Crown utilities for the work that they do providing services 

to the people of Saskatchewan and I thank the members of the 

Saskatchewan rate review panel for their due diligence and 

independent oversight in reviewing applications and providing 

solid recommendations to this Saskatchewan Party government. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the minister 

for a copy of his ministerial statement that he provided in 

advance. The good news is the rate payers at SaskEnergy 

throughout Saskatchewan will be receiving a rate reduction. 

 

The bad news is, Mr. Speaker, it is far too little, far too late. No 

amount of spin from the Sask Party government will cover the 

effects of the gross overcharging that was done this winter 

starting October 1 and all through the coldest months of the 

heating season. Saskatchewan consumers — all through the 

longest, coldest winter we’ve had in many years — 

Saskatchewan SaskEnergy residents were paying the highest 

rate for natural gas in Canada — full stop, period. And no 

amount of spin changes that fact, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I note that the minister referred to this request as bringing 

SaskEnergy’s rates to the lowest since May 2003. So I did some 

real quick checking, and on the Henry Hub, the price of natural 

gas today is 4.17; in May of 2003 it was $6.54. That’s the price 

SaskEnergy buys from, or it’s related to the price that 

SaskEnergy purchases gas at. It’s more than half again more in 

2003 than it is today. 

 

So no amount of spin covers the fact that they’ve gouged 

Saskatchewan consumers all through the coldest winter. They 

should’ve reduced the rates May 1 or even before that. It’s a 

shame that this Sask Party government has gouged 

Saskatchewan consumers all winter long, and they continue to 

do so. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Order. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 80 — The Construction Industry Labour Relations 

Amendment Act, 2009 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill 

No. 80, The Construction Industry Labour Relations 

Amendment Act, 2009 now be introduced and read for a first 

time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour that Bill No. 80, 

The Construction Industry Labour Relations Amendment Act, 

2009 be now read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — At the next sitting of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Intergovernmental 

Affairs. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

to report that it has considered certain estimates and to present 

its sixth report. I move: 

 

That the sixth report of the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice now be concurred 

in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair of the 

Intergovernmental Affairs Committee: 

 

That the sixth report of the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice now be concurred 

in. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

 I recognize the Acting Chair of the Human Services 

Committee. 

 



2206 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2009 

Standing Committee on Human Services 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am instructed by 

the Standing Committee on Human Services to report that it has 

considered certain estimates and to present its fifth report. I 

move: 

 

That the fifth report of the Standing Committee on Human 

Services now be concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Acting Chair of the 

Human Services Committee: 

 

That the fifth report of the Standing Committee on Human 

Services be now concurred in. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Ruling on Bill No. 604 – Requirement for Royal 

Recommendation 

 

The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, the Speaker has a 

ruling regarding Bill No. 604. It is the Speaker’s duty to review 

all Bills in respect to rule 65 of the Rules and Procedures of the 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. This rule states in part 

that any Bill which proposes: 

 

. . . any new or additional charge upon the public revenue 

or upon the people . . . shall be recommended to the 

Assembly by Message of the Lieutenant Governor before 

it is considered by the Assembly. 

 

This rule is fundamental to our constitution as it observes the 

parliamentary principle of the Crown initiative in financial 

matters, including accountability for all public expenditures and 

initiating legislation that imposes additional charges upon the 

public. The practice in this Assembly is for Bills to be 

introduced and read the first time with their further progress 

being contingent upon the Speaker affirming that they are in 

order. I have now had the opportunity to review Bill 604. 

 

On December 4, 2008, Bill No. 604, The Professional Public 

Service Employees Protection Act was introduced by the 

member from Regina Dewdney. This Bill is presently standing 

on the order paper for second readings under the heading, 

private members’ public Bills and orders, item no. 2 on page 5 

of the order paper. The issue that I must address is whether Bill 

604 contravenes the parliamentary principle of the Crown 

initiative in financial matters. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Clauses 3(1) and (2) of Bill 604 makes the provisions of the Act 

applicable to a majority of Saskatchewan public service and 

Public Service Commission employees. 

 

Further, clause 5(2) requires that upon termination of the 

employment of any employee to whom the Act applies for any 

reason other than just cause, the employee is entitled to 

severance in the amount of 24 months salary. 

 

Clause 7 of the Bill specifically binds the Crown. Given the 

wide ambit of the Act, coupled with the size of public service 

and the other entities covered by the Act, the obligation of the 

government for the cost would be significant to the point where 

it would be a new and additional charge upon the public 

revenue. 

 

It is stated in Erskine May, page 882-883, 23rd edition, that: 

 

If there is any doubt on the matter and it appears that the 

new proposal may entail an extension of previously 

enacted purposes of expenditure or an increase in the 

expenditure potentially liable to be incurred in pursuit of 

such a purpose (see pp 886-887), a Money resolution will 

be required. 

 

And further that “. . . whereby the Crown would incur a liability 

or a contingent liability payable out of money to be voted by 

Parliament” requires a royal recommendation. 

 

I would also refer members to the ruling of the Speaker on May 

6, 1998 where it was ruled that a Bill seeking to provide 

compensation to certain individuals with hepatitis C was ruled 

out of order as it would have required an expenditure of public 

funds requiring the royal recommendation. 

 

Similarly, on June 12, 2001 the Speaker ruled that the creation 

of a justice system review commission clearly constituted an 

expenditure of public funds requiring the royal 

recommendation. 

 

For these reasons, I find that Bill No. 604 requires a 

recommendation from the Lieutenant Governor. The member 

from Regina Dewdney is not a member of Executive Council; 

therefore, I must rule that the said Bill is out of order and will 

be removed from the order paper. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 184 through 252. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 184 through 252 tabled. I recognize 

the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 

allow the standing committees on Crown and Central Agencies, 

and the Economy to do their important work, I move this House 

do now adjourn. 

 



March 10, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2207 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

this House adjourn in order to facilitate the workings of 

legislative committees. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. This Assembly stands 

adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 14:33.] 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2195 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2195 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2195 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2195 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2195 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2195 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2195 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2196 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2196 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2196 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Community Effort on Behalf of Landis School 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2196 

 Couple Honoured at Prince Albert Winter Festival 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2196 

 Cumberland Regional College Scholarships 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2197 

 SaskTel Classic Challenge Cup Race 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2197 

 Women in Policing 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2197 

 Proposed Child Care Facility in Saskatoon 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2198 

 Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities Annual Convention 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2198 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 The Traffic Safety Amendment Act 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2198 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2198 

 Drinking Water for Duck Lake 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2200 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 2200 

 SaskWater Services 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2201 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2201 

 SaskTel Operations 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2202 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2202 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Toilet Replacement Rebate Program  

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2203 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2204 

 Saskatchewan Rate Review Panel  

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2204 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2205 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 80 — The Construction Industry Labour Relations Amendment Act, 2009 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2205 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2205 

 Standing Committee on Human Services 

  Allchurch ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2206 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 Ruling on Bill No. 604 – Requirement for Royal Recommendation 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2206 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2206 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 


