




















































Hansard: November 12, 2009


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 13A  THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 12, 2009, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3543 

 November 12, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — Before routine proceedings I would like to 

table the 2009 progress report for the Children’s Advocate 

office entitled Foster Home Overcrowding in Saskatchewan. 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I have a couple of introductions. First of all I’d like to 

introduce a number of people in the east gallery from 

SaskFEAT, Saskatchewan Families for Effective Autism 

Treatment. I know there are a number of parents, family, and 

friends here today. I also realize that it has been a little difficult 

for them. I think they’ve had a couple of days that they had 

planned on being here, and for different circumstances those 

dates have changed. But I’m glad that they were able to change 

their calendars and be here today in their Legislative Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think there’ll be much discussion on the whole 

issue of autism spectrum disorder as we move through the 

routine proceedings, Mr. Speaker, and I’ll have more to say at 

that time. So I’d like all members to join me in welcoming them 

here today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I would also like to 

introduce, sitting in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, Mrs. Janice 

Klein and her daughter Brandi. If you could just give us a little 

wave, please. Thank you. Janice was the Juvenile Diabetes 

Research Foundation co-family walk ambassador in 2009, and 

her daughter Brandi was the Juvenile Diabetes Research 

Foundation co-youth walk ambassador. Brandi is a type 1 

diabetic. 

 

Also with them, Mr. Speaker, is Randy Durovick, fundraising 

coordinator for Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation. I had 

the opportunity of being at the walk this spring — I think it was 

in the spring, summer, in June — and it was a cooler day, I 

remember, but a great turnout. And one of the persons that was 

there to introduce and start the walk on its way was none other 

than our all-star defensive end, John Chick, who is a diabetic 

and plays at a very high level — obviously — of football as a 

diabetic. So I want to welcome the three here today that are 

seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, and thank them for the 

great work that they do. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 

want to introduce the family members seated in the east gallery 

who are here with us today. Many of them are representing 

family or family members who have autism. We know that they 

represent only a small percentage of the many families who 

wanted to be here today, largely because other families couldn’t 

find caregivers or just couldn’t make it here. 

 

But I do want to say that the statistics now show that one in 98 

children are diagnosed with this disease. It’s something that 

governments right across the country and in fact across North 

America are grappling with, and I look forward to meeting you 

later and also the debate that will go on in the Assembly. Mr. 

Speaker, I welcome the members of the families here and hope 

that their stay is worthwhile. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you I am very pleased to introduce a number 

of guests who’re here today to support the legislation on 

banning texting and hand-held cellphones. 

 

Today we have with us from the Saskatoon Police Service, 

Deputy Chief Bernie Pannell. We have from the RCMP [Royal 

Canadian Mounted Police] traffic division, Staff Sergeant Ian 

Mitchell. From SADD [Students Against Drinking and Driving] 

Saskatchewan, we have Tim Spelliscy, the provincial director. 

From the Saskatchewan Automobile Dealers Association, 

executive director Susan Buckle. 

 

From Sheldon-Williams Collegiate, the SADD chapter, we have 

adviser Delaine Anderson. And with her is a number of students 

who I’m very pleased and proud to see in the gallery today, and 

thank you for your support. And from SGI [Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance] we also have Kwei Quaye and Kim 

Hambleton, and I’m very pleased to see you. 

 

Please, everyone, help me in welcoming everybody to their 

legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have two things I 

also want to say. I just want to add my welcome to Janice and 

Brandi and Randy from the Juvenile Diabetes Research 

Foundation. Welcome to the legislature and congratulations for 

all the work that you do. 

 

And I too want to talk about the parents and families of autistic 

children who are up in the east gallery. Actually the board of 

directors from SaskFEAT, many representatives are here today. 

Tim Verklan is here, if you could wave, Tim. Arden and Calvin 

Fiala and their daughter Elene and Hartley, their son. And 

Travis and Patricia Dugan are here. And Corrine and Rod 

Glover are here. Welcome to all of you. And as the member 

from Saskatoon Douglas Park said, I know you represent a lot 

of the families who couldn’t make it here today. 

 

And also in the gallery with the families are a lot of the 

therapists who provide the services to the children and families. 

So welcome to all of you for today. I think this will be a very 

interesting discussion and very worthwhile. And thank you so 

much for coming to hear it. 

 



3544 Saskatchewan Hansard November 12, 2009 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Sitting in the west 

gallery is my son Brent. Brent is here to see the proceedings 

today. He feels very special about himself. He graduated from 

the University of Regina last spring, and shortly after that got a 

job, bought himself a brand new car. And the significance about 

it is that the same day that he bought that car, General Motors 

went out of bankruptcy protection. So I would ask you to 

welcome him here and thank him for saving General Motors. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs, the member from Meadow Lake. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you I’d like to introduce somebody who needs no 

introduction to this Assembly, Mr. David Marit, the president of 

SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] — 

recently held a very successful convention over the weekend. I 

know I had the opportunity to attend as did many members of 

this caucus as well. So I introduce Mr. David Marit. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like 

to join with the minister in welcoming Dave Marit to his 

Legislative Assembly. Dave is one of these individuals that 

wears many hats in our province. Not only is he the president of 

SARM, but he also is a member of the Enterprise Saskatchewan 

board — an organization that is providing great advice for our 

government, for the economy of Saskatchewan. 

 

And Dave, I want to thank you on behalf of all citizens of 

Saskatchewan for serving your province in many, many ways. 

Thank you. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 

pleasure to rise today on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan 

who are concerned about the condition of Highway 22. 

 

The petition goes on to state that Highway 22 has significantly 

deteriorated, and it’s to a point now where the petitioners 

believe that the highway is a potential safety hazard for the 

residents who travel on it. And it’s clear, Mr. Speaker, that 

Highway 22 requires an upgrade immediately. I’ll read the 

prayer, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to commit to providing the 

repairs to Highway 22 that the people of Saskatchewan 

need. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And this petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by the good folks from 

Regina, Earl Grey, and Southey, Saskatchewan. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition that speaks to the problems that Saskatchewan 

renters are facing in this climate of combination of rising rents 

and low vacancy rates in many communities right across the 

province. 

 

And many of those communities have a vacancy rate of less 

than 1 per cent, which has been devastating for some of the 

communities. And, Mr. Speaker, it also speaks to the issue that 

the argument that the private market would deliver sufficient 

affordable housing in the absence of rent control has been 

proven to be false. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to consider enacting some form of rent 

control with a view to protecting Saskatchewan renters 

from unreasonable increases in rent. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by residents of 

Moose Jaw and area. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

rise today to present a petition calling for wage equity for CBO 

[community-based organization] workers. 

 

And we know that the workers in community-based 

organizations have traditionally been underpaid and many 

continue to earn poverty-level wages, and that CBO workers 

care for and provide valuable service to some of the most 

vulnerable members of our society, such as persons living with 

mental and intellectual disabilities, women and children in 

crisis, low-income, at-risk individuals, young children, youth, 

Aboriginal, immigrant, and visible minorities. Mr. Speaker, I’d 

like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

development and implementation of a multi-year funding 

plan to ensure that CBO workers achieve wage equity with 

employees who perform work of equal value in 

government departments. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these folks come from the city of Regina. Thank 

you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

in support of a new long-term care facility in La Ronge. And 

the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 



November 12, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3545 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately invest in the planning and 

construction of new long-term care beds in La Ronge. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by the good people of La Ronge and area. I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition in support of fairness for students here in 

Saskatchewan through the necessary expansion of the graduate 

retention program. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately expand the graduate 

retention program to include master’s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are from 

the good community of Melfort. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I stand today and present 

petitions in support of maintaining quality health care services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the residents of Saskatchewan hope that 

Saskatchewan government realizes that in order address their 

issues of retention and recruitment and ensure safe staffing 

levels, that they have to commit adequate funding and 

installation of good faith in provincial bargaining, Mr. Speaker. 

And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to commit to maintaining quality health 

care services and job security for all public health care 

providers. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the petitions are signed by residents of Middle Lake, St. 

Brieux, Cudworth, Yellow Creek, and Wakaw. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents of 

Saskatchewan as it relates to the unprecedented 

mismanagement of our finances by the Sask Party. The prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to start managing our 

provincial finances responsibly and prudently to ensure 

that it does not continue its trend of massive budgetary 

shortfalls, runaway and unsustainable spending, equity 

stripping from our Crowns, and irresponsible revenue 

setting. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions, Mr. Speaker, are signed by concerned residents 

of Assiniboia, Saskatoon, and Regina. I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Olympic Torch Relay in La Ronge 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, on the morning of Saturday, 

November 7, 2009, the 2010 Olympic Torch Relay hit the town 

of La Ronge. It was the first Saskatchewan stop on the torch’s 

journey across the country. This was a huge celebration for the 

town of La Ronge, the Lac La Ronge Indian Band, and the 

village of Air Ronge. 

 

Many community members came out to enjoy the festivities. 

The day began with a beautiful version “O Canada” in Cree by 

Aileen Searson. Chief Tammy Cook-Searson provided 

welcoming remarks, followed by FSIN [Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations] Vice-Chief Morley Watson. 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Olympic torch departed from Elder Demar Mirasty’s house 

at Jackpine Reserve carried by Tanner Cook to the Lac La 

Ronge Indian Band office. Once the torch reached the band 

office, it was blessed by Elder Catherine Charles. From the 

band office, it was passed to Elecktra Charles who ran to the 

hospital. Natasha Boyes finished the run at the Mel Hegland 

Uniplex, where many activities were held from morning until 

late afternoon, including a pancake breakfast and a community 

walk. 

 

This event was a great opportunity for leadership and 

dignitaries to bring greetings and best wishes. I was honoured to 

take part in this. It was a moment that will be remembered for a 

long time for the torch carriers and for the people of the town of 

La Ronge, Lac La Ronge Indian Band, and the village of Air 

Ronge. As Chief Tammy Cook-Searson put it so clearly, “May 

the 2010 Olympic flame, passing through our Woodland Cree 

territory, ignite the spark in all of us to reach the full potential 

of our dreams.” Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Share Similarities and Celebrate Differences 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I am sure many of 

our guests seated in the gallery know all too well, living with 

autism spectrum disorder can be challenging for both the 

individuals affected and also their families. Right here in 

Saskatchewan about 1,800 of our children are living with 

autism. These children may be born with autism but they live 



3546 Saskatchewan Hansard November 12, 2009 

full lives, surrounded by the important things: truth, loyalty, 

intelligence, and love. I know that the parents of autistic 

children, like moms and dads all around the world, put the 

needs of their children before their own but they face unique 

challenges, ones that you and I can only imagine. 

 

All children are unique, and autistic children are no different 

but their special needs require a special kind of parent. It was 

once said that we should share our similarities and celebrate our 

differences. Today should be no exception. 

 

Kim Peek was the inspiration for the well-known movie Rain 

Man. She said it well: 

 

Recognizing and respecting differences in others, and 

treating everyone like you would want them to treat you, 

will help make our world a better place for everyone. 

Care . . . be your best. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Saskatoon Lions Support Coronary Artery 

Rehabilitation Group 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Friday, November 

6, Saskatoon Downtown Lions Club generously presented 

CARG, the Coronary Artery Rehabilitation Group, with a 

cheque for $3,600. 

 

CARG is a self-help, volunteer, non-profit group dedicated to 

promoting a healthy lifestyle for persons with cardiac problems, 

with the assistance of cardiac specialists. CARG offers group 

support and fellowship, an opportunity to participate in a 

supervised exercise program, and continuing educational and 

supportive events. This recent donation of 3,600 will be used to 

purchase stationary bikes at the new Shaw Centre. 

 

I’d like to thank the president of CARG, Dr. Mohindar 

Sachdev; vice-presidents, Dennis Johnson, Peter Scott; and 

volunteer, Antoinette Honoroski. In particular I’d like to 

recognize my constituent, Dan Danaher, first vice-president of 

CARG. 

 

The Saskatoon Lions Club, CARG’s most recent donor, has 

been providing quality community programs in our community 

for decades, including blind bowling, blind skiing, diabetes 

awareness, the sled dog track meet, and the Saskatoon Speed 

Skating Club, just to name a few. They also operate the Lions 

eye bank, Lions guide dogs, and the Lions Band. 

 

I would like to thank Mike Slonowski, Marlene Belke, and Bob 

Korpan from the Saskatoon Downtown Lions Club for their 

dedication and contribution. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in thanking the 

Saskatoon Lions Club for their generosity, and in thanking the 

executive and participants of CARG for making us aware of our 

need to be heart-smart. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress Hills. 

World Diabetes Day 

 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saturday, November 

14th is World Diabetes Day. According to the World Health 

Organization, more than 180 million people worldwide are 

living with diabetes. 

 

This year the focus of World Diabetes Day is diabetes 

education and prevention. The campaign slogan is, Understand 

Diabetes and Take Control. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this disease is a major health problem in our 

province for people of all ages, from all walks of life. In 

Saskatchewan a provincial diabetes advisory body was 

established in 2001 to provide the Ministry of Health with 

advice on diabetes programs, and it’s been instrumental in the 

development of a number of excellent diabetes educational 

materials. One such educational item received the Practical 

Diabetes Resource Award from the Canadian Diabetes 

Association. 

 

Mr. Speaker, health promotion and disease prevention programs 

such as these help us achieve a healthier population and reduce 

dependence on the acute care system. We continue to add new 

drug therapies based on the advice of the government’s expert 

drug review committees, assisted by the national common drug 

review process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, fellow members, please join me in officially 

recognizing World Diabetes Day. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Visual Art Program Engages Participants 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Recently the Broadway Theatre hosted the 

National Film Board premiere of the film A Year at Sherbrooke, 

directed by Saskatoon filmmaker, Thomas Hale. The film 

explores the creative process for people with physical and/or 

cognitive disorders in Sherbrooke Community Centre, a 

long-term care home in Saskatoon. 

 

The film follows two artists, Thelma Pepper and Jeff 

Nachtigall, as they work with Sherbrooke residents. A studio 

was set up to give residents an opportunity to experiment in the 

visual arts. Initially a few residents dropped in to paint and 

draw. Within a month the studio was overflowing with 100 

participants, most of whom had never engaged in making art 

before. Participants were people living with paraplegia, 

quadriplegia, acquired brain injury, Alzheimer’s, or mental 

illness. 

 

Despite challenges and limitations, the artists created their own 

methods of making art. Driving a wheelchair through puddles 

of paint and then onto paper laid onto the floor turned the most 

colourful track designs into a work-in-progress. A wheelchair 

was converted into a mobile painting machine. 

 

Ninety-year-old Saskatoon photographer, Thelma Pepper, also 

took part in the art program through her show of photographs 

and interviews with Sherbrooke residents. 

 



November 12, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3547 

This original program has linked with elementary schools, other 

long-term care facilities, SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of 

Applied Science and Technology], and the University of 

Saskatchewan. Many nursing and social work students have 

participated as volunteers to gain training experience for their 

professional studies. 

 

Sherbrooke is working to secure stable funding for the art 

program, and then hopes to become a provincial training centre 

for other long-term care homes that are eager to join in this 

program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, congratulations to Sherbrooke PR [public 

relations] and communications leader, Patricia Roe, along with 

Thelma Pepper, Jeff Nachtigall, and the residents and artists of 

Sherbrooke Community Centre on this innovative and inspiring 

program. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Saskatoon Curler Inducted in Sports Hall of Fame 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 

November 7th I represented the Premier at the induction of the 

Saskatoon Sports Hall of Fame. There were several athletes and 

builders that were inducted. The team inducted was our 2003 

Saskatoon Hilltops, undefeated that year, sir. 

 

Also a fellow from my constituency, Mr. Jerry Shoemaker. 

He’s been active in curling as a player and an administrator, 

reaching the highest level possible as an executive when he was 

elected for a one-year term as president of the Canadian Curling 

Association. He began curling as a 10-year-old in Plunkett, 

Canada and moved to Saskatoon where he was a member of the 

Granite Club, Nutana and CN. 

 

He was elected to the Granite board in ’82 and became its 

president for ’87-88. He was the first president of Curl 

Saskatoon in Saskatchewan, and he was elected to the Canadian 

association board in ’98 to 2002. He was an organizer, director 

for CCA [Canadian Curling Association] liaison in successive 

order for the last three Briers to come to Saskatoon. 

 

He holds a lifetime membership in the Saskatchewan 

association and he was inducted into the Canadian Curling Hall 

of Fame in 2007. He also shared with me that our Minister of 

Highways isn’t a bad curler. Please assist me in congratulating 

Mr. Shoemaker on his induction. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Take Our Deputy Ministers to Work Day 

 

Mr. Furber: — Well, well, well, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

congratulate the government on an important initiative in 

workplace education that benefits everyone in Saskatchewan. 

Last week, parents across Canada participated in Take Our Kids 

to Work day, the program that offers young people first-hand 

experience in the world of work in a wide range of workplace 

settings. 

 

As successful as the Take Our Kids to Work program has been 

over its 15-year history, government cabinet ministers have 

found a new way to build on this day’s success with an 

innovation all their own. I refer of course to the very popular 

take our deputy ministers to work day. Allow me to outline a 

few of this day’s special and innovative features. 

 

First, Mr. Speaker, this day is special because it gives deputies 

real world, first-hand experience answering reporters’ questions 

in scrums after question period. These are questions such as, 

what is your government’s policy on disclosure that baffled the 

Minister of Corrections, or how did you respond to documented 

safety concerns that stumped the Minister of Labour. 

 

Second, Mr. Speaker, this day affords special educational 

opportunities to the ministers themselves, such as when the 

Minister of Health learned his ministry was negotiating a 

surgical tourism program with British Columbia. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, this day is unique in that unlike Take Our 

Kids to Work day, it has no fixed date on the calendar, but can 

be held whenever the people of Saskatchewan need a lesson in 

the incompetence of this government’s ministers and in the poor 

judgment of the man who named them to cabinet. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Before we move to oral questions, just let me 

say this to our guests. You’re more than welcome, and we 

welcome you to your Chamber, but we ask that you refrain 

from any involvement in the debate on the floor. And we thank 

you so much. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Autism Spectrum Disorder Issues 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question to the Minister 

of Health. Mr. Speaker, in 2007 it was estimated that 1 in 150 

children in Canada had the disease autism, and by 2009 that 

estimate had jumped to 1 in 98 children. Mr. Speaker, as one of 

the directors of SaskFEAT said, and I quote: 

 

It is with heavy heart that all I can do, when I receive a 

phone call from another parent that has just received their 

child’s autism diagnosis, is to support them by listening. 

When I am asked what is next, I need to inform them 

there is no Sask autism strategy, and there is a minimal 

number of trained professionals that have qualifications 

and training to work with their child. 

 

To the minister, Mr. Speaker: when will your government come 

forward with a fully funded plan and strategy to deal with this 

most important issue? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Order. I’d ask the guests to respect the rules of the Assembly 

and we would please ask members not to participate in any 

form. And unfortunately there’s only one other option if 

members don’t regard the rules, and that would be we’d have to 



3548 Saskatchewan Hansard November 12, 2009 

ask you to leave. And we do not want to do that. 

 

I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’ve had the opportunity in the two years that I’ve 

been the Minister of Health to meet with parents and family, to 

meet with parents in my office, with some from other 

constituencies, some parents from my constituency that have 

children that suffer from autism spectrum disorder. I’ve had the 

opportunity to go to different constituency offices and meet 

with parents that have children with autism spectrum disorder. I 

talked to MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] on our 

side whose nieces and nephews suffer from the disorder. I had 

the opportunity in my constituency office, through the work 

placement program in the community that my constituency 

office is in, to have a young lad that had autism spectrum 

disorder work in our office for about six to eight months. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, in no way will I ever pretend to know the 

issues that those parents, the issues and the challenges that those 

parents face. Mr. Speaker, I don’t think any of us do until we 

live 24-7 with a child that suffers from autism spectrum 

disorder. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the family and friends for the 

support, and from our government, tell the parents that we 

admire the day-to-day challenges that they face, Mr. Speaker. I 

look forward to talking more on where we’ve come from, where 

we’re at today, and where we will be in the future. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 

Minister of Health. And I want to say that I’m sure all members 

of the Assembly have met with parents who are struggling with 

this disease in their family. The question to the minister is, 

when will we have a proper program, properly funded, with a 

proper strategy to deal with this issue? 

 

The mother of a little boy named Andy wrote to the minister a 

short while ago, and in the letter said, and I quote: 

 

What you have done so far with your $3 million was a 

wasted $3 million. The consultants you hired can now 

send more children with diagnosis of autism to a 

provincial system that does nothing. We waited for 

diagnosis for months, and currently we are on the Autism 

Resources Centre’s wait list at number 138. The three 

hours of therapy per week offered by ARC once off that 

list will do nothing to help my son. 

 

[10:30] 

 

The question to the minister: when will you have a properly 

funded strategy in order to take care of the needs of these 

families? 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Just a reminder to members in 

addressing the question, they’re not to address the individual 

directly. I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, when we came to office in November of 2007, we 

looked at, you know, many different programs. And what have 

we found? It’s always easier to maybe add on to certain 

programs — whether it’s a drug plan, to add Avastin to a drug 

plan, whether we’re talking about surgical wait times now and 

how we can reduce those surgical wait times. 

 

What we found when we got to the autism file, that really there 

had not been much done. Mr. Speaker, in the last budget, 

leading up to our government taking over, there was $500,000 

put in on an annual basis in just that last year for autism 

supports. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what we did in May of 2008, I struck a 

provincial autism advisory committee that had people from a 

number of fields — whether it was clinicians, whether it was 

people from SaskFEAT, from community-based organizations 

— from as many groups as we could on this committee to look 

at what would be a proper strategy as we move forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, seeing that we were starting with a budget of only 

$500,000 we, in our first budget, moved it up to $3 million, Mr. 

Speaker. And on the advice of the committee, we’re looking at 

how we can best spend that $3 million. I’ll be looking forward 

to explaining that in the next question. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the minister has indicated 

that the government is providing $3 million for programming, 

but as the previous question indicated from the parents, this is 

wasted money because of the lack of training and support for 

the workers who are coming into the system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the consultants and support workers the minister 

put in place lack the training and experience in dealing with this 

disorder. And the speech pathologists and occupational 

therapists and psychologists, who have little or no experience 

with autistic people, need and want that kind of training. As one 

father of autistic teenager said, and I quote: 

 

We have had to continually place our son in the hands of 

inadequately trained people. Our son has the ability to 

learn, but he is only as good as the people that work with 

him.  

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister has indicated that he is spending $3 

million. The problem is we don’t have a strategy. We don’t 

have the experienced workers to work with these individuals. 

When will the minister and this government come forward with 

that kind of a program and strategy? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the work that the 

provincial autism advisory committee did was work on a 

strategy. And they presented that strategy to me in October 30, 

about a year ago, and it’s a framework and action plan for 

autism spectrum disorder in Saskatchewan. 

 

What it looks at is making sure we can hire the proper 

complement of health care professionals throughout the health 

regions. It targeted 33 health care professionals that we needed 



November 12, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3549 

to hire, some consultants and paraprofessionals that we needed 

to place in the various health regions that can supply more 

services for these children and young adults, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’re about halfway there. We’ve got a little over 18, 19 of 

these health care professionals that have to have a background 

in autism spectrum disorder. That isn’t easy to find when there 

had been very little work done in the past, Mr. Speaker. We’re 

looking around the province and across Canada for these 

professionals. We’re a little over halfway there, Mr. Speaker. 

But we want to get to the 33, see how that provides service 

across the province, Mr. Speaker, and then we’ll certainly 

evaluate it. But we’re about halfway through the action plan 

that was put forward by the advisory committee. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Parents are telling us, 

and the minister has indicated that they’re telling him as well, 

that raising a child with autism and trying to provide the proper 

therapy for their child is costing them thousands of dollars per 

year. And the strategy that was presented to the minister a year 

ago isn’t helping them with what they need now. When these 

parents ask for help, they are told to go through the cognitive 

disabilities strategy. Unfortunately many don’t qualify for CDS 

[cognitive disabilities strategy] funding because it’s income 

tested. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 2007, PEI [Prince Edward Island] eliminated 

income testing from parents of children 18 years of age and 

younger who receive benefits from PEI’s disability support 

program. To the minister, Mr. Speaker: will the minister agree 

to remove income testing from the CDS so that all parents with 

children with autism can access funding? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I can 

certainly understand that income testing is a bit of an irritant for 

many, many people. It is the policy of Social Services through 

the cognitive disabilities strategy. That policy was put into 

place many, many years ago. 

 

Income testing is not new in many programs. Many programs in 

Social Services have income testing. Many programs in the 

Ministry of Health have income testing. If you look at 

long-term care placement, if you look at home care, if you look 

at the drug plan, if you look at many different programs, there is 

income testing already in place, Mr. Speaker. That is the case in 

the cognitive disabilities strategy, Mr. Speaker. I know it’s an 

irritant, but it is a program that is in place for many different 

programs throughout government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — One of the good things about being a minister, 

Mr. Speaker, is that you can change the policy. This is cold 

comfort to the parents and families who are dealing with 

autistic children to have the minister say this is a policy that has 

been long standing. It doesn’t work. It isn’t meeting their needs 

now, and it’s not the answer. 

Mr. Speaker, autism is a complex disorder, and parents need the 

opportunity to choose the best treatment options for their 

children and their unique circumstances. To the minister, Mr. 

Speaker: considering this government has failed to establish an 

adequate and proven strategy that works for everyone coping 

with autism, will the minister agree to immediately adapt the 

individualized funding program so parents of autistic children 

can access funds to pay for the therapies best suited to their 

children? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I would just like to 

correct the member opposite. It was not a policy change. The 

cognitive disabilities strategy was designed and implemented in 

2005. It was implemented. And when it was introduced in 2005, 

it was a model that had income testing. So it was their strategy, 

their policy, that had income testing. They had looked at other 

models across the province, and at that time it was in alignment 

with other models across our country. 

 

We acknowledge that individuals impacted by autism and their 

families continue to require substantial supports. And it’s very 

important that we now work with the groups, as the Minister of 

Health has said, and the stakeholders involved, as we can do 

better as we go forward. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, again I say to the both ministers, 

you do have the power to change the policies, and it’s time to 

do it. They are not working. And it’s cold comfort to the parents 

who are sitting in the gallery and the people that they represent 

that are sitting at home to have finger pointing going on. 

 

This is the only province, Saskatchewan is the only province 

without an autism strategy and is considered an autism 

wasteland by the rest of Canada. Parents are telling us that they 

first wait for months to get a diagnosis, and then once their 

child is diagnosed with autism, they again wait two to three 

years to access three hours of therapy a week. 

 

Instead of waiting, Mr. Speaker, many parents try to pay for the 

therapy for their children, and this costs them thousands of 

dollars per year. When they seek financial assistance from the 

government, they are told they don’t qualify for individualized 

funding or their income is too high to get CDS funding. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the ministers: will they provide parents with the 

funding they need to access therapy, or will we continue to have 

Saskatchewan be a wasteland for autistic children? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Well, Mr. Speaker, what I would say 

to that question is that there is a framework, an action plan that 

was put forward by people from SaskFEAT, from people in 

community-based organizations, from people that were 

involved in the whole delivery mechanism for autism spectrum 

disorder. There is an action plan. We’ve had that plan in place 

for a year. We expect to have the full complement of 



3550 Saskatchewan Hansard November 12, 2009 

professionals hired in the next few months and see how that 

plan works as we move forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’re not opposed to reviewing it after two years. But there is 

no use to changing course just after a plan which came from the 

advisory committee to the Ministry of Health is implemented. 

There’s no use changing in mid-course. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, they did say that well we as the government 

could change certain things. And we certainly did — $500,000 

in the last budget of the NDP [New Democratic Party] 

government, compared to $3 million from this government, Mr. 

Speaker. We won’t take advice from those members. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Availability of Government Vehicles 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, Battlefords Interval House, like many CBOs across the 

province, protects vulnerable women and children. But like 

many other areas of rural Saskatchewan, in The Battlefords 

there is no public transportation. And thus women and children 

fleeing domestic violence need access to vehicles. 

 

For 25 years, the Government of Saskatchewan has allowed 

CBOs like Interval House to lease central vehicle agency 

vehicles. But now they’re told this practice has come to an end. 

To the Minister of Government Services: why is this 

government denying access to vehicles to protect vulnerable 

women and children? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We understand the 

importance that leasing CVA [central vehicle agency] vehicles, 

what that provides to community-based organizations. As of 

today, there are no changes. There is no change in policy in 

regards to providing vehicles to community-based 

organizations. It will be as it has been. I understand the member 

relating to a CBO out of North Battleford, and their vehicles 

will be maintained as the guarantee has happened. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we have here a letter from 

the Minister of Government Services confirming that Interval 

House, and presumably other agencies around the province, are 

being denied access to government vehicles. In her letter, the 

minister cites budget constraints as the reason why these 

women and children are being put at risk. Again this practice 

has been in place for 25 years through multiple administrations 

and even during the massive cost cutting of the early 1990s. 

 

So to the Minister of Government Services: is she claiming that 

the financial situation of the government is worse now than at 

any time in the past 25 years? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services. 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And as the 

members opposite are aware, that our purchasing of vehicles for 

this budget year was that of 500 vehicles. So not every CBO in 

the province of Saskatchewan can expect to receive new 

vehicles. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, the vehicles that are currently had by 

various CBOs throughout the province of Saskatchewan will 

continue to have vehicles throughout the province of 

Saskatchewan. And our government will continue to maintain 

them, and they are a guarantee. And we will provide safe 

transportation to all CBO and their clients. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, this CBO isn’t waiting for brand 

new vehicles. They’re using used vehicles because they are 

solely for use within the city of Battleford and within a very 

close region, mostly within the city. So we’re not talking about 

highway miles. They are looking for used vehicles, not new.  

 

So we know that this government’s mismanagement is causing 

some cutbacks, but the Minister of Finance has made a 

commitment, and I’ll quote, we will fight very hard to ensure 

that the most vulnerable are protected. But then they turn 

around and cut the services from CVA. 

 

So to the Minister of Government Services: how is denying 

access to vehicles that help women and children escape 

domestic violence really put in force what the minister said, 

protecting the most vulnerable? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I will reiterate 

what I said and stated earlier. The vehicles provided to 

community-based organizations throughout the province of 

Saskatchewan will continue. CVA will continue to provide and 

maintain the current vehicle complement within its mandate, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to point out for the members opposite 

and for their information, our government increased funding to 

Transition House, which is what she’s referring to, and sexual 

assault agencies to $1.1 million, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

[10:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Management of Provincial Economy 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Tuesday 

the Minister of Finance finally threw off his rose-coloured 

glasses and agreed that Saskatchewan is going into a recession, 

a fact that everyone else in this province already understood. 

The minister also admitted that his $1.3 billion mistake on 

potash revenues is going to be even larger when he tables the 

mid-year report next week, something this opposition has 



November 12, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3551 

contended from budget day and has reiterated at first quarter. 

 

A straightforward question, Mr. Speaker: how much larger? 

And how did the minister and the Premier get this budget 

forecast so very, very wrong? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the first thing I 

would like to say is that Saskatchewan is not going into a 

recession, we’re coming out of one. You know, in fact, Mr. 

Speaker, in fact, Mr. Speaker, the Conference Board of Canada 

has released a forecast today that predicts that Saskatchewan 

will post an economic growth rate of 3.7 per cent in 2010 — the 

second-best in the country, second only to BC [British 

Columbia]. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve said that we’re going to acknowledge next 

week that the current year’s economic projections are negative. 

That’s true. But we are working our way out of it, and we’re 

going to lead the nation or be second-best in the nation in 

economic growth next year. That’s an incredibly positive story, 

Mr. Speaker, and one all of us should be very proud of. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — I thought for a minute there, Mr. 

Speaker, the Finance minister was saying that we went in on 

Tuesday and that we came out on Thursday. But now, he’s 

talking again about next year country. I thought we’re talking 

now about this year country. 

 

But the Finance minister says the budget process in March was 

the same as it’s always been, and the professional public 

servants were the same as they’ve been for some time. So the 

only change was, this Minister of Finance and that Premier 

were in charge of the decisions, Mr. Speaker. The Premier and 

the minister both said, I quote, we took our advice from Finance 

officials. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have a freedom of information request we made 

to the Finance department asking for all documentation and 

analysis on which they based the forecast for the $1.9 billion in 

potash revenues in this year’s budget. The answer: we don’t 

have it; talk to Energy and Resources. 

 

To the minister: why would you ignore the advice of your 

professional public servants and let the minister, the member 

from Kindersley, set your potash estimate? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, there is a 

whole number of factors that we take into consideration when 

we set projections and make assumptions, and make 

assumptions for any budget year or that what we’ll actually 

have in mid-year. Mr. Speaker, we use independent agencies. 

We use our Energy and Resources professionals. We use 

members of the Ministry of Finance. All of these professionals 

are used to determine what the best advice is. And we’ve taken 

that best advice, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now it’s easy to say now, in retrospect, that we were wrong. Of 

course we were. That’s a documented fact, and I’m not 

pretending that it isn’t true. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that we have done our very best to 

use the best numbers we can. And they’re consistent, and 

they’re consistent with the information and the advice that was 

given to Saskatchewan by all of these factors. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, let’s be clear. We’ve been 

straight on this from day one on budget day with our concerns, 

and that minister and that Premier said that they got their advice 

from Finance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we sent the same FOI [freedom of information] 

request to the Department of Energy and Resources, and they 

refused to provide any information on the grounds that it was 

advice to ministers. The biggest mess-up in the history of 

Saskatchewan budget making, and they’ve decided to hide the 

information which they based this disastrous budget on. When 

will this government come clean and present the news media, 

this Assembly, the people of Saskatchewan with all the material 

upon which the Finance minister and the Premier based this 

foolish decision? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

should know that we’re not going to release confidential advice 

that comes to cabinet as part of a budget-making process. No 

one ever has. No one ever has, and no one ever should. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that the public forecasters that 

publish information, in terms of the growth rates and the 

assumptions for potash prices or oil and gas prices or any 

others, are generally posted for public consumption. And the 

members opposite are quite able to go into those websites and 

see the range of forecasts that there are when you’re leading up 

to any budget preparation process. Those same informations 

come to us, and we take that advice. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on hindsight of course we were wrong. But at the 

time, we believed that we were exercising a fair measure of 

prudence based on previous years’ actual production and results 

that were achieved, based on the forecasters that were 

communicated publicly and based on our own internal 

projections, Mr. Speaker. So we were doing the very best we 

can and using the very high talent of professionals in this 

province. 

 

The Speaker: — Member from Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I remind the 

minister that in this House the day after his budget was 

introduced last March he said, I quote, “. . . we’ve made sure 

that we’ve built in a fair bit of caution in all our assumptions 

. . . even if our finance officials are wrong by half a percentage 

point, that is $50 million . . . our surplus vastly exceeds it.” 

 

False bravado, Mr. Speaker, and now Saskatchewan is paying 



3552 Saskatchewan Hansard November 12, 2009 

the price. 

 

Has the minister taken the time to read the analysis that came 

from CIBC [Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce] on October 

23? I’d urge him to do so. I quote, “. . . we continue to have 

concerns about potash pricing and demand over the next 12-18 

months.” It goes on: “. . . our thoughts remain that we are 

looking at a 2+ year recovery in potash demand.” 

 

When is he going to start listening to his officials and stop 

trying to create fantasyland budgets based on phony revenue 

projections and the minister and the member from Kindersley’s 

gut feelings? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there 

are some important facts to bring to the discussion here today 

including this: that when this budget year has concluded, this 

province will have 40 per cent less debt than it had when this 

government was elected. 

 

We also know that, at the end of this budget year, that people 

will pay historically less in education property tax than they 

ever have in the history of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Here’s another fact, Mr. Speaker. Another fact is that families 

will be paying less in income tax than they ever did under the 

previous government, Mr. Speaker. Another fact is that there 

have been $2.5 billion invested in capital in the province of 

Saskatchewan in infrastructure. Another fact, when this budget 

concludes is that there will have been . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Another fact, Mr. Speaker, when this 

budget year concludes is that there will be historic investments 

made in people who are vulnerable, Mr. Speaker, in health care 

and education across this province. 

 

And when this budget year concludes, here is another fact: that 

the 75 per cent of the people of this province that think we’re on 

the right track will be saying the very same thing, Mr. Speaker. 

The same group of people are saying that if they had a choice 

today, they’d pick this Minister of Finance over anyone over 

there. It will also be true at the end of this budget year. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I’d ask members to come to 

order, so we could go through introduction of guests, and so we 

hear the Bills that are being called. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Addictions Advisory Committee 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, early today our government announced the 

establishment of a new addictions advisory committee. Mr. 

Speaker, formation of this committee is a significant step in 

fulfilling our mandate commitment to establish a provincial 

addictions agency. This committee will give independent 

review and advice on how the new addictions agency can best 

provide leadership, support, and resources to regional health 

authorities and other stakeholders on prevention and education 

initiatives, professional training and development, research, and 

evaluation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this committee will shape the vision, mission, and 

principles and the name of the new agency — its size, 

composition, and the board of governance model. The 

committee will look at the scope of the programs offered by a 

new provincial addictions agency and funding criteria for 

addictions programming. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this committee will examine the establishment and 

effective linkage with the Ministry of Health, regional health 

authorities, other government ministries, schools, 

community-based organizations, and First Nation and Métis 

organizations. The committee will recommend a framework for 

a provincial drug strategy that connects the national anti-drug 

strategy and incorporates unique differences and challenges of 

programs delivered in northern Saskatchewan communities 

while building partnerships with First Nations and Métis and 

national alcohol and drug abuse programs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the committee will provide a mechanism for 

reviewing current alcohol and drug services with the goal of 

improving access to quality and timely treatment, prevention 

and education, partnership development, coordinated training 

for clinicians and addictions professional, and outcome 

monitoring. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the committee members include a list of 

well-respected individuals in the addictions fields. They are Dr. 

Peter Butt, director of the Northern Medical Services; Dr. Kevin 

Kok, board certified psychiatrist; Barbara Robinson, program 

lead for the addictions counselling diploma program at SIAST 

Woodland Campus; Foster Monson, executive director of the 

Regina Recovery Homes; Chuck McCann, manager of 

Addictions Services for Prince Albert Parkland Health 

Authority; Darlene Arnault, registered nurse from northern 

Saskatchewan; Greg Drummond, director of mental health and 

addictions for the Saskatoon Health Region; Bryan Dykes, 

community advocate; Shauna Lafontaine, executive director, 

Métis Addictions Council of Saskatchewan; Bev Whitehawk, 

director of primary health care, Federation of Saskatchewan 

Indian Nations; and Kyla Christiansen, health education 

consultant, Ministry of Education. 

 

Our government is committed to strengthening the current 

system of prevention, education, and treatment services. Mr. 

Speaker, we will continue to build on the work that the Ministry 

of Health, the regional health authorities and their partners are 

currently providing to improve the increased capacity of 

addictions treatment programs in the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the creation of this committee demonstrates our 

progress in achieving our election commitment to establishing a 

provincial addictions agency. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 



November 12, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3553 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And thank you to the 

minister for his advanced copy. I must say I’m a bit skeptical, 

given the framework that we’re dealing with, with the autism 

strategy sitting with the minister for a year and so little done on 

it. I’m thinking this is another framework and committee that’s 

going to have their framework and their advice ignored or at 

best slow locked. 

 

I am also concerned with the comments made about the needle 

exchange program. And putting this in place, I’m assuming that 

when the report was done for the minister on the needle 

exchange program and the scientific consensus was that the 

needle exchange program we are currently working with in this 

province is the most appropriate and effective way to go, that 

the minister will not be using this committee to undermine that 

report as well. 

 

I am very happy to see the people that are on it will represent 

many of the areas in the North because the North has, I think 

they have, quite a high need and not very many services that we 

provide up there. And I’m hoping that the people that are on the 

committee will have a strong voice and many things that need 

to be done in the North will be done through the work of this 

committee, if its work is heeded and actually act upon. 

 

So I thank the minister for his copy, and we’ll certainly be 

watching what the committee does and what comes about from 

their work. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 108 — The Cities Amendment Act, 2009 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 108, The 

Cities Amendment Act, 2009 be now introduced and read a first 

time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Municipal 

Affairs has moved first reading of Bill No. 108, The Cities 

Amendment Act, 2009. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the Minister Responsible for Municipal 

Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — At the next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

[11:00] 

Bill No. 109 — The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2009 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 109, The 

Municipalities Amendment Act, 2009 be now introduced and 

read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Municipal Affairs has moved 

first reading of Bill 109, The Municipalities Amendment Act, 

2009. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the Minister Responsible for Municipal 

Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — At the next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 110 — The Northern Municipalities Act, 2009 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 110, The 

Northern Municipalities Act be now introduced and read a first 

time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Municipal 

Affairs has moved that Bill No. 110, The Northern 

Municipalities Act, 2009 be now read the first time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the Minister Responsible for Municipal 

Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 111 — The Northern Municipalities Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2009/Loi de 2009 portant 

modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée 

The Northern Municipalities Act, 2009 
 



3554 Saskatchewan Hansard November 12, 2009 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 111, 

The Northern Municipalities Consequential Amendments Act, 

2009 be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Municipal 

Affairs has moved first reading of Bill No. 111, The Northern 

Municipalities Consequential Amendments Act, 2009. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the Minister Responsible for Municipal 

Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — The next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 112 — The Justices of the Peace 

Amendment Act, 2009/Loi de 2009 modifiant 

la Loi de 1988 sur les juges de paix 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 112, 

The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 2009 be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved first 

reading of Bill No. 112, The Justices of the Peace Amendment 

Act, 2009. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 113 — The Justices of the Peace Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2009 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 113, 

The Justices of the Peace Consequential Amendments Act, 2009 

be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved first 

reading of Bill 113, The Justices of the Peace Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2009. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 114 — The Small Claims Amendment Act, 2009/Loi 

de 2009 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur les petites créances 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 114, 

The Small Claims Amendment Act, 2009 be now introduced and 

read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved first 

reading of Bill No. 114, The Small Claims Amendment Act, 

2009. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — The next sitting of the House. 

 

Bill No. 115 — The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2009 

(No. 2)/Loi n
o
 2 de 2009 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour 

du Banc de la Reine 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 115, 

The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2009 be now introduced 

and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved first 

reading of Bill No. 115, The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 

2009. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 



November 12, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3555 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 116 — The Traffic Safety (Drivers’ Licences and 

Hand-held Electronic Communications Equipment) 

Amendment Act, 2009 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments Corp. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 116, 

the traffic safety (drivers’ licences and hand-held 

communication equipment) amendment Act, 2009 now be 

introduced and read the first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation has moved first reading of Bill 116, 

The Traffic Safety (Drivers’ Licences and Hand-held Electronic 

Communications Equipment) Amendment Act, 2009 be now 

read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered in 

committee? I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 609 — The Whistleblower Protection Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 609, The 

Whistleblower Protection Act be now introduced and read a first 

time. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Fairview has 

moved that Bill No. 609, The Whistleblower Protection Act can 

be now read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? I 

recognize the member from Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — At the next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 281 through 309. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 281 to 309 tabled. 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Autism Spectrum Disorder Strategy 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the end of my 

remarks, I’ll be moving the following motion: 

 

That the province of Saskatchewan shall establish a 

comprehensive, provincial Autism Spectrum Disorder 

(ASD) strategy that is based on proven, best practice, 

evidence-based research treatments, programming; and 

 

That all stakeholders, including individuals with ASD, be 

consulted on the components that will be included in the 

strategy, including but not limited to treatment, research, 

surveillance, awareness campaigns, community 

initiatives, education, and respite care of families; and 

 

That this strategy shall include child, adolescent, and 

adult treatments and support; and 

 

That given the complexity of the disorder and its 

treatments, the individualized funding concept be adapted 

for parents and guardians of autistic individuals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, families in Saskatchewan with autistic children are 

facing a crisis. When a child is diagnosed with autism and 

therapy is prescribed by a health professional, publicly funded 

health care only pays a small portion of the cost of the 

prescribed therapy. Families must often pay out of their own 

pocket and for a large portion of the expensive prescribed 

treatment, and these costs may reach as much as $60,000 a year. 

 

Autism is a complex, life-long developmental disability which 

is three to four times more prevalent among boys than girls and 

is on the rise with 6 out of 1,000 children being diagnosed 

autistic each year. Autism can result in severe problems in 

social interaction, communication, and behaviour. And, Mr. 

Speaker, autistic children and autistic individuals need autism 

therapy services and support in order to participate to their 

fullest extent in society. 

 



3556 Saskatchewan Hansard November 12, 2009 

Mr. Speaker, comprehensive autism spectrum disorder strategy 

will in the long run save families, individuals, and governments 

money as autistic individuals reach their full potential. Mr. 

Speaker, there is, as the minister has said, been developed an 

autism strategy. And it’s interesting to look at the strategy and 

the guiding principles. And I’m just going to read a few. 

 

The first one is that “Services and support are individualized to 

meet the unique and specific biological, emotional, 

developmental, and social needs of individuals with Autism 

Spectrum Disorders.” And the guiding principles, for the most 

part, are things that I think everyone believes in. It’s 

unfortunate that when I continue reading them, nothing, none of 

them, actually are done nor even are they addressed adequately 

in the strategy. And I think that is what speaks to the frustration 

of the parents and families and therapists who have come today 

to this legislature to listen to this debate. 

 

“The intensity of the services are supposed to match the 

individual needs.” Well we have basically a system that, as both 

ministers spoke, that has certain policies in place that no one 

seems to be aware that could be changed, and in fact not aware 

that they have the authority to do that. 

 

And we’re talking about issues like the income testing for the 

cognitive . . . income support. And that if it’s not working, why 

would we think that we have to keep it? In whose best interests 

is it to keep it? And for the ministers to stand up and defend it 

when it’s indefensible is odd to say the least. The authority rests 

with them to make it work. And the parents of children and the 

families of people who have autism need to know that what’s in 

place and that money is being spent on will actually meet their 

needs and their children and their family’s needs. And that isn’t 

so. 

 

And another guiding principle is that the “Services and supports 

are available to reduce the impairment and improve the 

functioning . . .” Well none of that will happen unless you have 

timely diagnosis and adequate continuing interventions, so that 

families with children with autism have access to the treatments 

that they need and that they choose because there’s a fairly wide 

variety of treatment options available, and what works for one 

child will not necessarily work for another. 

 

And families need to be included in the planning of what works 

for their children, and included in this planning is a fair amount 

of personal cost. 

 

And the personal cost is not only measured in dollars. I’ve had 

families come to my office that have both had to quit their jobs 

because they both have to be at home to look after their child. 

 

I’ve had families come and say they’re divorcing. And the 

divorce rate is very high. This is a very stressful, stressful 

circumstance for families to be in, and a lot of marriages just 

don’t work; they don’t last. And this is something that again is a 

cost to society, not to mention the cost to the individuals and the 

children, to split up the family. We don’t do enough to support 

people so that they as families can survive. 

 

And when we look at what people are asking for, they want 

somebody who knows how to help them. And parents of these 

children are really well educated on this disorder, mainly 

because they’re interested but also because they’re smart. And 

people have access to information that has . . . We’ve never 

seen such an access to information. 

 

And now parents have the information, but they should not be 

asked to be the person who orientates the therapist. And when 

the minister talked about the individuals that are being hired 

across the province, that is one of the main concerns is that the 

people that are being hired do not have adequate orientation to 

work with these children. And it is not the job of the parents — 

who have enough to do at home to keep the family together, to 

keep the child safe and happy — to actually now start 

orientating the therapists. 

 

It’s all well and good to pay the therapists whatever we’re going 

to pay them and hire them. But if they aren’t able to come and 

work with the families and be the navigator, be the person who 

pulls the services together for that individual child and that 

family, then it’s a waste of money. It is better spent to give that 

money to the family who then can find their own best resource. 

 

And as the minister said, many of us have experience in our 

own families with children with autism. I too have a nephew 

that has autism. He is not diagnosed yet, so I understand the 

waiting. I understand the purchase of services, and I understand 

the frustration of the parents who are watching this child not get 

what is needed at this crucial point of his development. He’s 

three years old. The longer you wait to intervene, the less likely 

the child will have to reach his or her full potential. And that’s 

what the parents are saying. 

 

This isn’t an exercise in pointing fingers, as the minister just 

couldn’t resist at the end of his last question. He couldn’t resist 

pointing fingers. If the minister would take the political rhetoric 

out of his answers, we’d be faced with dead silence. He simply 

can’t answer the question that would meet the parents’ needs. It 

has to be a political spin. And that doesn’t matter to the parents. 

 

We as government didn’t do enough. Absolutely we did not. 

But now we need to see something better than saying what you 

did or didn’t do. That isn’t going to help any child or any 

family. It simply is not enough. And it isn’t an answer that 

parents are coming to this legislature to get. They came to ask 

for help, and they get platitudes and political rhetoric. How sad. 

How sad. That’s all we have to offer. Well we do not. 

 

From our point of view, we think the income testing should be 

removed from the cognitive . . . the funding that’s needed and 

we also think individualized funding needs to be adapted to 

have the parents access their own therapies that best meet the 

needs of their child and their family. 

 

And individualized funding is something that the member from 

Nutana and I were very instrumental in bringing into the health 

system when we were in the Ministry of Health. We understand 

how it is supposed to work. Unfortunately it isn’t serving 

people well yet either and so for the Minister of Social Services 

to say that a policy that was established under our government, 

when we were government, will stay forever — if it doesn’t 

work, we can’t keep it. 

 

I’m having people from the disabilities community say to me, 

we have to fix that. We have to fix individualized funding. It 



November 12, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3557 

was meant for a certain purpose to have people be more 

independent and it isn’t working, so we need to fix it. And this 

is another thing that we need to look at when we adapt the 

individualized funding, which I hope that we will do since it’s 

the answer to these parents who need help now. 

 

[11:15] 

 

If we adapt the individualized funding, we have to take the 

bureaucracy out of it. The people that are accessing 

individualized funding through the disabilities community are 

finding it really frustrating. In fact I had a person tell me that 

she has two degrees and she was helping her brother try to get 

this individualized funding. With two degrees, she couldn’t 

figure out the forms. 

 

The forms are put there, from my view, to discourage people 

from using it. That isn’t what the government is meant to do. 

We are meant to serve the people, make it easier. When 

someone calls us and says, I need help, our first answer should 

not be no. It should be, how can we help you? How can we help 

you? And if we have a policy that doesn’t work, then we say we 

need to look at this and we need to fix it so it can help you. 

 

And to say that we are entrenched in our policies is a pretty 

lame excuse for doing nothing. And I think that the people that 

have come today and the families who are watching, that 

couldn’t come because they simply can’t — they can’t get 

respite care; they can’t bring their children; they have other 

things that they need to do — they all could not come but 

believe me, Mr. Speaker, they’re all watching. And they want to 

hear an answer and they don’t want to hear, well this is how it’s 

always been done and this is how it has to be done forever. That 

isn’t good enough. 

 

And they don’t want to talk about a strategy that has all the 

good words in it. All the good words are here when I read it. 

The words are good and the guiding principles are good, and 

the vision statement is great. But it’s been sitting on the 

minister’s desk for a year. Do we have any hope or confidence 

that this will actually be implemented so families can actually 

benefit and children who are waiting — number 138 on the 

waiting list to wait for three hours of therapy a week — do we 

have any hope that these children and these families will be 

served by this strategy? I have not seen it. I cannot say I have 

that hope, and I think families that are here today have come 

because they don’t see the hope either. 

 

They need to see, frankly, the money. They need to see some 

money so that they can actually survive. When people have to 

quit work because they have to look after their child, then they 

can’t afford to buy any more therapy. So it’s a vicious circle of, 

how do you survive? How does a family survive with that kind 

of stress? 

 

And I’ve talked about the marital breakups, but the rest of the 

family too. I mean you have a child that has autism. You have 

other children too. And how does that whole family work 

together to survive as a family and still do the best for everyone 

in the family? And I don’t see it. 

 

And I don’t see the minister having any idea. He talked about 

all the people who have come to him and spoke these words and 

showed him evidence of what this means. And he still has those 

answers to this House, that it is a finger-pointing political 

rhetoric and exercise. Shame on him. Shame on him. Children 

should not be used this way, should not be disadvantaged this 

way. 

 

We do have an obligation to the children that you should not 

have to go and income test, be income tested to receive funding 

under a program that is meant to do this. And we don’t have to 

have income testing if you fall and break your hip and come to 

emergency. They don’t ask you what your income is before you 

get your hip replaced or your X-ray done or anything. Why 

would we do this to these families of children with autism 

disorder? Why would we do that to them? 

 

This isn’t the same as all the other income testing things that we 

do that the minister rattled off as a defence. It isn’t a defence. 

And when we see this many families come today and talk about 

what is needed, you have to say, this isn’t me bringing this up 

for some political gain. This isn’t the Opposition Leader 

bringing it up for political gain. This is families who have come 

and talked to us and talked to the minister and talked to many 

other MLAs and told them — told all of us that — we need 

help. We are in crisis. We need help now. 

 

And there is a way to do this. If we give the families 

individualized funding, access to that, even in an interim basis 

so that the families have some ability to access the proper 

therapies for their children right now and in the amount that 

those children need to actually progress to their full potential, 

then we will all benefit. And if we need to do it as an interim 

while we wait for a strategy somehow to be introduced and 

developed and staffed up and orientated up, then at least while 

we’re doing that — while we’re doing our bureaucratic dancing 

— we can have real help to families so that they can actually 

deal with what they have to deal with on a day-to-day basis. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the therapists that came today to . . . There’s 

therapists in the audience as well, in the galleries, and they 

came to give their support. They know what work has to be 

done. They know intimately what work has to be done. We 

need to have everybody’s input into what is needed for this. But 

as a consensus, the message I’ve got is that individualized 

funding, the concept of individualized funding would be 

extremely beneficial to families so they could actually move to 

help their children. 

 

And as I said, Mr. Speaker, I do have a motion ready to read, so 

I don’t want to go too far before I actually have to say the 

motion. So I think I’m going to actually read it now and leave 

some room for my colleagues to speak because everybody does 

have a lot to say — and a major support from the opposition for 

this motion. And the motion reads: 

 

That the province of Saskatchewan shall establish a 

comprehensive provincial autism spectrum disorder 

strategy that is based on proven, best practice, 

evidence-based research treatments and programming; 

and 

 

That all stakeholders, including individuals with ASD, be 

consulted on the components that will be included in the 

strategy including, but not limited to, treatment, research, 



3558 Saskatchewan Hansard November 12, 2009 

surveillance, awareness campaigns, community 

initiatives, education, and respite care of families; and 

 

That this strategy shall include child, adolescent, and 

adult treatments and support; and 

 

That given the complexity of the disorder and its 

treatments, the individualized funding concept be adapted 

for parents and guardians of autistic individuals. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Eastview has 

moved: 

 

That the province of Saskatchewan shall establish a 

comprehensive provincial autism spectrum disorder 

strategy that is based on proven, best practice, 

evidence-based research treatments and programming; 

and 

 

That all stakeholders, including individuals with ASD, be 

consulted on the components that will be included in the 

strategy including, but not limited to, treatment, research, 

surveillance, awareness campaigns, community 

initiatives, education, and respite care of families; and 

 

That this strategy shall include child, adolescent, and 

adult treatments and support; and 

 

That given the complexity of the disorder and its 

treatments, the individualized funding concept be adapted 

for parents and guardians of autistic individuals. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Sutherland. 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m honoured to 

get up in the House today and speak to this motion. Autism, I 

think, is a word that we hear very often, but I don’t think we 

really do know how the disease processes and the impact to 

both the patient and to the family. 

 

I researched autism last night, Mr. Speaker, and there were 

quite a few videos available for viewing. And these little 

children, cute as a button, are doing behaviours that I saw in my 

kids as well. And it’s a group of these behaviours that leads to 

the diagnosis, and as a result of that sometimes the diagnosis is 

put off or missed. 

 

Autism spectrum disorder is a neurological disorder which 

causes developmental disability. Autism affects the way the 

brain functions, resulting in difficulties with communication 

and skill interaction, unusual patterns of behaviours, activities, 

and interests. 

 

The term spectrum refers to a continuum of severity and 

developmental impairment. Not every child who is afflicted 

with autism behaves in the same way or has the same disability. 

Children and adults with ASD, autism spectrum disorder, 

usually have particular communication and social, behavioural 

characteristics in common. But the conditions cover a wide 

spectrum with individual differences in the number and kind of 

symptoms, severity, age of onset, challenges with social 

interactions. 

 

There are five autism spectrum disorders, and they’re described 

under the category of pervasive development disorder. The 

most common is autistic disorder; PDD-NOS, which is 

pervasive developmental disorder — not otherwise specified; 

and Asperger’s disorder, also called Asperger’s syndrome. 

 

What this is telling us, Mr. Speaker, that the diagnosis process 

is not very simple. It’s a complicated process that takes 

well-trained experts, and it’s not a matter of having an ECG 

[electrocardiogram] or a blood test. This kind of affliction needs 

to be diagnosed through monitoring and behavioural 

assessment. 

 

Autistic disorder usually appears during the first three years of 

life and is four times more common in boys than in girls. 

Asperger’s Syndrome is often diagnosed later, once a child 

reaches school age. So what we do know is that it’s estimated 

that one in every 165 children is born with an ASD, and there 

are approximately 200,000 Canadians living with an ASD. This 

figure does not account for the numerous family members and 

caregivers whose lives are affected by autism. 

 

Autism is not related to race, ethnicity, family income, lifestyle, 

or parenting. There is no standard type or typical person with an 

autistic developmental disorder. 

 

What are some of the characteristics of this disorder? As I said, 

it has largely got to do with social skills and communication. 

That’s why the diagnosis area is done through monitoring and 

behaviour. So basically, Mr. Speaker, the family recognizes or 

suspects a behaviour that seems a little different in their child. 

And it’s very disturbing when you’re a parent to know or to 

wonder if your child’s sick. I mean, we’re all parents. The worst 

thing that could happen to us is for our child to be sick, 

especially a debilitating, chronic disease such as this. 

 

So the parents . . . And part of it is education. I mean, I don’t 

think any of the members in the House, save for the member 

from Eastview, you know, would have that much knowledge 

about this disease unless they had it in their family. And it’s a 

complicated thing to learn about. So suffice it to say that 

parents need a place to go. They need to be able to ask the 

questions about the child’s behaviour and get a diagnosis. We 

do have a team in Saskatoon at the Kinsmen Children’s Centre 

who do the diagnoses. 

 

And the characteristics of ASDs are difficulty with social skills. 

Some autistic people show no interest in other people. They 

don’t know how to talk, communicate in a conversation. 

Children have trouble playing or relating to another child, 

problems with communications and especially non-verbal 

communication — facial gestures and facial cues that we take 

for granted when looking at someone. The autistic person 

cannot connect those dots from a facial cue or an emotional 

gesture into real communications. 

 

They also have repeated behaviours and restricted interests. One 

of the common things in young children is spinning around. 

And I think everybody here has had a niece or nephew, if you 

don’t have children of your own, stand and turn around and 



November 12, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3559 

around and around. It’s a game. This is something that’s a 

common characteristic behaviour in autistic children. And, you 

know, alone that wouldn’t be significant, but coupled with 

staring and finger flapping and repeated rocking . . .  

 

The unfortunate thing, Mr. Speaker, is when ASD affects a 

child, the child will develop normally. So you feel very 

comfortable your child’s coming along and developing quite 

normally, and sometimes in a matter of a day they cease to 

connect with people visually or by sound. So it’s very difficult 

on parents. 

 

[11:30] 

 

ASD also has behaviours like unusual responses to sensations. 

So we’ve all seen Rain Man. When the actor doesn’t get his 

way or he’s put off of a routine, he begins to tantrum and hit 

himself. And that’s one of the behaviours significant to autism, 

and of course that’s in varied degrees of severity. However, 

managing that type of behaviour, one can only imagine the 

stress in that. 

 

So the diagnosis, as I said, is done through observation of the 

child by professionals. There’s a series of treatments. Because 

every case is different, every treatment schedule is different. 

However, you do need to have a specialist do the treatment. 

Fly-by-night or snake oil salesmen, so to speak, can do more 

damage than good. So there’s applied behaviour analysis, 

speech therapy, occupational therapy, social skills therapy, 

physical therapy, play therapy, behaviour therapy, and 

developmental therapies, as well as visually based therapies. 

Biomedical is also used. Some pharmaceuticals are helpful, but 

they respond most to behavioural therapies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the previous government put in $500,000 

earmarked for autism. Our government in its first year bumped 

that up to 3 million and is continuing to fund it yearly. We are 

in the process of getting specialists and creating a framework 

where we can help these children and these families. 

 

The cognitive disabilities fund and the means testing, Mr. 

Speaker, that whole fund was put in place by that government 

across the way when they were in power. And now, they’re 

tearing it apart. We know we need more treatment. We know 

we need to go farther, and we’re doing that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. I recognize 

the member from Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s with 

some humility I enter into this debate. And I will not pretend to 

lecture other members of the House — some of whom have 

been Health ministers, and one of whom of course currently is a 

Health minister, Mr. Speaker — or members of the public about 

autism spectrum disorder. 

 

It is our place here to argue public policy and debate whether 

what has been done up to today for the families afflicted by this 

spectrum disorder is sufficient and appropriate or not. And it is 

the position of the opposition, as expressed in this motion, that 

it is not sufficient and it is not appropriate and much more 

needs to be done. 

 

I’m not sure what is the position of the government members 

yet, Mr. Speaker. I don’t think we’ve heard that yet. But it 

seems to be by implication that enough has been done by this 

government, and that we cannot expect to see very much more 

from this government in respect to a strategy, in respect to 

greater funding for those afflicted by autism spectrum disorder. 

 

I am fond, perhaps overly fond, of a Russian proverb, Mr. 

Speaker: “The best time to plant a tree is twenty years ago. The 

second best time is today.” And what that proverb speaks to is 

the inadequacies of regret and recriminations about the past to 

address problems for the future, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s what we see so often from this government. And 

members who’ve only served in government, on the 

government benches, Mr. Speaker, are fond of rising and 

saying, that government, to this opposition, Mr. Speaker. As if 

they are in opposition, as if they were elected to opposition, 

when they were elected to government. 

 

Too often members of this government get up and say, for the 

past 16 years. And two years into this government, members 

will get up and say, as they have this week, over the past 16 

years nothing was done. Well I would say through you, Mr. 

Speaker, to those members: of those past 16 years, two years 

are theirs. Two years are theirs for them to answer to, Mr. 

Speaker. What has been done in the past 16 years? But what has 

been done in the last two years of those 16 years, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Minister of Health, in answers to questions today, and the 

member from Saskatoon Sutherland who just spoke, both said 

that this government has increased funding for autism spectrum 

disorder from $500,000 to $3 million. Mr. Speaker, I would like 

to read from the budget address — the Minister of Finance, the 

NDP government — made on March 22, 2007. Mr. Speaker: 

 

. . . I’m very pleased also to announce today that we will 

provide $3 million in this budget to develop an intensive 

autism treatment program for children moderately to 

severely affected by autism. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is the Hansard record. That was the budget of 

2007. If that’s correct, Mr. Speaker, then this is not a sixfold 

increase we have seen from this government, Mr. Speaker. It is 

a freeze of funding, Mr. Speaker. A freeze of funding, and as a 

matter of fact, a decrease of funding by inflationary pressures. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when the NDP government — and I’m not 

saying we planted the tree 20 years ago when we should’ve — 

but when the NDP government made this first step in 2007, we 

did not imagine that any future government would see it as the 

last step, Mr. Speaker. And so we are calling on this 

government to take the next step and not point out that they are 

not sitting under the shade of a tree planted 20 years ago, but to 

plant the trees that are necessary. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, you know, in some ways my favourite 

proverb is a little slight for the circumstances. Children are not 

trees. And the importance of intervening early in a child’s life, 

early in a child’s development, cannot be overemphasized, Mr. 

Speaker. We knew that. We knew in government that we had to 

do what we could when we could do it. 

 



3560 Saskatchewan Hansard November 12, 2009 

Immediately prior to announcing the spending on autism, the 

Finance Minister announced restoration of the dental sealant 

program or at least the first step to return to the dental sealant 

program. I only raise that, Mr. Speaker, because one of the first 

programs this government cut — they may have only frozen 

spending on autism — they cut the dental sealant program. 

When it is time to cost-cut on that side of the House, Mr. 

Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party government is penny-wise and 

pound foolish. 

 

And I appreciate all governments go from one budget to the 

next to a certain extent, and they go from one four-year term to 

the next four-year term to a certain extent, Mr. Speaker. But this 

is a government that sees its current political situation as so 

much more important than the future of families that may not 

see the full entire benefits of individualized funding, the full 

entire benefits of a strategy of early intervention, years after the 

men and women sitting on the government benches have left 

public life, Mr. Speaker. But there has to be some concern 

about the future. Our concern can’t always be for the political 

present, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now members opposite, particularly the Minister of Health but 

also the member from Saskatoon Sutherland, said, well we can’t 

move away from income testing because we’ve had income 

testing. And it does seem to be a government that is frozen in 

many ways by the past. And ironically frozen by not their own 

past, not their own policies, not their own practices, but we 

can’t possibly move away from the policies of the previous 

government, which we want to attack but also say, these are the 

policies that are in place. These are the precedents, and 

implicitly we have to continue to follow them. 

 

In the list of income testing that the minister set out in his 

answers to questions, he included income testing for the 

seniors’ drug plan, Mr. Speaker. Well that was not the policy of 

the previous government, Mr. Speaker. When the NDP 

government brought in the seniors’ drug plan . . . And members 

opposite, I think, will have done their very best to forget their 

original reaction: it was unsustainable. The members opposite 

did not support it. They did not believe it should have been 

done. They said it was unsustainable. The province could not 

afford it. 

 

Well as on many issues, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party can 

change their convictions and principles from one week to the 

next. And when they realized the program was popular, all of a 

sudden it was sustainable, and to save face, to save face, Mr. 

Speaker, they brought in income testing. And it has never been 

established by this government — and this opposition has asked 

on numerous occasions — it has never been established by this 

government that the administrative cost of the income testing 

actually is less than the savings by not providing the program to 

all senior citizens. Mr. Speaker, the programming actually costs 

more because of the income testing. 

 

I’m not suggesting that would be the case with individualized 

funding for people on autism, Mr. Speaker. But to rise in this 

House and oppose an end to income testing for families 

afflicted by autism on the grounds that we inflict income testing 

as a political face-saving measure on the senior citizens of this 

province for the seniors’ drug plan, is to add insult, Mr. 

Speaker, to injury. 

And so, Mr. Speaker, the opposition calls on the government to 

unfreeze the funding directed at families afflicted by autism, to 

stop blaming the past for refusing to build a future, and to look 

at what can be done for the early intervention in the lives of 

these . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. I recognize 

the member from Prince Albert Carlton. 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I too join in 

the debate today but also humbled by the fact that I have two 

lovely daughters who are teenagers now, and I as a parent and 

my wife, Charlene, have never had to worry about a condition 

like this. 

 

And my wife’s a teacher, and she tells me stories about children 

in grade 1 that she teaches who are for the most part diagnosed 

or probably will be diagnosed with autism in the future. And I 

hear lots of stories when she comes home from school about the 

supports that are required. And I understand the love of a 

parent, and thank you for coming here today to take part in this 

and listen to us. And to have the opportunity to speak on this is 

humbling and I’m very touched, so thank you for this. 

 

The member from Saskatoon Meewasin touched on a couple of 

interesting points. The latter point I want to bring up first is that 

he talks about policies that were in place, Mr. Speaker, under 

the previous NDP government. And that our government, when 

we came into power by the electorate two years ago, understood 

that we had policies that were going to be different. They voted 

for those policy changes. In fact by the standards of statistics, it 

would look like the people of Saskatchewan ran to our policies. 

They believe in us. That there was problems with the previous 

administration on how they ran the government and how they 

ran the province for families, for individuals. 

 

And we talk about various things in this Legislative Assembly, 

about nurse retention. We talk about housing for social service 

recipients. We talk about other programs as well. I’m not going 

to get into those today. I want to focus on this specific issue. 

 

And I think the issue here that the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin . . . And one of the first points he talked about was 

the funding. True, and on his facts, there was $500,000 a year 

that the previous government for 16 years gave to this particular 

account. And in 2007, yes, there was an injection of 2.5 million 

additional dollars — one-time funding, Mr. Speaker, one-time. 

 

[11:45] 

 

So prior to that, when you do the math, Mr. Speaker, it averages 

out, over 16 years of NDP government, to $32,000 per year — 

small, small amount. Sadly to say it was a small amount by the 

previous administration, and one-time funding, with no 

commitment to future funding, was disheartening. 

 

So our government, Mr. Speaker, listened to the stakeholders, 

and over the last two years we’ve put in $6 million, Mr. 

Speaker. And we have a commitment to maintain that funding 

every year — not a one-time injection during an election year. 

So that’s disheartening the member from Saskatoon Meewasin 

wanted to go there this morning with a gallery full of mothers 

and fathers of children who are suffering from that autism 



November 12, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3561 

disease. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, you know, as awareness of autism spectrum 

disorder increases, we are seeing early diagnosis, resulting in a 

need for intensive supports for family of children with autism. 

 

Our government announced last March that children with 

autism in the communities of North Battleford, Regina, 

Saskatoon will benefit from $322,300 in new funding. This 

investment includes $150,000 in ongoing funding to early 

childhood intervention programs for increasing services for 

children and their families. Also one-time grant of $172,300 

will be provided to the Saskatoon region early childhood 

intervention program to develop, coordinate, and deliver two 

professional learning conferences on autism for the pre-K to 12 

[pre-kindergarten to grade 12] and early learning and child care 

sectors. 

 

The new funding, Mr. Speaker, will allow the early childhood 

intervention programs in North Battleford, Regina, and 

Saskatoon to provide intensive, home-based support to five to 

seven families in each early childhood intervention program 

region. Through this funding, an autism early childhood 

consultant will work with children from birth to age five who 

are diagnosed with autism or who are awaiting diagnosis. This 

work will help both the child and family meet goals such as 

increasing communication skills, improving cognitive skills, 

and improving fine and gross motor skills. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on top of this, the Minister of Health announced 

the framework and action plan for autism spectrum disorder 

services so children with autism can have access to enhanced 

services and supports. This framework is designed to address 

growing gaps in autism care and focus the approach to services 

and support to those with autism. 

 

Under the plan, 15 consultants will be located throughout the 

province, acting as first points of contact for families seeking 

services. The consultants will individualize intervention 

programs for children and act as case managers. An additional 

18 consultants will support workers and provide direct supports 

to children with autism. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this new plan does two things. First, it makes the 

most efficient use possible of the available funding dollars. And 

second and even more important, it recognizes that each child 

with autism is unique and needs individualized programming 

and evidence-supported intervention options. Mr. Speaker, our 

government will continue to ensure those with autism are 

receiving the care needed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government has two global funds to support 

those with autism. First there is the early childhood intervention 

program, as I spoke about earlier, which received $3.6 million. 

And an additional $990 million is provided to the boards of 

education around the province. This money is used to improve 

the quality of education and assist in the delivery of appropriate 

programs and services. Mr. Speaker, we also have the 

provincial autism advisory committee which created a plan to 

guide the development of autism treatment and support across 

the province with $2.99 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is addressing immediate needs of 

those with autism. At the same time, we are providing a 

long-term vision to guide us as we move forward. Talking to 

stakeholders and groups that have been involved with the 

autism spectrum disorder for a number of years have given us 

counsel, moving us forward. And this government believes in 

taking that counsel ongoing as well. Because for sure, and to be 

sure, Mr. Speaker, things in the past weren’t good. 

 

Things right now are moving forward and we look forward to 

the stakeholders involved in this particular disorder to advise 

us. And the parents will in turn be able to talk to those groups 

who in turn can advise us as well. And that’s what this 

government is committed to, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The income program for people with long-term disabilities is 

another issue our government took into hand two years ago. 

And, Mr. Speaker, our government brought in the largest ever 

investment in programming for people with intellectual 

disabilities, as well as the introduction of a new income plan for 

people with disabilities. We put $76.9 million over four years to 

help those with intellectual disabilities to live safe, secure, and 

meaningful lives in their communities. 

 

This investment will eliminate the current 440-person wait-list 

for residential, day, and specialized programs for people with 

intellectual disabilities. It also includes 27.8 million in funding 

for capital projects. It will also introduce programming 

standards that will ensure the appropriate levels of support are 

provided, and it will provide improved supports to approved 

private sector home providers. 

 

Over the next four years, we will be able to help more than 400 

people who are currently on a waiting list for new or expanded 

services. Mr. Speaker, this means for the first time in our 

province’s history, people with long-term disabilities have their 

own separate income program. For years people with 

disabilities and their organizations have been telling 

government that they needed a new, dignified, less intrusive 

income support program. The new program began in October 

2009, when 3,000 people with disabilities enrolled and began to 

receive benefits. 

 

Over time, enrolment in the new program is expected to reach 

between 8,000 and 10,000 people. This historic income 

replacement program is a turning point for people with 

disabilities in Saskatchewan. It is giving people a greater 

opportunity to contribute to their well-being as an important 

factor in helping them build self-reliance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, more than 3,000 people who are eligible for the 

new program have been invited to enrol, by the Ministry of 

Social Services, as part of the program’s implementation, with 

the first benefits to be paid for the month of December. So far 

more than 2,000 people have already enrolled in the new 

program. The SAID [Saskatchewan assured income for 

disability] program is designed in collaboration with members 

of the disability community and will provide an income for 

people with significant long-term disabilities that are separate 

from the Saskatchewan assistance program, referred to as SAP. 

 

Support for people with disabilities is a priority for this 

government. We are committed to ensuring that everyone in 

Saskatchewan benefits from our province’s growth. Mr. 



3562 Saskatchewan Hansard November 12, 2009 

Speaker, as a government we are committed to doing our part to 

ensure people with disabilities participate fully in our society. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those with intellectual disabilities in the Saskatoon 

area are going to have access to residential and other programs 

with funding to build a new home near Aberdeen. This home 

will include a 15-space day program for people with intellectual 

disabilities, and it will also have a day program. 

 

We have committed to providing more than $750,000 in annual 

operational funding once the new home and day program are in 

operation. The new 4,500-square-foot home will be constructed 

on an acreage and will be operated by Farm in the Dell, who is 

also planning to build the 2,000-square-foot building for the 

delivery of day programs as part of this project. 

 

And I see my time’s coming in, Mr. Speaker. So autism is a 

serious issue for this government. We as legislators shouldn’t 

play politics with such an issue. We need to work and help 

those with autism. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The member’s time has 

elapsed. I recognize the member from Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

pleased to enter into this public policy discussion in terms of 

how we need to move forward when it comes to autism-related 

supports and services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the previous member just indicated to the House 

— and I want to correct the previous member — that, in the last 

year in office, the NDP government allocated $2.5 million in 

one-time funding to autism supports and that there was no 

ability to include the $3 million in ongoing supports. And I just 

wanted to put it on the public record. Some of us sat on the 

Treasury Board prior to our defeat in November of 2007, and 

some of us have briefing notes that were available in the fall of 

2007 and the spring of 2007. 

 

I just wanted to put this on the record. It’s a briefing note 

regarding enhancements to autism-related supports and services 

dated September 18th, 2007. And I need to correct the 

government because what this briefing note indicates is that the 

2007-08 budget for autism included $500,000 in ongoing 

funding for treatment and support and $2.5 million in one-time 

funding for bursary and training opportunities for people who 

work with autism and related conditions. 

 

Saskatchewan Health recognizes the need to provide high 

quality services to our province’s children and has decided 

to allocate ongoing funding for autism interventions in the 

amount of $3 million annually, beginning in 2008-09. 

 

Now what this briefing note also indicates is that: 

 

During 2007-08, the one-time funding will be used for 

capacity building and training. Funds have been allocated 

to provide introductory hands-on autism therapy training 

workshops to front-line professionals [so that would be 

teachers, educational assistants, child care workers, 

therapists, consultants] to provide bursaries to students in 

selected health professionals to enhance the summer 

programming for children with autism and to commence 

providing intense therapy to children with autism. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this briefing note also says departmental 

officials will be meeting with our partners in the near future to 

discuss the options for how these funds should be used in 

2008-09 and beyond. It also says that very soon a letter will be 

going to health regions, community resources, Learning, and 

CBOs to invite them to participate on an autism advisory 

committee to plan for the allocation of the $3 million budget for 

2008-09. So, Mr. Speaker, the previous government did make 

arrangements to have ongoing supports of 3 million for autism 

services in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, all of us have had people from our 

constituencies come to our offices indicating that the 

individualized funding is not working for them. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I recently had a young family that have recently 

purchased a home. They work. They don’t make a lot of money, 

but they earn money beyond the ability to receive any 

individualized funding because of their income. 

 

Mr. Speaker, their little boy is two and a half years old. He’s a 

beautiful little boy. He’s been recently diagnosed with autism 

spectrum disorder, and he is not yet speaking. And, Mr. 

Speaker, they believe that with some intense speech and 

language therapy that their little boy could be in a position 

when he starts school to have some speech and language. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are people who are middle-income people. 

Both the man and the woman are both working, and they have 

one child. But they have a pretty significant mortgage payment 

because they have gotten into the housing market in Saskatoon, 

and we all know that the cost of housing has escalated 

dramatically in the province of Saskatchewan. Most of the 

people that are coming to my office, Mr. Speaker, are young 

working families with young children and they have a diagnosis 

and they’re looking for supports. 

 

Now the minister earlier indicated to us that he had this 

advisory committee put in place and that they had put forward a 

program or a framework and an action plan last year. And I 

think all of us can agree with the guiding principles. I think the 

principles are important. The principles are that: 

 

Services and supports are [to be] individualized to meet 

the unique and specific biological, emotional 

development and social needs of individuals with Autism 

Spectrum Disorders. 

 

The intensity of services and supports [need to] match the 

level of individual needs. 

 

Services and supports are available to reduce the 

impairment and improve the functioning of individuals 

with Autism Spectrum Disorders. 

 

Early intervention . . . 

 

And my colleague, the member from Meewasin, spoke about 

this. 

 

Early intervention is critical in [terms of] reducing 

impairment and improving the function of individuals 



November 12, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3563 

with Autism Spectrum Disorders. 

 

Intervention, treatment and support services are 

evidence-supported, and on-going research and evaluation 

informs decision-making by policy-makers, service 

providers and community members. 

 

And I want to support my colleague from Eastview when she 

said that the real experts on autism disorder are the parents that 

have spent a lot of time researching the subject, getting to know 

the research. They know exactly what may work and may not 

work given the individual circumstance. And I really do think 

that we need to have professionals pay more attention to what 

parents are saying to them, because oftentimes the parent is the 

expert. Most times the parent is the expert when it comes to the 

types of strategies and programs that may or may not work with 

their child. 

 

[12:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, the guiding principles go on and I think all of us, 

as members of this Assembly, can agree with the guiding 

principles. Now what we need to do is to get the right policies 

in place to support the guiding principles, and we need to get 

the right support in place to support parents and their children. 

 

Mr. Speaker, individualized funding is not working for the vast 

majority of parents in the province because it’s income tested. 

And I do believe that, given that we know early intervention is 

critical, that we need to remove that impediment in order that 

young children can have access to the appropriate services for 

their particular disability, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s absolutely key that we have trained 

individuals and educated individuals in autism. Mr. Speaker, 

it’s absolutely key. And we know where the education and 

training is located. We need to get people into those programs 

so that they are in Saskatchewan providing the latest 

information and the best therapies to children and youth that are 

living with autism spectrum disorder. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve known in the past that, particularly in the 

whole area of treating people who’ve been sexually abused, you 

can’t just have anybody treat them. You need to have people 

who have the skills and knowledge and the pedagogy when it 

comes to treatment and supports. And so I say to the members 

opposite, let’s get the right people who have the right training to 

provide those services to the young people that have this 

disorder, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The other thing that we need to do, Mr. Speaker, is that we need 

to get those services on the ground in communities, and that is 

going to take money beyond the $3 million. And so as we’re 

training and educating those young people or the supports, we 

then need to make sure that there is a position available for 

people in the community to have access to the right therapies, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so I would say to the government that I know that they’re 

putting 18 people across the province in place. I hope that they 

have the education and training and knowledge base, because 

that is key if we’re going to have the right supports with the 

right programs in place to support families who have children 

with autism spectrum disorder, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other thing that we need to do is get rid of the 

barrier. If intervention is critical to supporting people with 

autism spectrum disorder, we can’t have a barrier of income. 

Mr. Speaker, we need to treat this disorder as we do . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. I recognize 

the member from Saskatchewan Rivers. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m honoured to be 

able to stand in the House today and speak on this important 

issue faced today. We submit to this House that it’s 

irresponsible to suggest that our government has done nothing 

regarding the needs of students with autism spectrum disorder. 

Our government has not, nor will it ever, ignore the needs of 

children living with autism spectrum disorder. 

 

Consider the following: the Ministry of Education provides 3.7 

million annually to the early childhood intervention program. 

This program then directs funds to students with autism 

spectrum disorder. Furthermore, the ministry also provides 67 

million annually to school boards for intensive needs support 

services, which include services for students with autism 

spectrum disorder. In addition to the Ministry of Education 

funding towards the needs of students with autism spectrum 

disorder, our Saskatchewan Party government through the 

Ministry of Health allocated 2.9 million to the provincial autism 

advisory committee. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with nearly 7 million funding dollars committed to 

addressing the needs of students with autism spectrum disorder, 

how can the NDP claim that we have ignored the needs of these 

students? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP also contends that the Saskatchewan 

Party government isn’t doing anything to support families of 

children with autism. This is untrue. In 2008 our government 

provided 3 million of funding for autism services. We consulted 

with all stakeholder groups, including families and health care 

professionals, to best determine the needs of families with 

children with autism. 

 

I myself, I’m in a program called Adopt an MLA and I work 

with a family raising a child with autism. Bryan is a bright 

young man and I think he really enjoys our visits together. Well 

I’m the parent of four adult children. I understand the 

challenges of raising a child with autism. By working and 

supporting with these families, I truly believe we can help them. 

 

Again, our government also created the provincial autism 

advisory committee which provides parents and other 

stakeholders with a feedback mechanism. Parents can now 

provide valuable input which will then guide treatment for 

children with autism. Mr. Speaker, under the previous NDP 

government the families of children with autism had no such 

voice. 

 

Our government also created 33 new positions throughout the 

province that will enhance autism spectrum disorder services. 

Now these new positions will also support numerous 

intervention programs, as well as providing training 

opportunities for Saskatchewan parents, service providers, 



3564 Saskatchewan Hansard November 12, 2009 

professionals, and paraprofessionals. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, our government has implemented 

funding for three autism positions through the early childhood 

intervention program. Now these autism positions will be 

absolutely critical for children with autism, as they are the first 

stage in helping these children acquire a functional 

communicational system. Once professionals have intervened at 

an early stage, these workers can begin to work with the 

children in cultivating a communication system in order that 

their learning can expand. Now these critical positions will be 

located in Regina, Saskatoon, and the Battlefords. So, Mr. 

Speaker, we can see that our government is committed to 

providing funding and resources to these families of children 

with autism. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the numbers speak for themselves. And contrary 

to what the opposition says, our government is doing a lot to 

support these families. Through three separate ministries, our 

government provides direct funding. The Ministry of Education 

does so through two global funds. The early childhood 

intervention program is provided with 3.6 million, and this 

money can be directed to intensive interventions for children 

with autism spectrum disorder. Now these programs include 

supports and services such as assessment, speech/language 

services, occupational and physical therapy, counselling, and 

inter-agency collaboration for students with intensive needs 

including autism spectrum disorder. 

 

Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, the Ministry of Social Services 

authored a report entitled Communities Working Together: 

Saskatchewan’s Action Plan for Citizens With Cognitive 

Disabilities. The Ministry of Social Services provides flexible 

funding, and this funding is directed towards people who meet 

criteria which then supplements or exceeds existing programs, 

programs that support individuals and their families throughout 

the province of Saskatchewan. These services include respite 

care, parent aids, independent living support. And all of these 

services are provided through the Minister of Social Services’ 

flexible funding pool. Now for 2009-10, the funding pool 

budget for the cognitive disability strategy is 1.9 million. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, that is two separate ministries tasked with 

addressing the needs of children with autism spectrum disorder. 

But there’s also a third ministry responsible for addressing the 

needs of these children. The Ministry of Health provides global 

funding to all Saskatchewan health regions, and these health 

regions are then responsible for allocating funds towards 

programs and services based on their respective priorities as 

they relate to children living with autism spectrum disorder. 

Now these services are made available to all Saskatchewan 

residents of all ages. These services can be provided in 

out-patients, community and home environments, and include 

assessment, education, and ongoing intervention. 

 

So this is the plan that our government has. I think it’s a result 

of a very comprehensive review of existing provincial autism 

spectrum disorder services. And this program is currently being 

implemented throughout the province. In fact Lisa Simmermon 

is quoted in a October 31st, 2008 edition of The StarPhoenix as 

saying: 

 

It’s positive to see that . . . [the Saskatchewan Party 

government is] actually going to try to put in place some 

people who are targeted specifically for providing some of 

the treatment services that are needed for autism. 

 

So thank you, Mr. Speaker. I see my time is up. But I truly 

believe this is a very important issue, and as parents and leaders 

of the community, I think we’re trying to address autism. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — According to the rules, the 65-minute debate 

period has elapsed. We will now enter a 10-minute question 

period. I recognize the member from Regina Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What an interesting 

time this has been. First we hear that the government, the Sask 

Party, crowing that they’ve increased the autism spending to $3 

million. And then my colleague points out that we left it at $3 

million, so in fact it’s a freeze. So the ground just keeps on 

shifting for the Sask Party. 

 

We hear excuses that New Democrats did and didn’t do this and 

that and the other thing while we were office. Well that was two 

years ago, Mr. Speaker. We hear the Sask Party also saying, 

well what do you want us to do? We’re spending the same 

amount of money. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the many steps that parents have to jump, 

one of the hoops they have to jump through to get the 

appropriate help for their autistic children is to have an ability, a 

cognitive ability test. Will the government, will the Sask Party 

remove the income test for that cognitive ability test, that very 

unfair income test . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Mr. Speaker, I 

apologize. I knew who I was asking it to. It’s to the member for 

P.A. [Prince Albert] Carlton. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Well, Mr. Speaker, thank you. And again to the 

member opposite, I want to thank them for the questions. They 

always seem to bring up these points where they want to start 

talking about crowing, disrespectful today with the fact that we 

have parents of children in the gallery that will have to listen to 

this kind of talk. It’s not what we should be looking at today. 

 

The idea, Mr. Speaker, is that this government has talked to 

stakeholders. We’ve moved forward on the actions and 

recommendations given to the Minister of Health. We’ve also 

worked on the situation that was left for us — which was 

$36,000 per year average spending for children with autism 

spectrum disorder — Mr. Speaker, in two years, $6 million. 

And other ministries, as we’ve heard, are also supporting these 

programs. So, Mr. Speaker, I want to say right now that this 

government listens to the stakeholders, doesn’t put money in at 

election time, Mr. Speaker, to try to win votes. Thank you very 

much. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Before we move forward, I just 

want to remind members of the rules that have been 

implemented by the members, that they’re not to bring the 

visitors in the galleries into the debate. I recognize the member 



November 12, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3565 

from Saskatchewan Rivers. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Autism spectrum disorder is not well 

understood, and this disorder first appears during infancy or 

childhood.  

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask the opposition members if they 

would stop playing politics with this issue so that we can 

address the needs of families dealing with autism through 

commitment and co-operation between the two of us. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Which member? Which member? 

 

Ms. Wilson: — To the member from Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m assuming the 

member listened to question period when I said — and I also 

said in my speech — that if the minister would take the politics 

out of his answers, we’d be having dead silence. And I certainly 

see that still. We’re talking about who did what and finger 

pointing, and as I said before, no one is interested in that. 

 

What they’re interested in is the two solutions that we have 

proposed. One is to take the income testing away from the 

cognitive disabilities fund, and the other one is to adapt the 

individualized funding program to meet the needs of parents 

with children with autism. That is what we have said, and 

there’s nothing political about it. It is an actual strategy with 

recommendations. 

 

What I’ve heard up to this point has been nothing but political 

rhetoric of all the litany of things that the Sask Party supposedly 

did, even with incorrect numbers. So the politics is certainly not 

on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[12:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 

question will be to the member from Saskatchewan Rivers, Mr. 

Speaker, so she has the opportunity to pay careful attention. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of the province of Saskatchewan and 

the families of those with autism aren’t concerned about the 

past. The past and the mistakes that have been made are just 

that — it’s the past. Their concern is about the future. 

 

I’ve had the opportunity to spend considerable time with a 

family in my constituency with a young son with autism and 

talk to them about the many challenges they have gone through 

and are continuing to go through in trying to get treatment for 

Aden. In fact this family spent tens of thousands of dollars 

going to Los Angeles to a program there to learn about dealing 

with Aden and his particular needs. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, my question to the member is this, the 

member for Saskatchewan Rivers: will they commit today to 

quit talking about things, just talking about it, and make a 

commitment to remove income testing from individualized 

funding to provide for the families in this province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — I thank the member opposite for that very 

valuable and important question. But I believe our government 

is making strides to improve things. And the committees have 

met and listened. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well again we hear 

that we shouldn’t politicize this process, and both sides have a 

certain stance they want to bring forward today. I think it’s 

interesting that we talked about funding, previous funding from 

the previous administration, funding that we’re doing from our 

standpoint. You know, and the government of the day, 16 years 

ago, had some initiatives for sure. Absolutely. For $500,000 a 

year, I’m sure that it was something. 

 

Today they criticize what our government’s doing. And you 

know, some families in SaskFEAT have said and advocated for 

individual funding per child. It’s about 45,000 to 60,000 per 

child, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To the member from Saskatoon Nutana, she stood today and 

showed us a document that indicated what they were doing for 

the citizens of the province. Can she tell us if she agrees with 

the amount that some of the SaskFEAT parents have said that 

they wish for? Does she criticize that amount? What would they 

do, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, what I can say to the member 

opposite is that as the result of the $3 million that was put into 

the budget in 2007-08, there was a committee, an advisory 

committee that was put into effect which gave a strategy to the 

province. I think none of us will disagree with the guiding 

principles of that strategy. 

 

And I think what parents want is they want to have access to 

services and programs. And they want those services and 

programs provided by people who have the training and 

education when it comes to autism spectrum disorder. 

 

I also think what parents want — and this is certainly loud and 

clear in my constituency office — is that with the escalated cost 

of living, escalating cost of getting into a home . . . just to buy a 

home in the province of Saskatchewan and have a mortgage, 

even at low interest rates, that mortgage is high. And so they 

want to see the elimination of income testing when it comes to 

accessing individualized funding. And we agree with that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 



3566 Saskatchewan Hansard November 12, 2009 

question is for the member from Saskatoon Sutherland. A few 

minutes ago, Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity to ask a 

member whether or not they would agree to supporting today, 

their government supporting today, the removal of the 

limitations in income testing on individualized funding. Mr. 

Speaker, those limitations today and that income testing 

eliminates many, many families from those needed supports for 

their children. 

 

So my question to the member from Saskatoon Sutherland is, 

will she stand today and tell this House that she supports 

removing the income testing from individualized funding? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There’s been a lot 

of work done in the autism area. We had increased funding. 

One of the biggest issues around autism is research. We still 

don’t know what causes it, how it can be prevented. Those are 

important things, Mr. Speaker. Some of the various suspected 

causes, you know, included everything from heredity to 

environment. So we don’t know what causes it, and prevention 

would of course be the best action. 

 

However what we do know is that the treatment has to be very 

specialized. The member from Eastview had stated so, as well 

as the member from Meewasin, that specialized treatment is 

very, very important. And so I think that what should be best 

done is what we’re doing, and that is to create teams of 

professionals . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The 75-minute private members’ 

motions time has elapsed. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 606 — The Protection of the Wild Ponies of the 

Bronson Forest Act 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased 

to rise today to tell the members of the Legislative Assembly 

about the wild ponies of the Bronson Forest and to explain a 

little bit further the Act that was introduced in the House a week 

ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ll start off by saying this is a motion that 

recognizes the effort made by the Government of Saskatchewan 

to protect the wild ponies of the Bronson Forest. Before I delve 

into that, there’s a couple people I should thank that have been 

very involved in this process up to this point. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a gentleman, a 86-year-old rancher who’s been 

ranching up in that area for his entire life, Mr. Speaker, his 

name’s Bob Hougham. He’s the first person who brought this to 

my attention. He had photos of some horses that had been shot 

and killed. He also had pictures of horses that were running 

wild that were just as free and as iconic as you can possibly 

imagine. And he thought that we needed to do something to 

either protect them or we were going to lose them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Another gentleman that shares his passion, his name is Ken 

McLeod. He grew up just miles away from there, Mr. Speaker. 

He’s been involved with these horses on a couple different sides 

of the issue in his life, but he is a major advocate for them. He 

in fact petitioned this legislature some time ago to try and get 

some support for them then and was turned down. But I 

appreciate Ken’s support of what we’re doing now, and I think 

he deserves some appreciation. 

 

Ray Sproull, another, Mr. Speaker, who’s supplied some 

fantastic footage. David Krughoff, who wrote a fantastic article 

in Prairies North this spring with again some fantastic photos 

of these magnificent animals. 

 

One person I think deserves some credit here, Mr. Speaker, is 

Milt Wakefield. He held my seat in this legislature up until the 

last election. When in opposition, Mr. Speaker, he also had 

brought this to the attention of the legislature. He petitioned the 

then government that they could do something to protect these 

ponies. And I know he was very frustrated by the response that 

he got from the then government. He felt like his concerns were 

somewhat being ignored, Mr. Speaker. And I wasn’t there at the 

time, but I know that he had tried to champion this and did 

champion this. It was just deaf ears, I think, that was the 

problem. 

 

I would also like to thank the local support. Many people when 

I was talking about this a year ago, that this was something I 

thought needed to be done, said absolutely. This herd of horses 

or multiple herds of horses have been part of our community for 

their entire lives, going back almost 100 years. And they’ve 

been very supportive. 

 

Since the Bill was introduced just a week ago, Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to say a flood of emails have come in — people that 

are very supportive from across Saskatchewan but really across 

the country. A lot of people can really relate to wild ponies. 

They are an iconic symbol that, I think, they represent Western 

values. They represent freedom. And they’re a little bit in the 

imagination of everyone in Canada, especially, I think . . . I’ve 

got a couple of young girls, Mr. Speaker, and they think that 

this is about the most important work a government could do, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Another example. We opened up a Facebook page two days 

ago, Mr. Speaker, that was a Facebook page for people that 

were supportive of this, or that weren’t and wanted to express 

that. It has been overwhelming. The number of people is, over 

100 people in two short days have signed up as supporters of 

the Bronson Forest horses. And you know the comments in 

there are just fantastic. People that can really relate to this. 

 

Now to get into some of the more technical information — just 

where they are, what they are, kind of how we got to this point. 

The Bronson Forest, Mr. Speaker, lies north of Lloydminster 

and west of Meadow Lake. It almost butts up to the Alberta 

border. Its southern border of the forest is 25 kilometres north 

of Paradise Hill, and its northern border stretches all the way up 

to Ministikwan Lake. In the forest there’s countless beautiful 



November 12, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3567 

lakes. There’s Bronson Lake, there’s Peck Lake, Little Fishing 

Lake, Moonshine, Round, North, and a major recreation area 

there, especially around Little Fishing and Peck — big cabin 

communities, a provincial park. 

 

And many of those people go through the effort needed to get 

all the way over to the Bronson Forest to try and catch a 

glimpse of these elusive animals. Many, many people come 

back after a weekend quadding up there with just fantastic 

stories of what they’ve seen, and the interaction they were able 

to have. 

 

Also living up there, fantastic wildlife. It is a mecca for hunting 

white-tailed deer. There’s a lot of black bear. There’s wolves. 

Outfitters are very prevalent in this area, and I think have very 

successful businesses. It’s a tourist area. My wife and some of 

the ladies from Red Cross in the local area had gone on a horse 

packing trip up there in the spring. They packed up their horses 

and tents and just headed out into the wilderness, right in 

amongst the wild horses’ territory, set up tents. And you can 

swim in the lakes and there’s no one for miles and miles 

around, and campfires at night, and trying to catch a glimpse of 

these horses again, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now the horses themselves, I think I’ll talk about them for a 

second, Mr. Speaker. They’re one of Saskatchewan’s best-kept 

secrets. That’s a theme that has really come through from a lot 

of people that have contacted me is, you know, who knew we 

had wild horses in Saskatchewan? You heard about the Sable 

Island horses. You hear about horses in Alberta. But 

Saskatchewan? We don’t have wild horses. In fact, Mr. 

Speaker, I think it has been a great secret, but no longer. I think 

that what we’re doing here in this legislature is partly spreading 

the word. And they’re going to be something that many people 

can take pride in and hopefully come and take a look at, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

In 2005 it is estimated there was roughly 125 of these horses 

running free. They have been a wild herd for almost 100 years. 

And it’s a rather harsh climate, Mr. Speaker. We live in 

northern Saskatchewan. As I said earlier, there’s black bear. 

There’s wolves. And they are prey to these animals. And I 

know that the balance of nature is something that probably 

keeps these animals at about that level — 125. 

 

I’ve heard, you know, over the years it’s got slightly higher and 

slightly lower. But the troubling thing, Mr. Speaker, is that 

recently, and not because of the balance of nature, it is more the 

balance of unwanted human interaction — people shooting 

them, Mr. Speaker — that has forced their numbers down to 

about 37. 

 

That was a number, probably the best estimate by David 

Krughoff in Prairies North who had spent a substantial amount 

of time out there and is, I don’t want to call him an expert, but I 

think he probably is. He knows about the herds. He calls them 

bands. 

 

He says that there’s three bands of horses. Two of the bands 

have 14 in it, and then there’s one smaller band of four. There’s 

an additional five stallions that roam the forest, I’m presuming 

that in hopes that someday they will be the top stallion in one of 

those bands. They roam singularly or in pairs. There’s 21 

females in the three bands. And during the 2008 season, there 

were five colts that survived the trials of birth, Mr. Speaker. 

And that’s no small feat, so five new colts joining the herd this 

year. 

 

Mr. Krughoff had told me that watching these horses, very 

often there’s wolves just in the long grass continually 

shadowing the herds. And if they get a shot, and I think they 

would probably take a colt if they got the opportunity. 

 

[12:30] 

 

The five new colts, that represents a 24 per cent success rate of 

mares bringing colts. It’s not a great success rate. I know that 

there’s some concern that overpopulation in different 

environments, in different parts of the world where there are 

wild horses, that can be a concern. This particular area, Mr. 

Speaker, the balance I think has been well established, and 

historically it has been around that 125 number. 

 

The ponies of the Bronson Forest, they provide both a living 

and historical tourist attraction for the people of Saskatchewan. 

The ponies are an iconic symbol of freedom and the western 

way of life. Like the wild animals, they’ve learned how to 

survive on their own. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, many of the traits that they embody are the 

same traits of the ancestors that 100 years ago were 

homesteading that area. Those people, they came up into the 

North. They didn’t know . . . They probably came from 

southern Saskatchewan or the US [United States] to forge a life 

in bush and hills and forest and try and eke out a life farming or 

ranching. And the self-sufficiency they had is very much 

reflected in the horses they brought and the horses that roam 

wild there today. 

 

Self-reliance of these animals, Mr. Speaker. There was lean 

years back then, when due to nature or mistake or fire, that 

those ranchers and frontiersmen went without. And same with 

these horses, Mr. Speaker. They’ve lived relatively untouched 

ever since, and it’s a tribute that they have been so successful. 

And I think it’s kind of special for everyone else just to see that 

that way of life may have passed, but this link to it, being the 

horses, still survives today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the ponies do become extinct, Mr. Speaker, and 

if we’re down under 40 and things don’t change, if 

high-powered rifle versus horse is still legal in Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker, I am afraid that we will see them go extinct. And 

that would be a real shame. And I think we would have no one 

to blame but ourselves. 

 

We have the power here as legislators to make good decisions, 

not to run blindly at a fad. But this is something that Milt 

Wakefield brought forward and educated the Assembly on 

years ago. It’s something that I think is the right thing to do, and 

I have a lot of confidence that members will do the right thing, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to speak about the community that has 

been around and a part of these horses. And these horses have 

been a part of the community. It’s a tightly knit community. It’s 

mainly ranchers, getting more recreation now. 



3568 Saskatchewan Hansard November 12, 2009 

But one story that really stands out, and it’s the story I’ve 

known for a long time and is really special to me, before I even 

knew there was a problem with these horses getting shot. And it 

is back in the late ’70s or early ’80s, entrepreneur got a contract, 

or I don’t know if he got a contract, but got approval to trap a 

bunch of these horses in fences. He trapped them, and he hauled 

a load of them down to the stockyards in Lloydminster and was 

going to sell them at the stockyards to make a little money. He 

did that, and they went to auction. And the auctioneer sold them 

off, probably going for meat or for dog food, Mr. Speaker. And 

what had happened is the local ranchers up there got wind of 

this. They went down to the stockyards. They bought them all. 

They hauled their horse trailers down there. They loaded them 

up and hauled them back 150 km north and turned them loose. 

 

Now if that isn’t a testament to, number one, a fantastic 

community — I think, you know, I think every community 

should aspire to that sort of behaviour — but to the love of the 

horses and thinking of them, not as family, but as part of a 

tightly knit community, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And these very ranchers then and now are still some of the 

strongest advocates for these horses. They’re the ones that have 

brought it to my attention. These ranchers graze their cattle on 

the Bronson Forest lands. All summer long, they’re out there 

riding their horses, moving their cattle from field to field. 

 

And what it is, Mr. Speaker, it’s very wooded. It opens up into 

unbelievable, beautiful grasslands and lakes, and it’s just a treat. 

Me and my family were up there this past weekend. It’s a 

harrowing experience to get there. It’s one of the roughest, 

toughest roads I’ve been on in a long time. I think that’s a 

tribute to our Minister of Highways that the other roads in 

Saskatchewan have come so far, but this particular road . . . 

And it isn’t a highway, it’s a bush road, It’s about six miles off 

the closest main road. And to get in there is a test. But it’s well 

worth it when you get in to see the beauty of the Bronson 

Forest. 

 

In summer months, like I said, these horses graze in amongst 

and around the cattle. In fall it’s one of the most vibrant 

wilderness areas, and hunting is a big part of that community. 

People come from all over Saskatchewan to hunt white-tailed 

deer. The outfitters hunt in there. And these horses survive and 

thrive in and amongst all that. And I think it’s a bit of a treat 

when people come up from the States to go outfitting, and 

they’re hunting moose or white-tailed deer and out of the corner 

of the pasture comes a herd of wild horses. That’s just a little bit 

of Saskatchewan that you can’t put a value on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s a major quadding area around the lakes recreation area. 

Many people for an afternoon will pack a lunch and come out 

quadding and share that with any guest that they might have. 

Logging takes place in here, Mr. Speaker. And I’m giving all 

these examples because this is a vibrant area. It, on one hand, is 

stark wilderness. And on the other, it’s vibrant in commercial 

cattle, in commercial logging, in commercial outfitting. And 

these horses live within all that and are embraced by almost 

everyone who works within them. 

 

I’d just like to talk a little bit about other jurisdictions and how 

they’ve taken this seriously, Mr. Speaker. Most people in 

Saskatchewan didn’t know we had wild horses. I think that’s 

mistake number one. But looking across Canada, I think the 

best example is in 1961. And I believe it was John Diefenbaker, 

the prime minister who hailed from Saskatchewan, and I 

believe it was John Diefenbaker who passed into law the Nova 

Scotia Sable Island Regulations of Canada Shipping Act of 

1961. And that granted national recognition and protection for 

the Sable Island horses, and I think that is kind of a cornerstone 

really in North America. 

 

In 1970s the Americans had a national Act that protected the 

wild horses of the United States. Other provinces — Alberta has 

some protection for their wild horses, and British Columbia, I 

believe, has some protection for theirs as well. Alberta’s horses 

are down around Suffield. British Columbia has about 400 in 

the Chilcotin range, Mr. Speaker. The Saskatchewan people, 

Mr. Speaker, have had a long history of working together to get 

accomplishments. I think that that is a spirit that we should try 

and embrace in this Assembly, and especially on an issue like 

this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I hope that we can lend a hand to assist the people trying to save 

the horses of Bronson Forest, and do our part as legislators. 

These local people believe that these ponies represent a part of 

our heritage, and if we lose these ponies to extinction we will 

lose that link to our past. That is a sentiment that has been 

shared to me by many, many people. 

 

I’m going to pass the floor on to the opposition, Mr. Speaker. I 

know they’d like to make some comments. But before I do, I 

would just like to share with the Assembly that this is 

something that has been brought forward to members of the 

Assembly in times past through my predecessor, Milt 

Wakefield. It’s something that has been written about in 

magazines here in our province. It’s been written about across 

Canada. It’s one of those few times that I think there is no real 

political side to it. Everyone can and should come together to 

work for it. And today, Mr. Speaker, we have that opportunity. 

 

We know that private members’ Bills often get bogged down by 

process. Very few of them see the light of day. They often are 

introduced and die on the order paper, and that is something I 

don’t want to see happen here. And today, Mr. Speaker, we 

have the opportunity to, by leave, pass this through all stages. If 

the opposition will co-operate, the Saskatchewan Party is 

certainly willing to do that. By the end of session today, Mr. 

Speaker, the members opposite with their co-operation can 

ensure that there is protection for these horses. 

 

I think that if there is concerns and somebody would like to 

speak to it, there’s that opportunity. We can debate a lot of 

different things, but when there’s something about a community 

that has come together, a community that has said to the 

legislature, look at this issue and let’s work our way through it, 

because we think it’s the right thing to do, I’m asking, Mr. 

Speaker, my counterparts on both sides of this legislature to 

work today to get this done. I don’t want to see this die on the 

order paper. I don’t want to see a good piece of legislation, 

something that’s a link to our past, opportunity for the future for 

the tourism, for the people that live in that community, that 

have been raised in and around them . . . 

 

And I would like to maybe expound on that a little more. We 

get lost here in Regina and Saskatoon and Lloydminster and 



November 12, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3569 

Lashburn and Maidstone with, you know, day to day. In 

Lloydminster it’s a lot of oil field. In Regina, the world I live in, 

it’s a lot of legislature. This area, Mr. Speaker, it’s ranchers. 

These are men and women that were raised in the saddle, to use 

a euphemism. 

 

I am a cattle rancher myself, Mr. Speaker, and I ride horses and 

we round up our cows and we use horses very regularly. But 

maybe we’re modern ranchers, because we have a chute. If 

we’re branding, we bring them in and we put them in a squeeze 

and we brand them in the squeeze. This area, Mr. Speaker, they 

have embraced the past. They continue to, they rope calves off 

their horses. They drag them in by a fire and they brand them 

what I would call the old-fashioned way. 

 

They don’t do it because it’s old fashioned, Mr. Speaker. They 

do it because that’s the most efficient, fastest way to brand a 

herd of calves. The reason I don’t do it, Mr. Speaker — and I 

don’t disagree with them — is I don’t have that skill. I love 

horses. I’d spend all day roping my first calf, Mr. Speaker. I 

don’t think that . . . It would take me about six months to brand 

my entire herd if I was the man on the horse with the rope. 

 

But I think that we have to look at it through their eyes. These 

people that are raised on horses, that live the life of ranchers are 

cattlemen. They ranch this very land in and around these horses. 

Many of them, their fathers ranched in and around these horses. 

So it just has come to me and I know it came to my predecessor, 

Mr. Wakefield, that this needs to be done. And probably now 

pressing now than ever, when we can drop from 125 horses to 

less than 40. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Something has to be done. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Yes, something has to be done, Mr. 

Speaker, because when you put a high-powered rifle against a 

horse, the high-powered rifle will win every time. I think that it 

is, you know, I never want to get in the position where an 

animal that’s living in the wild that has learned all the skills . . . 

You know, there will be times that nature, that wolves, that the 

balance will be found. But I don’t think the balance will ever be 

found when it is pitting rifle against horse. 

 

And that’s where there’s a role for the people in this building to 

do the right thing. And I guess I would just like to again say, we 

can do this today, Mr. Speaker. Very often private members’ 

Bills get lost on the order paper. It’s not that they get voted 

down; it’s just that they get put off. They get talked out. And at 

the end of session they get prorogued, and that means that they 

would need to be reintroduced a year from now. 

 

We have the power today and I really hope we have the support 

for these wild ponies, Mr. Speaker, that by leave today . . . 

There’ll be time for members to speak to this as well. But we 

will have time to go through the other stages — Committee of 

the Whole — and potentially by the end of today, Mr. Speaker, 

there can be support, there can be protection for the wild ponies 

of the Bronson Forest. 

 

Now with that said, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move that Bill 

No. 606, The Protection of the Wild Ponies of the Bronson 

Forest Act be now read a second time. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Lloydminster has moved 

second reading of Bill 606, The Protection of the Wild Ponies of 

the Bronson Forest Act. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

I recognize the member from Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I know you, as well as 

everyone else in the Assembly, is probably surprised to see me 

standing to talk about wild horses. And I have to say I have to 

thank a constituent of mine — her name is Gladys Wolf, and I 

spoke to her this morning — saying that this was coming 

forward. Gladys was the one who actually brought this to my 

attention in the summer. And I had sent a letter to the Minister 

of Environment asking her to do something about this. She then 

referred it to the Minister of Agriculture. And thank you to the 

member from Lloydminster for telling me that this was coming. 

And I did, like I said, talk to Gladys and she would be happy to 

have me mention her name. 

 

[12:45] 

 

I think probably what caught my imagination was that I had not 

spent a great deal of time thinking of horses in my life, but my 

niece, when she was 19, she went to Toronto and became a 

jockey at Woodbine, the major racetrack in Canada, and she 

was very successful. She was a very successful jockey. And 

because she was there, we spent many trips going to Toronto to 

see her race, got introduced to beautiful, beautiful horses, got 

taken through the barns, got pictures of her with her winning 

horses, and basically started me on quite an interest in horses 

and issues around horses. 

 

When I was first running in the by-election in Eastview, I was 

met on the lawn of some home by a man who said, what are you 

going to do about thoroughbred racing? And I said, I have no 

idea about thoroughbred racing. But now I do. Now I do know 

about thoroughbred racing. I do know what happens at Marquis 

Downs and I do know about horses. 

 

I think the Bill itself is very interesting because I think the 

article that I read from Prairies North was very good, but 

there’s another article that I had sent to me and it’s from 

Canadian Cowboy Country magazine. And it’s an extremely 

poetic discussion and view of the horses in the Bronson Forest 

and it is talking about who owns the horses, which is probably 

one of the questions that has no answer to this point. And this 

article was actually written in ’05, in March of ’05, but it still, I 

think, supports what is still out there now as a conflicting view 

of some people between mythology and science. And I thought 

it was very poetic when the author said: 

 

Wild horses represent the relief we seek from our daily 

routines. We’re tired of being bridled, saddled and 

worked hard. We’d like to abandon our obligations, clear 

the corral fence at full speed and gallop into eternity. The 

wild horse is our dream of freedom. 

 

Then on the other side, the scientists are talking about, is this 

truly a feral horse? Is it reintroduced into the ecosystem? And 

talk about choosing moose over horses and the damage that 

horses are doing to the environment. 

 

So it went on to talk about . . . And beautiful pictures of the 

horses. I agree with the member from Lloydminster. These are 



3570 Saskatchewan Hansard November 12, 2009 

lovely horses. They’re smaller, to adapt to the environment so 

they can live in the wild. And they look like various ancestry 

because there are various colourings in the horses. 

 

And it is interesting that the member, he wants to have this Bill 

passed right now, but there’s many questions that still would 

need to be answered. My curious question that came to mind is, 

why a private member’s Bill when they are government? If this 

is an issue, it should come through environment or agricultural 

legislation, not be left to the vagaries of, as the member 

described, a private member’s Bill which most, futures of those 

die on the order paper. So it would be interesting to see why 

that is. 

 

To support something without having any consultation with 

people who are impacted by this . . . And the article says there 

is a division of thought on this. Who owns them is still not 

answered; the question’s not answered. And the consultation — 

we always talk about the consultation because different Bills 

impact many people and we don’t often look at or take into 

account the ripple effect in that. 

 

And as I’ve found out, the forest is located on traditional First 

Nations land, Treaty 6 area. And since the First Nations are the 

traditional owners and protectors of the land and animals, what 

do they say about this particular Bill? We have no answer to 

that. This is what happens when a Bill goes to committee. The 

committee has the opportunity to ask the questions about the 

impact of the Bill and what various stakeholders feel about the 

Bill. 

 

We also need to consider the police. Local police are saying, we 

don’t know if they’re saying that this is necessarily needed or is 

something that could be captured in some other law by 

changing some regulation. And the police do have abilities now 

already with poaching. 

 

And I find it interesting also that the Bill does not address 

actually movement of the horses. It does talk about capturing, 

but it doesn’t talk at all about transporting. So when it says that 

“No person shall in any way willfully molest, interfere with, 

hurt, capture or kill any of the wild ponies in the Bronson 

Forest,” it doesn’t talk about the penalties or the barring of 

transporting these horses anywhere else. 

 

And I know that other provinces have legislation or have 

protections in place for their ponies, their different herds, 

because obviously other provinces have also got herds. It is I 

think the most . . . And I can’t say that this would be something 

that we would not support. What I am saying, Mr. Speaker, is 

that given the controversy of and the differences of opinions 

and the question about who owns the horses, we need to do our 

due diligence. And as legislators, that is our job. 

 

So to come to this Assembly expecting a Bill to go through 

without that due diligence or oversight, I think, is fairly naive. 

And I think that if we want to see good, strong legislation, then 

we take it through the process, and I think if we want to talk 

about our jobs, what we need to do, our dedication to issues, 

real issues that people bring forward . . .  

 

And like I said, this came through to me from a constituent and 

I did send it to the Minister of the Environment. I took it 

seriously. The minister responded, sent it on to the Minister of 

Agriculture. And now we have a private member’s Bill, which I 

do still find a little odd. If it was necessary legislation, there are 

certainly mechanisms and processes available to the 

government to bring legislation forward in Acts that pertain to 

animals and wild animals and penalties for damaging animals. 

 

So I really do think that the article in the Cowboy Country 

magazine really demonstrates the differences of opinion. Some 

scientists say that the horses will damage the environment. 

Others see the benefit to tourism in the area. And that is 

something I can certainly see. If you ride and see a herd of wild 

horses, it would be something beautiful to see and not what 

everybody would have the opportunity to see. 

 

So I do think though that with many of the questions that are 

still unanswered in the way the Bill is being presented, it would 

be very difficult to say that we would, as an opposition, support 

this. I think everyone expects the job of the opposition is to be 

the eyes and the ears of the people, to look at, to watchdog 

things. And I think we need to take that job seriously. And I do 

think that this Bill has merit. It has a lot of merit. And I’m sure 

there’s people watching who really want to see it passed, but 

there is a process in this House that allows for these things to 

happen, and that is the process that we will follow. 

 

I do think that it’s going to be interesting to consult with the 

various places and people who are impacted by this, not just 

Lloydminster and the forest area but, as I said before, the First 

Nations whose . . . These horses reside on their land. And that is 

a different consultation entirely to talk about. And I have no 

idea, the presentation of the Bill gives us no indication of what 

the First Nations people feel about this or any suggestions they 

have or anything that they have to add to the debate. And I also 

think it’s interesting again to see what the police would have to 

say about how this would impact on poaching and their 

enforcement abilities in the area. 

 

I do think that everybody agrees that wild horses are a beautiful 

addition to the province. I think anybody who has an 

opportunity to go to the Bronson Forest and see the wild horses 

and have an opportunity to see what they add to the area and the 

benefit in tourism would agree that this is something that we 

want to see. We want to see the horses protected. We don’t 

want to see the herd depleted past the point where it can 

actually regenerate or keep itself going. 

 

And I think those things are laudable. The goals are laudable to 

have and to do. But again as I said, Mr. Speaker, as an 

opposition, we have an obligation to the people and all the 

people that these Bills and any other Bill would impact that we 

must have our due diligence and ask the questions that need to 

be asked. 

 

So I think that the member can take some comfort in the fact 

that we all do agree that this is a really serious issue and that we 

do have support for this sort of a protection for the horses. But I 

think it is also only fair to say that the Bill needs to go through 

the process that a Bill needs to go through and that we have to 

talk to people who this may affect. So I don’t think that there’s 

any point in thinking that by some sort of bullying or heckling 

that this should actually go through today. I think that, as I said 

before, it would be naive to expect that of a legislature. We do 



November 12, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3571 

have to do due diligence and there is due process. And I think 

that that is our obligation, and that is what we will be doing. 

 

I’ll find it interesting to continue this conversation with the 

people that it affects, including people in my riding who have 

an interest in this and people who have taken the opportunity to 

write the articles that draw the attention to the issues, and who 

have done so eloquently, that we do find all of us actually have 

an opinion on this. I would never have thought that this would 

be something that would generate such a strong feeling, but it is 

definitely something that I think has merit because it has 

generated a fair amount of support. 

 

Some of my colleagues wanted to speak rather than me. There 

was an interest in having a conversation about this, in speaking 

to this Bill. And I had to actually, you know, push myself 

forward. And I know when I started my remarks to say that it 

would be me that would be speaking on wild ponies would be 

kind of an interesting bit of a change for things that I 

traditionally speak on. 

 

But I have to say that going with my niece and seeing the 

absolute wonderful horsemanship, the wonderful relationship 

that she has with horses which she continues to this day . . . She 

no longer is a jockey in Woodbine. She’s back home in 

Saskatchewan taking her education, but has that history for such 

a young person to have developed such a bond with horses that 

she passed it on to all of us. That we were actually known in the 

horse circles because we would go and do . . . looking at betting 

on some of the races. So we were known in some of the places 

where we could do that in Saskatoon because we always 

couldn’t get to Toronto to watch her. But she did have a 

wonderful experience that engendered in all of us, as her family, 

an interest and a concern for horses and their livelihood. 

 

And she has even almost brought a horse back to Saskatchewan 

that was labelled and set to be destroyed because it had reached 

the end of its life in thoroughbred racing. And she was looking 

for . . . We almost as a family were going to buy this horse 

because it was such a beautiful horse and had done such 

wonderful things over its life. But basically at some point these 

things end and the value of that horse is no longer for the 

owners and that horse is out to pasture. 

 

But I think the horses that we’re talking about today, Mr. 

Speaker, will definitely be protected by people who are 

interested in their future, and I think this Bill will certainly raise 

the awareness of that. It will also cause us to have the 

discussion which has been languishing in the background for 

many years. As I said, this article I quoted from was from ’05, 

so it’s an issue that has been around that Bronson Forest area 

for quite a while and certainly deserves attention and it deserves 

to have the scrutiny because, when we put a Bill in place, I 

would hope that we have the co-operation of the people in the 

area. And I think without that, it’s very hard to protect the 

horses if you don’t have the consent and the co-operation of the 

people who are actually living with the horses and see them 

from obviously a different view. 

 

When I talked about the mythology versus the science, that 

there are people who don’t want them anymore. They don’t 

want them there. They consider the grasslands . . . The cattle 

need the grass; the horses do not. So there still is some dissent 

in opinion. 

 

So I think when we put a Bill through, we want to make sure 

that everybody who is impacted by this supports it. So our goal 

is to protect the horses. We don’t actually end up with having 

more dissent and more and more unrest or unhappiness in that 

area because we didn’t have proper consultation and we didn’t 

do our due diligence and we didn’t do what people want us to 

do. So I think that when we do that, we obviously do need to 

have the best way to protect the animals. 

 

And is this the best? Like I already see, as pointed out to me, 

there’s nothing in the Bill that talks about travelling, moving 

them out of the province, removing them. Capturing and killing 

them, all that stuff is captured, but not about transporting them. 

This is something that’s missing from the Bill, so obviously 

there’s something quite quickly that has been pointed. It’s 

missing. 

 

And what is also missing is any idea of what other stakeholders 

would have had to say about the Bill and how they see it 

impacting their communities, in particular the First Nations, 

when this forest is on their land. So it’s not responsible to 

expect a Bill like this to go through in this fashion. 

 

Like I said, I would have liked to have seen it as a regular Bill 

coming through a department and through the processes that 

that happens, because it does have more force and effect, as the 

member from Lloydminster said. A private member’s Bill tends 

to be lost and doesn’t tend to be followed through, so it’s 

unfortunate that this way . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Being the hour of adjournment, this Assembly 

stands adjourned until Monday afternoon at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 13:00.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3543 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3543 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3543 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3543 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3543 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3544 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3544 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3544 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3544 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3544 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3544 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3544 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3545 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3545 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3545 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Olympic Torch Relay in La Ronge 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3545 

 Share Similarities and Celebrate Differences 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3545 

 Saskatoon Lions Support Coronary Artery Rehabilitation Group 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3546 

 World Diabetes Day 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3546 

 Visual Art Program Engages Participants 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3546 

 Saskatoon Curler Inducted in Sports Hall of Fame 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3547 

 Take Our Deputy Ministers to Work Day 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3547 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Autism Spectrum Disorder Issues 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3547 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3548 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3549 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3549 

 Availability of Government Vehicles 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3550 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3550 

 Management of Provincial Economy 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3550 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3551 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3552 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Addictions Advisory Committee 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3552 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3553 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 108 — The Cities Amendment Act, 2009 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3553 

 Bill No. 109 — The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2009 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3553 

 Bill No. 110 — The Northern Municipalities Act, 2009 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3553 

 Bill No. 111 — The Northern Municipalities Consequential Amendments Act, 2009 

 Loi de 2009 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Northern Municipalities Act, 2009 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3554 



 

 Bill No. 112 — The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 2009 

 Loi de 2009 modifiant la Loi de 1988 sur les juges de paix 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3554 

 Bill No. 113 — The Justices of the Peace Consequential Amendments Act, 2009 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3554 

 Bill No. 114 — The Small Claims Amendment Act, 2009 

 Loi de 2009 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur les petites créances 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3554 

 Bill No. 115 — The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2) 

 Loi n
o
 2 de 2009 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3554 

 Bill No. 116 — The Traffic Safety (Drivers’ Licences and Hand-held Electronic Communications Equipment) 

 Amendment Act, 2009 
  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3555 

 Bill No. 609 — The Whistleblower Protection Act 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3555 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3555 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Autism Spectrum Disorder Strategy 

  Junor .............................................................................................................................................................................. 3555, 3565 

  Schriemer ...................................................................................................................................................................... 3558, 3566 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3559 

  Hickie ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3560, 3564 

  Atkinson ......................................................................................................................................................................... 3562, 3565 

  Wilson ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3563, 3565 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3564 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3565 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 606 — The Protection of the Wild Ponies of the Bronson Forest Act 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3566 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3569 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium Development 

Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

 Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

Government House Leader 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. James Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Capital Commission 


