




















































Hansard: November 26, 2009


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 21A  THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 26, 2009, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3817 

 November 26, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Weyburn. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

as you and all members will know, November 22nd to the 28th 

was proclaimed Multicultural Week in Saskatchewan, and I‟m 

pleased to introduce a number of individuals in the gallery, in 

your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Today we have with us Rhonda Rosenberg, the executive 

director of the Multicultural Council of Saskatchewan; 

Getachew Woldyesus with the Open Door Society; Neelu 

Sachdev, the executive director of the Regina immigrant centre, 

and Carol Lafayette-Boyd with the Saskatchewan Canadian 

heritage museum. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these individuals and the organizations that they 

represent under the umbrella of the Multicultural Council all 

work to welcome and assist, teach and encourage newcomers 

from all over the world to our province, Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. And I would ask all members to help me to welcome 

them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — On behalf of the official opposition it also 

gives me great pleasure to welcome the leaders from the 

Multicultural Council in celebration of Multicultural Awareness 

Week. Thank you. Please welcome them to their legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you I‟d like to introduce a Russian 

delegation that we have in your gallery today, Mr. Speaker, that 

are in Regina for Agribition. To start with I have Mr. Alexander 

Ivanovich Bellayev. He‟s the deputy minister of Agriculture 

from the Russian Federation. His assistant, Yulia Surovtseva. 

Denis Cherkesov from . . . the deputy head in charge of 

livestock. And also we have other representatives with the 

Russian delegations and I don‟t have all the names, Mr. 

Speaker, but we want to welcome them here today, too. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, with the delegation today, and I think 

familiar to many in here, is Jason Pollock, Agribition CEO 

[chief executive officer] and general manager. Did a 

tremendous amount of work to put on this show, Mr. Speaker. 

And Stewart Stone, Chair of the international business centre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Deputy Minister Belayev‟s area of responsibility 

include livestock, plant cultivation, and vet issues. He‟s a part 

of the large contingents from Russia attending Agribition this 

year, including a delegation that‟s here to buy cattle. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan and Russia have a strong trading 

relationship that we hope will only continue to grow. Mr. 

Speaker, I would ask all members to give them a very warm 

welcome to Saskatchewan and to our legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to join with the 

Minister of Agriculture in welcoming our guests from Russia 

and those who are here from Agribition because we have people 

from all over the world who are visiting our province and our 

city. It is the premier agricultural show in Canada, in fact in 

North America. I‟m sure the minister will agree. 

 

The effort that goes into this is phenomenal by thousands of 

people. And I want to join with him in welcoming our guests 

from Russia, wish them the best, and hope they‟re able to stay 

and enjoy some of the festivities around Grey Cup parties here 

in the city this weekend. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, through you and to you to the rest of the 

Assembly, I have a number of guests that I want to introduce, 

some from SEMSA [Saskatchewan Emergency Medical 

Services Association] and some from the regional health 

authorities. 

 

First of all is Trevor Dutchak, president of SEMSA. Also Ron 

Dufresne who is past president of SEMSA, and Steve 

Skoworodko also is the vice-president from SEMSA. As well 

joining them would be Rod MacKenzie from the Saskatoon 

Health Region, Wayne Nogier from Kelsey Trail Health 

Region, and Krista Koenders from the Heartland Health 

Region. As well as Gerry Schriemer and Larise Skoretz who are 

both members of SEMSA. 

 

So I‟d like all members in the Legislative Assembly to welcome 

them to their Legislative Assembly. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join with the 

minister in welcoming all the members from SEMSA and the 

health regions. 

 

I‟m assuming they‟re here to talk about the EMS [emergency 

medical services] review which I‟m looking forward to seeing. 

I‟m understanding it‟s supposed to be done shortly. I‟d like to 

welcome them all on behalf of the official opposition to the 

legislature this morning. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress Hills. 

 

Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to all 

members of the Legislative Assembly, I‟d like to introduce two 

people in particular and a larger group that are sitting in your 

gallery. 

 

I‟d like to welcome the Discovery Learning School from Maple 



3818 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2009 

Creek. They‟re seated in the Speaker‟s gallery and they are 

guests of Ombudsman Kevin Fenwick. And the students are 

attending today along with their teachers and some of their 

parents. But I‟d especially like to welcome a grade 11 student, 

Shannon Bowyer, of the Discovery Learning School, who wrote 

the winning essay for the Ombudsman‟s Fairness Week contest. 

 

The contest was in celebration of the 200th anniversary of the 

world‟s first parliamentary ombudsman appointed in Sweden in 

1809. Mr. Speaker, since that time there have been many other 

countries that have appointed ombudsmen and that same type of 

job has been applied to other types of enterprises. For instance, 

there are now ombudsmen serving for banks, for prisons, for 

insurance companies, and the NHL [National Hockey League] 

— and even, Mr. Speaker, the Canada Revenue Agency. I‟m 

sure that‟s good news for anybody who‟s had a tax problem. 

 

But today I‟d like to welcome this group from the Maple Creek 

Discovery School Foundation and particularly congratulate 

Shannon Bowyer. Would you join with me in welcoming them 

to their House today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The province of 

Saskatchewan benefits mightily from excellent leadership at our 

universities, and I notice in the west gallery we have an 

excellent example of that leadership. Joining us today in the 

Assembly, if my vision isn‟t betraying me, is president of the 

University of Saskatchewan, Peter MacKinnon. And so to you 

and through you, we want to welcome him to his Legislative 

Assembly this morning. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to join with 

the Premier on behalf of the official opposition in welcoming 

President MacKinnon to the legislature today. Not a stranger to 

the Assembly and not a stranger here in the province as he‟s 

served the university very well for a good length of time. So I 

join with the Premier in welcoming President MacKinnon. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, it is my great pleasure to 

introduce to you and through you four students from St. Gabriel 

School and St. Catherine School in Regina. 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Ukrainian.] 

 

Mr. Speaker, these students are from Ukraine and are attending 

school here in Saskatchewan through an educational agreement 

between Saskatchewan and Chernivtsi Oblast, the region in 

western Ukraine. 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Ukrainian.] 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the fall of 2008, I had the fortunate honour to 

travel to Chernivtsi Oblast to renew this agreement for 

co-operation in education, which was first signed in 1991. Mr. 

Speaker, I also had the opportunity of placing a wreath at the 

Holodomor monument in Kiev to honour the memory of those 

who perished in 1932-33. As you may know, Mr. Speaker, this 

week is International Holodomor Remembrance Week. 

 

I invite all members to join me in welcoming these very special 

guests to the Legislative Assembly during this important time of 

remembrance for our friends in Ukraine and for the citizens of 

our province, like myself, who are of Ukrainian heritage. 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Ukrainian.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — [The hon. member spoke for a time in 

Ukrainian.] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟d also like to welcome all the students from 

Ukraine to Canada. I also notice President Lysyk and Orest 

Warnyca are here joining us today, and I welcome them to our 

legislature. And I look forward afterwards to the candle 

ceremony and meeting the students from St. Catherine‟s and St. 

Gabriel also. Thank you. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present a petition on behalf of concerned citizens of 

Saskatchewan who are concerned over the condition of 

Highway 22. The petition indicates that the highway has 

deteriorated to a point where it is now a safety hazard for 

residents who have to drive on that highway. And, Mr. Speaker, 

I will read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to commit to providing the 

repairs to Highway 22 that the people of Saskatchewan 

need. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks of 

Earl Grey, Saskatchewan. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 

present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens that 

speaks to the issue that is well known across the province, that 

inadequate access to quality, affordable child care is a major 

roadblock for parents who want to access the labour market or 

to further their own education. And, Mr. Speaker, the prayer 

reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately add at least 1,000 new 

child care spaces in Saskatchewan. 



November 26, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3819 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of wage equity for CBO 

[community-based organization] workers. And we know, Mr. 

Speaker, that workers in community-based organizations in 

Saskatchewan have traditionally been underpaid and many 

continue to earn poverty-level wages. And in fact research has 

shown that CBO workers are paid on average 8 to $10 an hour 

less than employees performing work of equal value in 

government departments. Mr. Speaker, I would like to read the 

prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

development and implementation of a multi-year funding 

plan to ensure that CBO workers achieve wage equity with 

employees who perform work of equal value in 

government departments. 

 

And is in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these folks come from Ituna and Regina. Thank 

you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

in support of a new long-term care facility in La Ronge. And 

the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately invest in the planning and 

construction of new long-term care beds in La Ronge. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by the good people of La Ronge and area. I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition in support of fairness for students here in 

Saskatchewan through the necessary expansion of the graduate 

retention program. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately expand the graduate 

retention program to include master‟s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are from 

the city of Saskatoon. I see the constituencies of Sutherland, 

Nutana, Greystone, Massey Place, and perhaps Eastview, not 

sure. Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present yet another petition on behalf of rural residents 

of Saskatchewan who question why the Sask Party government 

is leaving them behind with respect to providing safe and 

affordable water, and who have not yet had any commitment 

from the Saskatchewan Party government. And the prayer reads 

as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to financially assist the town of Duck 

Lake residents for the good of their health and safety due 

to the exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency, and that this government fulfills its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good 

residents of Duck Lake. I so present. 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I stand today and present a 

petition in support of withdrawal of Bill 80. Mr. Speaker, the 

building trades unions in our province have a proud history of 

craft union certification. And, Mr. Speaker, they also have 

contracts that support apprenticeship system training which 

results in a highly skilled workforce which is so necessary for 

our province. And the petition reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to withdraw its ill-conceived Bill 80, The 

Construction Industry Labour Relations Amendment Act, 

2009, which dismantles the proud history of the building 

trades in this province, creates instability in the labour 

market, and impacts the quality of training required for 

workers before entering the workforce. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petitions are signed by people in Moose Jaw, Bienfait, 

Wapella, Battleford, Emerald Park, Corman Park, Dundurn, 

Rosetown, Humboldt, Martensville, Lloydminster, Langham, 

Hudson Bay, Colonsay, Prince Albert, Regina, Melfort, 

Saskatoon, Cupar, Dilke, Fort Qu‟Appelle, Holdfast, and 

Briercrest. I so present, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m 

pleased today to rise, presenting a petition in support of 

affordable rents and housing for The Battlefords, Mr. Speaker. 



3820 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2009 

The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to call 

upon the Government of Saskatchewan to develop an 

affordable housing program that will result in a greater 

number of quality and affordable rental units to be made 

available to a greater number of people throughout The 

Battlefords and that will implement a process of rent 

review or rent control to better protect tenants in a 

non-competitive housing environment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by residents of the city of 

North Battleford, the town of Battleford, and the village of 

Scott, Saskatchewan. I so present, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from across 

Saskatchewan as it relates to the unprecedented 

mismanagement of our finances by the Sask Party. With the 

confirmation of the billion dollar deficit created by the Sask 

Party, the concern across this province is huge, and that may 

understate it, Mr. Speaker. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to start managing our 

provincial finances responsibly and prudently to ensure 

that it does not continue its trend of massive budgetary 

shortfalls, runaway and unsustainable spending, equity 

stripping from our Crowns, and irresponsible revenue 

setting. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions, Mr. Speaker, are but a sample of the many 

individuals across Saskatchewan. These are signed by residents 

of Regina. I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Elmwood Residences Celebrate 40th Anniversary 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟d like to congratulate 

Elmwood Residences on their 40th anniversary. Elmwood 

Residences is a community-based residential service in 

Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

This organization or group of homes offers quality services for 

individuals with intellectual disabilities. It was established in 

1969 with the goal of providing, as closely as possible, a home 

and family life environment, to develop a sense of self-worth in 

each individual resident, and to promote and sustain a positive 

philosophy that would assure the well-being and abilities of 

each person. 

 

Mr. Speaker, from the beginning the Saskatoon Kinsmen have 

been consistent and generous donors, both in financing and 

individual resources. In fact on September 8th, 2008, the main 

home on Arlington Avenue was renamed Kinsmen Manor in 

acknowledgement of that generosity. 

 

I want to send special congratulations to Shelley Bartram, 

executive director of Elmwood. She has worked long and hard 

to ensure the excellence of services at the residence. 

 

In the first year of Elmwood there were 38 residents. Today 50 

individuals continue to enjoy life at Kinsmen Manor. Sixty-five 

people live with their friends at 11 Elmwood group homes. 

Approximately 50 families use the respite home, and another 25 

people are supported so they can live alone in the community. 

 

Life at Elmwood is exemplified by the joy of being together and 

receiving the love and support individuals need to enjoy a 

happy and successful life of their choosing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, truly it is amazing what is possible when good 

people unite together in a common cause. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 

 

Commercial Cattleman of the Year 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. John Wayne said, 

“Talk low, talk slow, and don‟t say too much.” This quote 

describes the man I have the honour of recognizing today: Tom 

Hougham, who ranches on the south bank of the North 

Saskatchewan River in an area called North Bend. Tom does 

have these characteristics, and when he speaks, I always listen. 

Tom is a heck of a rancher, a great community man, and I am 

privileged to call him a friend. So I am very proud that Tom 

Hougham is being presented with the Commercial Cattleman of 

the Year award at Canadian Western Agribition tomorrow. 

 

The Saskatchewan Hereford Association presents this award to 

an individual who has shown their dedication to the Hereford 

breed for many years and even generations. Those chosen are 

an elite group of commercial cattlemen that have demonstrated 

excellence towards the production of quality 

Hereford-influenced commercial cattle. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is another well-used cowboy quote: Behind 

every successful rancher is a spouse who works in town. In this 

case it certainly applies, as Tom is married to Marilyn 

Hougham who is, when she is not Tom‟s top cowhand on the 

ranch, I am very pleased to have as my constituency assistant in 

Lloydminster. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask all of the Assembly to join 

with me in congratulating Tom and Marilyn Hougham from 

Tom-Lyn Ranch on this well-deserved award. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Troy’s Youth Canoe Quest 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, Troy‟s Youth Canoe Quest is a 

friendly competition held annually in northern Saskatchewan. 

This year it was held in Wollaston Lake on August 4th, 2009. 



November 26, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3821 

Troy‟s Youth Canoe Quest is a friendly competition created 

with a goal of shedding light on youth suicide interventions. It 

was inspired by Troy Dorion of Pelican Narrows, who 

committed suicide at a young age. The purpose of the quest is 

not only awareness of this important issue, but also to keep 

young people focused on positive activities and setting goals. 

 

Troy was inspired while travelling with his uncles on the 2005 

Centennial Canoe Quest, an epic, 1100-kilometre journey that 

traced the original voyageur trade route on the Churchill River. 

After Troy‟s death, his principal, Ray Highway, decided to 

create a canoe quest in his memory, since Troy had enjoyed it 

so much. 

 

This year‟s Troy‟s Canoe Quest included three teams from 

Pelican Narrows. Paddlers were age 14 to 19. They paddled a 

remarkable 100 kilometres in two days. Troy‟s Youth Canoe 

Quest is a great example of the achievement of our young 

people in our province and helps us to remember that the high 

rate of suicide in the North must be addressed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in commending all 

competitors and organizers of this Troy‟s Youth Canoe Quest. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu‟Appelle Valley. 

 

Local, Everyday Heroes 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Regina is a 

safer place to live today because of our local, everyday heroes 

— our dedicated police officers. Thanks to the Regina police, 

our city‟s monthly crime stats are continuing a downward trend. 

 

October saw more impressive reductions. Property crimes are 

down by more than 10 per cent. Regina police attribute this 

progress to a reduction of more than 20 per cent in both break 

and enters and car thefts. Our home and our police vehicles are 

safer than ever. Plus we are safer because of the brave men and 

women serving on our local police force. 

 

Crimes against persons have been reduced this year by over 1 

per cent. Regina police chief, Troy Hagen, explained to the 

public that while these crimes are difficult to prevent because of 

their personal nature, they are continuing to put their focus and 

attention on these crimes. 

 

Today the citizens of Regina can feel safer and proud of our 

police officers, the men and women who show their courage 

each and every single day. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Famous Duos 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. History gives 

us many examples of names that will live together forever: 

Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid, Bonnie and Clyde, Bert 

and Ernie, Sonny and Cher, the Caped Crusader and his ward, 

Boy Wonder. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I rise today to celebrate another dynamic duo, the 

Minister of Finance and his ward, the Minister of Municipal 

Affairs, who have served together for a half year on the board 

of directors for the Municipal Financing Corporation of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Paper is traditional for a one-year anniversary, Mr. Speaker, but 

a member statement will have to do for a pair who have 

managed to blow their corporation‟s budget by 100 per cent in 

just six months with no knowledge of this overrun. 

 

Allow me to introduce these two prudent ministers, Mr. 

Speaker, by the nicknames known to their friends and admirers 

— check and balance. Check, Mr. Speaker, hails from Meadow 

Lake and was a federal Conservative candidate back when his 

favourite pair of words used to be “in” and “out.” Now, Mr. 

Speaker, check‟s been distracted, as a pair of Conservative 

lawyers fight his case in Ottawa, so he hasn‟t noticed far more 

money going out than coming in. 

 

Balance, Mr. Speaker, calls Melfort home. And his favourite 

pair of words used to be “strong” and “steady.” But despite the 

bad budget numbers, he hid from the public behind those words 

for so long that a certain columnist began to doubt he owned a 

pair of something else. And so I give you check and balance, 

Mr. Speaker. May they keep an eye on the balance sheet of this 

province much better in the months to come. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Services for People with Intellectual Disabilities 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I‟m 

pleased to advise the Assembly about an exciting new pilot 

project that‟s been launched in Yorkton today on behalf of 

people with intellectual disabilities. The goal of this $171,000 

project, a partnership of the Yorkton branch of the Sask 

Abilities Council and the Ministry of Social Services, is to 

strengthen the services provided to people with intellectual 

disabilities by approved private service homes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, approved private service homes play a valuable 

role in supporting people with intellectual disabilities in 

communities across Saskatchewan. This unique partnership 

with the Yorkton branch of the Sask Abilities Council links that 

organization, with its volunteers and staff, with approved 

private service home operators in the Yorkton area. Those 

operators will be provided with respite training and education, 

behavioural and after-hour crisis supports, and networking 

opportunities. Through this initiative we hope to enhance 

capacity and develop more and better services that respond to 

the needs of people with disabilities in their communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this pilot project is part of our government‟s 

four-year $76.9 million commitment to eliminate the wait-list of 

440 people with intellectual disabilities across Saskatchewan 

who require residential, day, and specialized programs to meet 

their assessment needs. The wait-list initiative is the largest 

investment in Saskatchewan history in support of people with 

intellectual disabilities. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 



3822 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2009 

Premier’s Trip to Washington 

 

Ms. Morin: — Last week the Premier jetted off to Washington 

to wine and dine with political representatives in America 

claiming to talk about energy and climate change. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at first glance this may seem like a positive action. 

Could it be that the Premier was finally taking climate change 

seriously? Could it be that he wanted to propose serious actions 

in advance of the Copenhagen conference on December 8th? 

Alas, this was not it. The Premier was there with one 

disappointing message. We need to rag the puck so that fighting 

climate change won‟t get in the way of his hunt for an 

economic boom since his government blew the last one. 

 

For those unfamiliar with the term, ragging the puck is a 

technique in hockey, essentially meaning to proceed slowly in 

order to use up time. The Premier wants to stall. At a time when 

climate change experts are repeatedly stressing the urgency of 

the situation, the Premier‟s response is to tell his colleagues to 

just slow down, just stall for time. 

 

Let‟s not be a leader in this field, says the Premier, despite the 

fact that the impacts of climate change are now happening much 

more quickly than expected, and despite the fact that 

Saskatchewan has the resource potential to tap into renewable 

energies to combat our carbon footprint. 

 

The province needs real leadership in the fight to address 

climate change and they need it immediately. Mr. Premier, Mr. 

Premier, we do not have time to rag the puck, and the people of 

the province will remind him of that in 2011. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Management of Provincial Economy 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, everyone in 

the province now knows that last March our Minister of 

Finance introduced the most unbelievable and irresponsible 

budget in the history of the province. And last week when we 

asked about the result of that budget that led to $293 million in 

cuts across 19 departments, those questions were put in good 

faith on behalf of the people of the province. 

 

And what was the answer? The answer was that no, he would 

not give the answers until when? Until after the next budget. 

My question to the minister is, how is it that it‟s going to take 

him till after the next budget to know what cuts he made in this 

budget? How does that work? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well thank you very much. Thank you very 

much, Mr. Speaker. It‟s interesting to note the line of 

questioning we‟ve had from the members opposite with respect 

to the length of the session. 

 

[10:30] 

 

With respect to the issue of supplementary estimates, Mr. 

Speaker, I think, and I‟ll get the exact years, but I think for five 

or six years, from about ‟92 through ‟96 when that member who 

just asked the question sat on the government benches, when 

they had the option of calling a fall session, they never did it. So 

supplementary estimates weren‟t considered at all, Mr. Speaker, 

until the spring sitting of the Legislative Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

This session, this session will not end without the full scrutiny 

and vote on all estimates, including supplementary estimates, 

Mr. Speaker. This session, which will end in the spring, will not 

end without another budget being presented, a balanced budget 

on the strength of debt reduction, on the strength of sustainable 

tax relief, and on the strength of the healthiest economy on the 

continent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Just a reminder for members which I‟ve tried 

to communicate through the House leaders. The questions are to 

be put through the Chair, and I‟d like to have that 

acknowledgement — rule 51. I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the 

Minister of Finance. It doesn‟t surprise anyone in the province 

that he doesn‟t understand his own budget as it would . . . 

[inaudible] . . . in the Municipal Finance Corporation that was 

mentioned earlier in the House has gone wrong by $31 million. 

The answer to our budget cut question should be at the 

minister‟s fingertips. Obviously they know, the minister knows, 

what the budget cuts are, the $293 million. Or maybe he 

doesn‟t. 

 

But my question is, which answer is correct — that you‟re 

hiding the answers from the public, hiding it from the public? 

Or is it that you just don‟t know and that you‟re that 

incompetent? There‟s one of two answers that we would like 

from the minister. Are you incompetent? Are you hiding the 

facts? Which is it? 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I would also ask members to be 

mindful of the terms or the reflections upon members based on 

the rules. And the members, there‟s a significant number of 

rulings in the past as to what‟s reflective, how we reflect on 

members. And I ask members to be mindful of that. I recognize 

the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

The minister has answered the questions with respect to the 

Municipal Finance Corporation.  

 

It‟s interesting, Mr. Speaker. The additional request for help 

through the Saskatchewan infrastructure and growth initiative 

instituted by this government that drove much of the changes to 

the Municipal Finance Corporation were what, Mr. Speaker? 

They were the growth of the province of Saskatchewan. They 

were an application from the city of Regina to proceed with 

what I think will be Canada‟s finest global transportation hub 

on the outskirts of the very city that he represents, Mr. Speaker. 

I think those are positive things. They are the reactions of this 

government to the growth that‟s occurring around the province. 

 

We‟ve heard members opposite talk about the length of debate. 

And in a moment of honesty, Mr. Speaker, it‟s interesting that 



November 26, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3823 

the Social Services critic over there, on this issue of what‟s 

been happening in committees on debates, said this: 

 

It‟s one of the things in opposition, you get to ask some 

questions that you wished you had asked when you were 

in government. But we‟re all very busy [he said]. And so 

this is a real . . . opportunity [for learning] for us. [The 

member said.] 

 

So the members opposite are learning about government even 

though they served on government for 16 years. It‟s our 

objective if they find opposition a chance to learn, we believe in 

education. We‟ll give them that chance for learning for a long 

time to come. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Just a reminder as well for when 

ministers are responding, to at least acknowledge or have some 

relevance to tie the response to the question. Thank you. I 

recognize the Opposition Leader. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 

Premier. My question to the Premier is this. When it comes to 

accountability and being open and transparent about the budget, 

the people of the province are really wondering why they can‟t 

get answers to the question that is, where are the cuts, the $293 

million? We‟ve asked in question period. No answers. We‟ve 

asked in committee. Not an answer. We‟ve written questions to 

the ministers. No answers. 

 

I want to quote from the election platform of the Sask Party and 

ask the Premier a question. In that document, you say, “A 

Saskatchewan Party Government will provide Saskatchewan 

people with more transparency and accountability than . . . 

previous government.” 

 

I want to ask him how is this hiding the 293 million in cuts 

being open and transparent? How does that work? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, first of all, with 

respect to the numbers the member has highlighted here today, 

we have highlighted those in terms of the deferrals. Those are 

deferrals, Mr. Speaker. We‟re going to get to those projects 

when the finances of the province afford it. 

 

Now to directly answer the member‟s question. His question 

was this: we campaigned on more transparency in the platform, 

Mr. Speaker. When we inherited government, here‟s the 

situation. The situation that was that that party in government 

had stopped the long-standing practice of four-year . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, order. I would just 

remind the Premier of responding through the Chair. Thank 

you. Recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, when that party was in office, 

it made a decision in its dying days, the tired old NDP [New 

Democratic Party] decided, we‟re not going to provide the 

four-year forecast that had been the tradition of budgeting in 

this province back to the days of Roy Romanow when we saw a 

lot . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The members have asked a question, 

would like to hear an answer. And I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — So, Mr. Speaker, we campaigned on more 

transparency. What did we do? We changed that. Our first 

budget had that four-year projection, had that transparency, so 

people could see the plan going forward. The same is true for 

the second budget. It‟ll be true in the third budget, Mr. Speaker. 

And what will also be true in the next budget is that it will be 

balanced, Mr. Speaker. The debt in the province will be lower 

than it ever was under that party. Taxes will be lower and our 

economy will lead the country, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Provision of High-Speed Internet 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, on October 28th, 2008, the Sask 

Party announced that it had established a new policy framework 

which would, and I quote, “. . . focus the Crowns on investing 

within Saskatchewan.” Yesterday the Minister of CIC [Crown 

Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan] stated, and I‟ll quote 

again: “. . . we believe in investing in Saskatchewan.” But last 

week SaskTel announced that it had reached an agreement with 

two private sector operators to provide fixed wireless Internet 

high-speed service to 15 communities. 

 

To the minister: why is SaskTel turning to private sector 

providers to make investments the Saskatchewan Party claimed 

would be done by the Crowns? And did the Sask Party drain so 

much equity from the Crowns that they can no longer afford to 

deliver these services to the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m pleased to 

be able to get up today to remind members that our government 

made a commitment to try and provide 100 per cent high-speed 

Internet coverage throughout the province. Mr. Speaker, that 

high-speed Internet coverage is provided through a variety of 

different private sector partners. The member opposite makes 

reference to some small communities in the province. Prior to 

very recent times, it was provided by three different satellite 

companies, none of whom were Saskatchewan companies. Mr. 

Speaker, not one of them. They were in operation prior to the 

last change of government. 

 

Those satellite partners will be . . . Those communities will be 

upgraded, and will now receive either fixed wireless or DSL 

[digital subscriber line] through private sector partners, one of 

which is a Manitoba company, the other one which is a 

Saskatchewan company, Mr. Speaker. These communities will 

be well-served. Their Internet speeds will go up markedly, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 



3824 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2009 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On May the 5th the 

Sask Party said, and I‟ll quote again: “SaskTel is exploring 

partnership options which would allow private sector 

companies to provide residential high speed Internet in the 

community in return for a subsidy.” Mr. Speaker, a subsidy. 

 

And we all know that companies like YourLink Inc. and 

RFNow could never afford to provide affordable high-speed 

Internet service to those communities at the price SaskTel 

could, given its economies of scale. 

 

To the minister: how much is the government subsidizing these 

companies to provide the service that should be provided by the 

people of Saskatchewan through their Crown utility? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I can advise the members 

and I can advise the House that RFNow has provided services 

in this province in Moosomin and Carlyle since 2001 under the 

previous administration. They provide good quality service. 

YourLink, which is a Saskatoon company, has provided 

Internet services throughout Saskatchewan in smaller 

communities where it has not been economically viable for 

SaskTel to use their business model to do it. It was done under 

the previous administration; it is now done under this 

government. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we will provide appropriate subsidies in 

communities where it‟s acceptable to ensure that the citizens of 

this province get good quality high-speed Internet. And we are 

going to make it a target that we will provide it to 100 per cent 

of the province of Saskatchewan. And we will do so during our 

mandate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. The Sask 

Party‟s drained money out of the Crowns to pay for their fiscal 

mismanagement to nearly a $1 billion. They won‟t allow the 

Crowns to invest in profitable enterprises outside the province. 

They privatized or tried to privatize everything that wasn‟t 

nailed down in the corporation, including email services, 

message relay services, and telephone operators, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now they‟re subsidizing other companies to provide high-speed 

Internet services, which we do as a company. They‟re 

privatizing more of the operations of SaskTel, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it won‟t be long before SaskTel is a shell of its former 

self, providing its customers with nothing but a dial tone. 

 

To the minister: how long will it take the Sask Party to 

undermine the Crowns and privatize enough of it so that they‟ll 

have to sell it off because it has no value? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I find it absolutely amazing 

that the members opposite will talk about the money that 

they‟ve spent outside of this province. Do they know that 

there‟s $300 million that could be in the province of 

Saskatchewan if they wouldn‟t have decided that Channel Lake 

or Guyana or . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. When the minister‟s 

attempting to answer a question that‟s being presented by the 

opposition, I would ask the opposition members to allow the 

minister to respond in the same way the opposition were given 

the opportunity to place the question. I recognize the Minister 

Responsible. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 

when they were in government spent an average of $500 

million a year on capital investments in SaskPower, SaskTel, 

and SaskEnergy. In the last two years, we‟ve spent $2.2 billion 

on capital improvements at SaskTel. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m very, very pleased to tell the members 

opposite we spent $90 million on high-speed Internet. We‟ve 

got the lowest natural gas rates in Canada. Mr. Speaker, 

SaskEnergy now has 4,000 new customers, in fact in some 

communities where their services, where there hasn‟t been a 

new connection for over two decades. That‟s what happens 

when you have a province that‟s improving and growing. We‟re 

investing in our province through our Crowns because we‟re 

growing — $2.2 billion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Big River Saw Mill 

 

Mr. Furber: — I‟ve got a question for the Minister of Energy 

and Resources. Can he confirm that at a community meeting in 

Big River earlier this year he told residents of Big River that 

Eacom Timber Corporation, the company which is finalizing 

the purchase of the Big River saw mill was, and I quote, “not a 

viable company,” and went on to tell residents that quote, if 

they were to investigate, they would see that Eacom was a 

shady company, and that Rick Doman, their CEO, was quote “a 

shady character”? 

 

Does the minister confirm making these defamatory statements 

about Eacom Timber, a publicly traded company, and did he 

make the same statement to members of the cabinet? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, later today we will be making 

an announcement around the forest management agreement, 

talking about the various areas of interest to the forestry sector 

in Saskatchewan. There will be an involvement of large 

companies, small companies, independent forestry companies, 

and of course communities and First Nations people affected by 

the agreement that we‟ll be announcing. 

 

And when it comes to the agreement with the community of Big 

River, the discussion about Big River, certainly there are grave 

concerns about the company that is in question here. I think it‟s 

on the public record, through the various media outlets about 

the start-up of that company, from a pharmaceutical company 



November 26, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3825 

that it used to be, through to now a start-up in the forestry 

sector. Mr. Speaker, I think there are concerns about the 

viability potential of this company and those who surround the 

questions as being asked. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, I have a fax recently received by 

the president and CEO of Eacom Timber, Rick Doman, from a 

businessperson in Big River confirming the minister‟s 

defamatory remarks. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Big River have been waiting two 

years for somebody to purchase and reopen their sawmill. 

Eacom Timber stepped up to the plate with zero government 

assistance. They didn‟t have to borrow the money to do it. They 

had it in the bank and their company, but instead of welcoming 

this new business to the province, the minister defames them in 

Big River and again in this Assembly today. 

 

What kind of game is he playing with the people of Big River 

and the jobs and the future in that town and with this company, 

Mr. Speaker? 

 

[10:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, the question surrounding 

Eacom is a very interesting one. And I quote from a CBC news 

article of May 8th, 2001, where they‟re involved in a number of 

lawsuits. The first one involves the Government of British 

Columbia, a lawsuit where they‟re suggesting that they reneged 

on forest licences. The second lawsuit is with regard to 

stumpage rates, and the third lawsuit as a result of what they 

claim is government mismanagement of the forestry sector. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are ongoing questions about the company 

that the member refers to. There are many, many concerns 

about the proposal as came forward. We expected we would see 

a proposal that would involve the forestry company. When we 

received the proposal, there certainly was no mention 

whatsoever of that, Mr. Speaker. And that‟s the reason why 

there are a number of questions about this company. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Is this Minister of Energy and Resources today 

saying that this government will not do business with any 

corporation that has a lawsuit against it in the province of 

Saskatchewan? Is that what he‟s saying? It‟s unbelievable, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And to save 300 jobs in Big River, all he has to do is provide 

this saw mill with the same allocation it had two years ago. 

Without an allocation, Eacom Timber has stated that they have 

no option but to move this asset out of the province, effectively 

killing this opportunity forever in Saskatchewan. 

 

Why has this minister failed to offer Big River saw mill an 

adequate wood supply to keep the mill here in Saskatchewan 

and bring back hundreds of jobs to that community? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, any time the Government of 

Saskatchewan receives proposals from various companies that 

want to do business in Saskatchewan, there‟s, a great deal of 

due diligence takes place to determine whether the company has 

viability or not. Not only the Ministry of Energy and Resources 

took a look at this. We also consulted with an outside agency, 

an accounting company to take a look at this. They came back 

with the same conclusion that we came back with, that this 

proposal simply would not be viable and did not meet the test of 

viability in Saskatchewan. 

 

There are lawsuits in question. There are questions about the 

start-up of this company. And there are certainly concerns about 

the proposal that they brought forward that did not include the 

forestry partner that they said it was going to include. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Funding for Boards of Education and Property Tax Issues 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, last spring the Saskatchewan 

Party introduced the biggest changes to education financing in 

the history of the province and took away school boards‟ ability 

to tax property. At the time, Saskatchewan people were 

promised that the government would be increasing funding next 

year to further reduce education taxes on property. They also 

promised school boards that they would have predictable and 

secure funding in place by 2011. 

 

Fast forward six months. We‟ve got a billion dollar deficit, the 

rainy day fund and the Crown corporations are being sucked 

dry by the government‟s financial incompetence. And now the 

Minister of Education says he‟ll have to break the Sask Party‟s 

promise to property owners and school boards. 

 

So to the minister: can he confirm that the Sask Party is about to 

break another promise? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I‟d be happy to talk about 

the promises that this government has kept. Promises, Mr. 

Speaker, that in the first two years, in the first two years of a 

Sask Party government, Mr. Speaker, we have instituted two 

major changes. The largest income tax break to the province of 

Saskatchewan ever, Mr. Speaker, that‟s in the first year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the second year of our term as government . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. The member opposite challenges and says, poor 

Ken, Mr. Speaker, poor Ken. Mr. Speaker, the opposition has 



3826 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2009 

asked a question. I‟m prepared to answer the fact, but that we 

have put in place the largest tax change in the province‟s history 

in Saskatchewan — $103 million. Mr. Speaker, I‟m sure 

there‟ll be more questions, and I‟ll have a chance to add some 

more information to the member opposite. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier started out the 

week by hugging Gainer the Gopher, but it looks like he‟s been 

bitten by the prairie dog. Because the Premier recently told the 

prairie dog magazine, and I quote, “There are fewer words 

more powerful in politics than, „They did what they set out to 

do.‟” 

 

Well what did the Sask Party say last spring? They promised 

Regina property tax payers that they‟d get a $150 property tax 

cut next year. They promised farmers in Winslow a $1,000 tax 

cut. And the Premier promised commercial tax payers a tax cut 

of about $200. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, they‟re not doing what they set out to do. 

They‟re full of big talk just a few months ago, but it turns out 

that cheerleading is not the same as governing. So to the 

minister: why should the people of this province believe any 

announcement that that minister makes? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education? 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, again we have a chance to 

talk about promises made, promises kept — 112 promises, Mr. 

Speaker, 112 promises made. Mr. Speaker, I think the members 

opposite have to understand where they have been for the last 

number of years. I‟m going to introduce a quote, Mr. Speaker, 

from Hansard. And the date of that quote, Mr. Speaker, is 

September the 22nd, 1987. And it says this: 

 

And I say, Mr. Speaker, is there any wonder that a tax 

revolt is brewing in this province? People are being taxed 

to death and they‟re saying, we can‟t take any more. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there‟s another interesting quote. This is a quote, 

Mr. Speaker, and it says this: 

 

We are pledged to do away with the education tax as soon 

as we get the new sources of revenue to take the place of 

the revenue now realized from that tax. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the date of that quote August the 3rd, 1944, by 

then Tommy Douglas, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — I think the Minister of Education should 

listen to the member from Lloydminster, where earlier today he 

said, talk low, talk slow, according to John Wayne, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in today‟s StarPhoenix, Ray Morrison, the 

Chair of the Saskatoon Public School Board, said, and I quote: 

 

. . . his biggest concern would be the government lowering 

the education property tax mill rate next year without 

backfilling the funding that would be lost. 

 

“Then we would be in a position where . . . it would 

probably have some significant impact on programming.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s not hard to imagine this government trying to 

make someone else foot the bill and take the blame for their 

broken promises. So to the minister: can he guarantee here 

today that school boards will receive the funding that they were 

promised, or will Saskatchewan school children be the latest 

victims of your $1 billion fiscal and financial mismanagement 

and incompetence? 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Just a reminder to the members 

that the use of words like “your” directly is implying something 

about an individual member. Members, remember to put the 

question through the Speaker. I recognize the Minister of 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

as I‟ve indicated to this Assembly many times, there have been 

two large changes in the province of Saskatchewan — the 

property tax change and the income tax change. The people of 

the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, are saving 

thousands of dollars. They‟re very pleased, Mr. Speaker, with 

the fact that the Saskatchewan Party government has kept an 

NDP promise made by Lorne Calvert, the former leader of the 

NDP, Tommy Douglas. And, Mr. Speaker, we‟ve kept that 

promise. We have made those commitments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have also said to the boards of education, as 

we‟ve moved forward over planning, we‟ve said to them that 

. . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Minister of 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, boards of education 

understand that there has been a change. They no longer have 

access to the tax base, and the changes that the provincial 

government makes to education tax is directly to the taxpayer. It 

doesn‟t have an effect on the school board any longer, Mr. 

Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Well the members opposite don‟t know exactly how funding is 

done, Mr. Speaker. Grant plus tax equals the amount that is 

needed for school divisions, Mr. Speaker. The province of 

Saskatchewan sets the tax rate. So the member opposite can 

suggest that changing or lowering or not lowering or raising the 

tax somehow affects the boards of education, Mr. Speaker. It 

doesn‟t. Mr. Speaker, it doesn‟t. And we will make a 

commitment to ensure that boards of education have adequate 

funding to do the job that they‟re there for, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Why is the member on 

his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to 

introduce guests. 



November 26, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3827 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Corrections has asked for 

leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the minister. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the 

west gallery we have some guests that I would like to introduce. 

One individual is my chief of staff, Rob Nicolay. But more 

importantly, Mr. Speaker, is Rob‟s parents. It‟s Joe and Glenna 

Nicolay. They are from Etter‟s Beach, Saskatchewan. And it‟s 

very nice to see them here today, and hopefully I get a chance to 

meet with them afterwards and see what their view on question 

period was. So I‟d ask all members of the Assembly to please 

welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, to make a 

statement regarding the celebration of the Holodomor. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has asked for leave to make a 

statement regarding the Holodomor. Leave is granted. 

 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

 

International Holodomor Remembrance Week 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you 

to the members opposite. Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned earlier, 

November 21st to 28th is International Holodomor 

Remembrance Week. 

 

The Ukrainian Holodomor commemorates the lives of millions 

of innocent Ukrainian victims of the famine genocide in the 

heart of Europe‟s breadbasket that occurred in 1932 and 1933. 

Historians estimate that possibly at least 7 million people died 

during this period, eradicated by man-made famine under 

Joseph Stalin‟s dictatorial regime. It is said, Mr. Speaker, that at 

the height of the famine the rate at which Ukrainians were 

dying was 24,000 people per day, and one-third of those victims 

were children. 

 

Imagine for a moment, Mr. Speaker, the populations of 

Yorkton, Melville, and Canora dying of hunger each day and 

then you will begin to understand the magnitude of the horror 

inflicted on the people of Ukraine. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the starvation that plagued Ukraine during these 

years has no natural cause. In fact Ukraine was the only Soviet 

republic that enjoyed bumper crops in 1932. Sadly, grain crops 

were confiscated and people were isolated by the army, 

preventing them from receiving food from neighbouring 

nations. Mr. Speaker, the Soviet government refused to 

acknowledge that the people of one of the richest agricultural 

regions in the world were starving. They even went so far as to 

turn down assistance offered by other countries and the Red 

Cross. 

 

The perpetrators of this genocide attempted to hide their crime 

against humanity by erasing it from the pages of history. On 

Joseph Stalin‟s orders, those who conducted the 1937 Soviet 

population census which revealed a sharp decrease in the 

Ukrainian population following the years of the Holodomor 

were shot, and the census results were suppressed. 

Unquestionably, Mr. Speaker, this is one of the most horrific 

calamities that Ukraine endured in modern history. 

 

In 2008 the government of Ukraine, the United States Senate, 

the Senate of Canada, UNESCO [United Nations Educational, 

Scientific, and Cultural Organization] and the United Nations 

joined over 40 other jurisdictions around the world to officially 

condemn the Holodomor, or recognize it as genocide. And the 

Government of Saskatchewan unanimously passed legislation 

to designate the fourth Saturday in November each year as 

Ukrainian Famine and Genocide (Holodomor) Memorial Day. 

This week, Mr. Speaker, there will be commemorative services 

held across the country and around the world to honour the 

memory of the innocent victims of Ukrainian Holodomor. 

 

[11:00] 

 

In Saskatchewan we will also honour and remember the many 

people of Ukrainian descent in our province and country who 

lost loved ones during Holodomor. Many survivors of this 

tragic time in history and their descendants live in our province 

and have contributed greatly to our cultural, economic, political, 

and educational life. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if I may, I‟d like to quote the 19th century 

Ukrainian poet and humanist, Taras Shevchenko, who said in 

his poem “My Testament”: 

 

Oh bury me, then rise ye up 

And break your heavy chains 

And water with the tyrants‟ blood 

The freedom you have gained. 

And in the great new family, 

The family of the free, 

With softly spoken, kindly word 

Remember also me. 

 

I ask all members here today, Mr. Speaker, to join me directly 

after these proceedings in the rotunda for a brief memorial 

service so together we can, as Shevchenko so eloquently wrote, 

remember those buried and express our gratitude for the 

freedom of those who survived. 

 

Let us remember, Mr. Speaker, that when we bring the 

Holodomor to international attention, we pay tribute to millions 

of innocent victims, we condemn the crimes of the Soviet 

communist regime, we restore historical justice, and we further 

the recognition of the Ukrainian genocide. 

 

Just as important for our own era, by acknowledging the 

Holodomor as genocide we increase the international 

community‟s awareness that engineered famines are still being 

used as a weapon against the innocent. And by raising this 

awareness, we hope to prevent such deplorable acts elsewhere 

in the world. In this way, Mr. Speaker, we not only honour the 

memory of the victims of this tragedy, but we educate and 

ensure that this most unconscionable type of crime against 

humanity will never occur again. Thank you. 



3828 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2009 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to make an 

extended reply. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Fairview has 

asked for leave. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — [The hon. member spoke for a time in 

Ukrainian.] 

 

Mr. Speaker, we remember so that we do not forget. Mr. 

Speaker, on May 7, 2008, this Legislative Assembly 

unanimously passed third reading of Bill 40, The Ukrainian 

Famine and Genocide (Holodomor) Memorial Day Act. Mr. 

Speaker, as in the Ukraine, the Bill recognizes the fourth 

Saturday of November each year as the annual day to 

commemorate the innocent victims of the 1932-33 Holodomor. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Ukrainian Holodomor commemorates the lives of 

millions of innocent men, women, and children who were 

eradicated by starvation in the heart of Europe‟s breadbasket. 

Mr. Speaker, many of Ukrainian ancestry have listened to 

stories, read historical, or watched film and video 

documentation of the Holodomor. But so much more must be 

done to understand the period of Ukrainian history as it was. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on November 28th many commemorative services 

will be held throughout the world, Canada, and here in 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the Ukrainian Canadian Congress, 

Regina branch, organized a special presentation of personal 

stories and dramatization of the Holodomor on November 21st 

of this year. Mr. Speaker, it is events such as these which 

contribute to a more informed understanding of this period of 

Ukrainian history. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we must continue to educate. We must remember, 

remember the history, tell the story of the attempts to destroy 

the national consciousness and the attempts to quash the 

aspirations of independence through starvation. We do this, Mr. 

Speaker, not only so that history might not repeat itself, but that 

the flame of human rights burns strong, a flame that we shall 

deeply cherish. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as many as 7 million died, one-third of them 

children, as a result of the man-made famine under Joseph 

Stalin‟s harsh and dictatorial regime. At the height of the 

famine, Ukrainians were dying at the rate of 1,000 per hour, 

25,000 perishing in a day. The government of the Ukraine, the 

United States House of Representatives, the United States 

Senate, the Senate of Canada, UNESCO the cultural 

organization, the United Nations, and over 40 jurisdictions 

around the world have officially condemned the Holodomor 

recognized as a genocide. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we must remember. We remembered this when 

the Holodomor Remembrance Flame came to our province, at 

that time celebrating the 75th anniversary of the famine and 

genocide which occurred in the Ukraine. Mr. Speaker, we all 

remember when the flame arrived here in Regina. We also 

remember the events organized by the Canadian Ukrainian 

Congress titled, “Keep the Flame Alive.” Remember the 

victims of the Holodomor while ensuring that their story was 

transferred from generation to generation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we remember Stefan Horlatsch in our Assembly 

here, who was a survivor of that Ukrainian famine. He initiated 

that symbolic walk for us and walked through several major 

cities in Canada. Mr. Speaker, Mr. Horlatsch himself was an 

author of six books and he, as a survivor, was recently inducted 

as an honorary member of the Ukrainian writers‟ union. Mr. 

Horlatsch lost 11 members of his own family to the Holodomor. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we must remember, and we must remember all 

those Canadians who have joined the international community 

in commemorating this tragedy to recognize the Holodomor as 

a genocide against Ukrainian people, and to ensure this heinous 

crime of using food as a weapon against people is no longer 

used by despots around the world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was not an easy road for people to get here. 

There was much skepticism. And we must work hard and we 

must keep that flame alive. Mr. Speaker, thank you. 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Speaker: — Before we move further in orders of the day, I 

lay on the table under section 14(1) of The Provincial Auditor 

Act the business and financial plan for the year ending March 

31, ‟09. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Openness and Accountability 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m pleased to enter into this 

debate where we have introduced a motion during the 

75-minute debate: 

 

That the Legislative Assembly condemn the government 

for their unwillingness to be open and accountable to the 

people of Saskatchewan in regard to the recent budget cuts 

that were brought about as a result of the government‟s 

unprecedented financial mismanagement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have tried everything that we possibly can do 

in order to understand the exact nature of, in essence, what 

really is $355.9 million in expense reductions introduced by this 

government as a result of their $1 billion deficit, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have asked the government to extend the session so that we 

can understand precisely how these cuts are going to be 

implemented and what impact they will have on the people of 

our province, and they have said no. We‟ve asked a written 

question that we understand those 18 — or is it 19? — agencies 



November 26, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3829 

and departments, how much is being reduced, and what is the 

impact upon the citizens of our province. And what have they 

done in response to those written questions? They have said that 

we‟ll know about this after next spring when they introduce 

their next budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier of Saskatchewan and the Sask Party 

promised the citizens of this province that they would be open 

and accountable and transparent. But at every opportunity, Mr. 

Speaker, at every opportunity those members opposite have 

denied the opposition and the public the ability to understand 

precisely the impact of those cuts of $355.9 million in expense 

restraint. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we think it‟s unacceptable. We think it‟s 

unacceptable that a government that came to office promising to 

be open and transparent and accountable would be so 

hard-nosed and so non-transparent that they deny us, through 

written question, the opportunity to understand the $355.9 

million in expense restraint. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have learned recently that the 

Saskatchewan School Council Association will no longer 

receive their minimum grant of $34 million. And, Mr. Speaker, 

this is an organization that‟s been in our province for 71 years. 

This is an organization that is considered one of the partners in 

education along with school trustees, directors of education, 

school financial officers, along with the directors of education 

and the Saskatchewan Teachers‟ Federation. Well the 

government in essence, as a result of the reduction of a very 

small amount of money, has decided to muzzle one of the 

partners in education, which are the parents. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we don‟t know where all of the cuts are. We 

do not know. And the members opposite have said, trust us. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it‟s very difficult to trust them when we 

learn, for instance, that the Minister of Health, who ran around 

the province announcing all of these nursing homes all across 

Saskatchewan, has now decided that no, there aren‟t going to be 

these nursing homes, that the money that was put out the door 

in 2008-09 of $122 million, it was sent out to all these various 

health authorities, that in fact, here‟s what‟s going to happen: 

we‟re going to reduce your operating grant, regional health 

authority, and you can backfill it by using the money that was 

there for long-term care facilities. 

 

So for instance in the area that I come from, Biggar, 

Saskatchewan or the member from Biggar — a Sask Party 

member represents that community — there was great fanfare, 

the mayor was there, the whole town was there when they 

announced that there was going to be a new nursing home built 

in Biggar. But what‟s happened? What‟s happened is the health 

region that represents the town of Biggar and the surrounding 

area has now used the money that was designated for that 

nursing home as part of its operating costs because the 

government has cut over $192 million from its budget, its 

Health budget, which apparently allows regional health 

authorities to use long-term care capital funds not currently 

required to replace operating grants from the Ministry of 

Health. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, there are communities after communities 

after communities that were promised. In fact the Minister of 

Health went to those communities with great fanfare along with 

the local member of the legislature, Sask Party member of the 

legislature. I call them the king of press releases. They had 

press release after press release telling us how this long-term 

care money was going to mean better facilities for our elderly, 

frail elderly, and disabled people in our towns across 

Saskatchewan. And in fact, that‟s incorrect. 

 

It‟s not true because what the government has done is they‟ve 

clawed all of that money back and told those health regions that 

received that money that this money is going to go to replace 

operating grants that should come from the Ministry of Health. 

Because you know what, Mr. Speaker, it‟s called? They are 

overcommitting out there and underperforming, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now if you go through their budget, it says that the Department 

of Health budget is down $192 million. Now we don‟t know 

what they‟ve cut. Have they cut chiropractic care for children? 

We don‟t know. We do know that they‟ve replaced operating 

grants with the money that was there for long-term care 

facilities, but we don‟t know what else they‟ve cut. 

 

In Education, the Minister of Education advised us that he had 

cut the $30 million out of the capital budget for Education, but 

there‟s another $1.2 million in Education cuts. Now could that 

be the child daycare money that they announced? Because they 

certainly haven‟t been able to get those spaces up and 

operational even though there are thousands of children in 

Saskatchewan waiting for a child daycare space all across the 

province. But they had press releases everywhere, that they 

were creating all of these child daycare spaces. But we don‟t 

know whether they‟ve cut child daycare funding because they 

won‟t tell us, Mr. Speaker. We do know that they‟ve cut the 

Saskatchewan Association of School Councils, but what else 

have they cut? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what‟ll be very interesting to see is whether 

or not all the money that the Minister of Education has 

committed to school capital all across Saskatchewan, whether 

the Minister of Education is going to do the same thing. They 

send it out to the health board and then what they do is they cut 

operating grants and say, take that capital money and that will 

be part of your operating grant. So we‟ll see what happens 

there. 

 

[11:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also know, we also know that Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport is down apparently by $10.7 million. But this 

is supposed to be primarily due to deferral of capital funding 

relating to the building communities program, and a reduction 

in estimated funding requirements for the active families 

benefit. But what we don‟t know is what else have they cut. 

Because we know that departments have escalating expenses 

and what Finance tells those departments to do is, eat it, which 

means you have to go and find money somewhere in your 

budget to offset those escalating expenses. So we have no clue 

what this government has done in terms of reducing 

expenditures in the province. 

 

Now then, we have Government Services. It‟s apparently down 

$2.6 million, and this is because of travel restraint. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, we know that there are some people, even with the 



3830 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2009 

travel restraint, that are still flying off to far places, still flying 

off first class, still flying off first class to faraway places and 

they aren‟t really showing much in the way of travel expenses. 

And I‟m sure we‟ll get to that in the next little while, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So we‟re interested in knowing which vacancies, which 

vacancies, because we also know that there are some places in 

government where there has been a significant increase in pay 

to certain individuals without it ever having gone through the 

Public Service Commission for their review. It‟s just that they 

wanted to make sure that some people somewhere got a pay 

increase, but it never went through the process of the Public 

Service Commission to ensure that the movement, from say a 

management 5 to a management 8, was legitimate. They wanted 

to make sure that some individuals someplace got a huge pay 

increase. So much for expense restraint, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And then we had that organization called Enterprise 

Saskatchewan, an organization that, as far as we can see, has 

racked up a whole bunch of eat, drink, and travel, but haven‟t 

really done much in the way of ensuring that we have various 

projects in the province. It‟s a $2.4 million reduction. We don‟t 

know what‟s been reduced. And this is apparently due to 

reduced project costs. Well what projects? What projects have 

been reduced? We have no idea. 

 

And then, of course, they say Advanced Education, 

Employment and Labour is up. Now that is one department we 

can get at. You know why, Mr. Speaker? Because anyone that‟s 

spending more, we get to review them in committee. But if you 

are cutting and you‟re not spending more, we don‟t get to 

review them in committee. 

 

In fact, the Ministry of Education is not in committee. The 

Ministry of Agriculture is not in committee. The Ministry of 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport is not in committee. And 

we‟ll be very interested to know how much in fact the Olympics 

cost us, because we‟re told that it‟s a lot more than $7 million. 

And these people opposite are refusing to be transparent and tell 

us precisely how much money is being spent by the 

Saskatchewan Sask Party government on those Olympics. 

 

Now we don‟t have Government Services coming into 

committee. We don‟t have Enterprise Saskatchewan coming 

into committee. We don‟t have all kinds of other departments 

and agencies coming into committee. So, Mr. Speaker, how is 

this open and transparent? How is it open and transparent? 

 

We‟d like to see Executive Council come in here and tell us, 

you know, how much did you . . . Or maybe it‟s not Executive 

Council. Maybe it‟s Intergovernmental. How much was spent 

on the Council of the Federation? Because we‟re told that when 

the Premier had all the premiers here last summer that we spent 

money like there was no tomorrow. And now they‟ll say, oh we 

had a lot of money. 

 

But you know, Mr. Speaker, this is how you get in trouble. You 

can‟t eat, drink, and travel your way across the globe; you can‟t 

pay off all your buds with escalating contracts; you can‟t spend 

like there‟s no tomorrow — and not rack up a deficit. 

 

Now I remember one previous premier that said you could be 

incompetent and still make money in the province of 

Saskatchewan. You know what? That was Grant Devine. And 

you know what we learned? You cannot be incompetent 

managers of our province‟s finances and still make money. 

 

Now maybe they could do it for a year, but the chickens have 

come home to roost. And we have a billion dollar deficit. We 

have a billion dollar deficit. We‟re draining money out of the 

Crown Investments Corporation, which is the holding company 

for all of those Crowns. We‟re draining money like crazy to pay 

for their fiscal . . . I can‟t say the words. I can‟t say the word, 

mismanagement. 

 

And then we had the rainy day account. You know, Mr. 

Speaker, we left these people with $2.3 billion in cash. That‟s 

how much money we left them. And what do we have left? Two 

point three billion, and what do we have? It is two years later, 

two years later, only their second budget. And we‟ve got a 

billion dollar deficit, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have a rainy day fund that‟s been drained to the point of . . . 

Who knows what‟s left in the rainy day fund? Because we don‟t 

have the third quarter yet. We have a CIC, which is the holding 

company that had over $1 billion in cash. It‟s been stripped 

clean over there because of their financial — I can‟t say the 

word, Mr. Speaker — mismanagement, even though we used to 

use that I-word in the ‟80s. But we‟ll call it the mismanagement 

word, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we have a government that‟s run amok. That‟s what they‟ve 

done. They‟ve run amok. You know they have said, time and 

time again, about the NDPers and how we ran government. 

Well I do know this: that if you didn‟t have the money, you 

didn‟t spend it. And I know this: that when it came to increasing 

the expenses of the province, we watched to make sure that we 

could afford it. When we cut taxes, we made sure we could 

afford it, Mr. Speaker. But not these people. 

 

And now we have a situation where they have reduced 

education tax on property. They have taken away school 

boards‟ ability to tax. And we don‟t know what‟s going to 

happen to school boards next year, Mr. Speaker. We have no 

idea, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this is a group of men and women . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I believe I need to have the member raise the 

motion. Fifteen minutes time has elapsed. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — I‟ve got to read the motion. Okay. Sorry. 

Sorry, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That the Legislative Assembly . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — [Inaudible] . . . to place the motion so we can 

have the further debate. I recognize the member. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I would move: 

 

That the Legislative Assembly condemn the government 

for their unwillingness to be open and accountable to the 



November 26, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3831 

people of Saskatchewan in regards to the recent budget 

cuts that were brought about as a result of the 

government‟s unprecedented financial mismanagement. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly is the 

motion presented by the member from Saskatoon Nutana. Will 

the members take it as read? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a real pleasure to 

be able to speak to this motion. The opposition‟s motion is just 

inaccurate, disingenuous. It seems that everything that the 

member from Saskatoon Nutana just spoke about is actually the 

opposite, is accurate and the truth. Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I‟d just ask members to be careful as to 

how they, the words they use in regards to the debate in the 

Assembly. I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Our Finance minister has stated again and 

again and again about what has happened with potash revenue, 

and I‟ll enter it into the record again. There‟s really two stories 

to Saskatchewan‟s economy right now. One is the reduction of 

potash revenue and all the other things that are going very well 

in the province. And I‟ll put it on the record again. I‟ll quote 

from the mid-year report, Mr. Speaker: 

 

At mid-year, potash revenue is forecast to be only $109.0 

million, a decline of $1.8 billion from budget, or $528.6 

million less than the first quarter. [Now] To compensate 

for this revenue shortfall and maintain a balanced budget, 

capital deferrals and spending restraint [on that] are 

necessary. Higher federal transfers related to 

Saskatchewan infrastructure spending, and an additional 

$460.0 million in CIC dividend — funded from the 

Saskferco sale proceeds — are also included in the 

mid-year [financial] . . . update. 

 

A transfer of $564.3 million will be made from the Growth 

and Financial Security Fund to ensure that the budgeted 

$424.5 million GRF surplus remains intact and that the 

government debt remains unchanged at $4.2 billion. 

 

The GFSF is projected to have a balance of $650.8 million 

at the end of the 2009-10. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this lays it out very transparently what our 

finances are in this province. The member from Saskatoon 

Nutana leaves the impression that we‟re running a deficit. Well 

it‟s just not true. When you run a deficit that means your overall 

debt goes up. Our debt in this province is not going up. It‟s 

going to remain unchanged at $4.2 billion. Debt does not 

change. 

 

Now I‟d like to point out what the NDP did when they were in 

government. They pretended to have money in a savings 

account. They pretended to have this money. So when they 

needed to increase spending, they borrowed money and 

increased the debt. And they said that wasn‟t a deficit. In their 

day, when they increased the . . . when they had a deficit they 

increased debt. This, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is not a deficit. It‟s a 

balanced budget, and our debt is not going up one iota. 

 

And also the other thing the member from Saskatoon Nutana 

said was that we‟ve taken all the money out of the Growth and 

Financial Security Fund. Well at the end of this fiscal year, 

we‟re still going to have $650.8 million in the Growth and 

Financial Security Fund. There‟s a number of differences 

between what the member from Nutana said and what reality is. 

 

Now going back to the projection of the potash prices and 

tonnage. All you have to do is go to page 30 . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — There‟s been a little bit of hollering. 

It‟s mostly coming from my left side of the ear, and I‟m having 

a hard time hearing the speaker. I would ask that the people 

respect . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I recognize the member from 

Biggar. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I‟d just like the members 

opposite to look at the mid-term report, page 32, volumes of 

potash sales. Well what does it show, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 

2009, 4.4 million tonnes. We haven‟t seen those types of 

tonnage in the potash sales since 1972. For 15 straight years the 

trend line has been going up to 7, 8, 9, 10, over 10 million 

tonnes of potash being moved. 

 

No one, including the members opposite, forecast that the 

Chinese and Indian governments were not going to be buying 

any potash this year. They pretend that they knew. They always 

say that they knew this was going to happen. There were no 

analysts anywhere projecting those types of changes in potash 

sales. 

 

I wonder what the members opposite would have said if we 

said, well just on the safe side, we‟re not going to say there‟s 

going to be any potash sales in the upcoming year. Well the 

members opposite would have been screaming and yelling 

about how could we actually say that. They would be bringing 

out quotes and graphs to show that, no, Saskatchewan has 

always had high rates of revenue from the potash sales. But 

that‟s fine. 

 

You know, there‟s a global recession on, the worst global 

recession on since the dirty thirties, since the Depression. Of 

course I‟m sure the NDP across the other side forecast that too. 

And so the world has gone through some tough times 

economically. The potash industry‟s going through some tough 

times. 

 

But guess what, Mr. Speaker? Guess who is the strongest 

economy, not only in Canada, but in North America, and 

actually compared to many places in the world? Well it‟s 

Saskatchewan has the strongest economy, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And that certainly speaks well to the future. 

 

We‟re going to go through this rough spot. There‟s no doubt 



3832 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2009 

about it. But our government, our Finance Minister, has been 

very responsible, transparent, and asks government to look at 

places to decrease spending and deferrals of spending. 

 

[11:30] 

 

And I like to point out what the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana said about long-term care facilities. She specifically 

mentioned Biggar. Well unfortunately I don‟t know why she‟s 

not the NDP shadow member for Biggar since she likes to say 

that she‟s from Biggar constituency. So she sends the member 

from Saskatoon Massey Place out to do media in Biggar. 

 

Well what do the members say from the NDP about the 

long-term care facility? They leave the impression that we have 

cancelled these 13 long-term care facilities. And it‟s not true. 

What we have is, we‟ve taken the $122 million back from 

health regions to offset the loss of revenue from potash. And 

it‟s been made very clear again and again and again by the 

Minister of Finance and the Premier and the Minister of Health 

that when these projects are ready to be built, the money will be 

there. There‟s going to be no delay in any long-term care 

facility projects. That‟s the fact. 

 

Why does the NDP keep saying something otherwise? The 

money will be there when they need it. It‟s the same thing with 

the . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. I‟ll bring the . . . I 

would ask the Leader of the Opposition to come to order. I 

recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you very much. Well I just have to say 

again that the money for the long-term care facilities in Biggar 

and the other 12 locations in Saskatchewan will be there, as it 

will be there for the children‟s hospital in Saskatoon. There will 

be no delays to any project because of funding. That‟s the fact, 

and I don‟t know why the NDP keep talking otherwise. 

 

Now, the other theme, and I‟m starting to run out of time, is 

what would the NDP do? They keep talking about well we, you 

know, we spent too much money. Well what projects would the 

NDP like to cut? That‟s going to be an interesting question to 

the opposition. I know in Biggar constituency, agriculture is one 

of the main industries. Well would the opposition like to ask for 

the $40 a head back from the cattle producers in Biggar 

constituency and livestock producers around the province? 

 

Would they like ask them that money back? Would they like to 

raise taxes? The 80,000 people that had a tax decrease, are the 

NDP suggesting that . . . Would they raise taxes and ask to get 

more money back from those people? I can tell you, after our 

budget last year . . . There‟s Teresa from Perdue. She works at 

the Co-op, and she personally thanked me for reducing her tax 

because she‟s a low-income person. And she really appreciated 

the benefit that would give to her and her family. 

 

Are the members opposite saying that I should go to Teresa 

from Perdue and say, no, no, no, the NDP, they want to raise 

your taxes? I wonder what she would say to that then. That‟s 

the irresponsible thing. 

 

We‟re going to work through this situation with the potash 

revenue. Potash sales will increase in the future. And our 

cabinet and our Finance minister has done the prudent thing to 

keep our books balanced and without affecting any construction 

projects in the future in any way. And I can only say that this 

motion, that the member from Nutana is absolutely 

irresponsible. And I certainly will not be supporting it. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think that the 

people of the province are insulted with the kind of discourse 

and the kind of speeches that we just hear right now. What 

people in this province are talking about right now, Mr. Speaker 

— and these members across here know it because it‟s coming 

from their own backyards and their own constituencies — is 

how on earth, Mr. Speaker, how on earth did a government in 

just two years take a Saskatchewan that was booming under 

New Democratic policies and take that province from boom to 

bust in two years? Boom to bust. 

 

People are asking that question in Weyburn, Mr. Speaker. And 

the reason I know that is because I‟m chatting with many of 

them. People are chatting about that down in Arcola, and down 

in Stoughton, and people are talking about that down in Cypress 

Hills, Mr. Speaker. And they‟re saying, how, Mr. Speaker, how 

does a government come on in to power and in two years take 

reserves of $2.3 billion and exhaust them, Mr. Speaker, in two 

years? In two years, boom to bust, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the people of this province are a very practical bunch of 

people, Mr. Speaker, and they‟re a wise bunch of people. And 

they‟re realizing pretty quickly, Mr. Speaker, that what has 

gone on is that they‟ve had a government that didn‟t know what 

they were doing, a government that‟s mismanaged their 

finances. They‟ve realized that the budget that was put forward 

in March of 2009 was based on phony revenue projections. 

 

And I know the minister, the member from Weyburn, knows 

this full well as well. And I‟ll bet if that member would have 

been at the table at that point in time, he might have offered 

advice otherwise, but I doubt his elbows would have been 

heavy enough to influence that budget. 

 

So phony revenue projections, runaway spending — the people 

of Saskatchewan disdain, Mr. Speaker. We can read it down in 

The Estevan Mercury. We can read about it in the Weyburn 

Review. People of this province are concerned, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They say you can‟t sustain, Mr. Speaker, because in many way, 

managing the treasury and managing the province is much like 

running your family or running a business, and you can‟t 

increase spending 32 per cent over two years on a path that‟s 

unsustainable. You can‟t book estimates on revenues that are 

fake, that are phony, and that are made up, Mr. Speaker. And 

that‟s exactly what this government has done. 

 

They put forward growth projections that had no resemblance 

of what the private sector was saying, Mr. Speaker. These 

supposed captains of industry have been proven to be fiscal 

buffoons in short order, Mr. Speaker. It‟s embarrassing for the 

Saskatchewan people, embarrassing, Mr. Speaker, and 

damaging on institutions that are important to the people of this 



November 26, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3833 

province — health care and education. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? I 

recognize the member from Sutherland. 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — The member from Rosemont used some 

terms — phony, made up, also buffoon. It is the long-standing 

history in the legislature that name-calling and accusations of 

being untruthful are unparliamentary, Mr. Speaker. And I 

request that he withdraw and apologize for his uncalled-for 

remarks. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House 

Leader. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On the 

point of order, I simply want to let you know, as you listen to 

the point of order from the members opposite, that I listened 

very carefully to the member from Regina Rosemont‟s 

comments, comments that are particularly relevant to the 

motion in front of the House today. 

 

The member, and I think I understand the rules of the Chamber 

fairly well, the member did not use any word that would be 

listed as unparliamentary. The member‟s comments were 

relevant and direct to the motion in front of us. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I think the member opposite, rather than advise on a 

point of order, has simply entered the debate. And that, Mr. 

Speaker, would be out of order. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — On the point of order, I would 

caution the member not to direct, when he‟s talking, if he‟s 

directing words at ministers or individuals, not to do that. It can 

be directed at the government or policy, but not at particular 

individuals. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. There‟s nothing more concerning in this province 

at this point in time, that we see a government that can‟t 

manage its fiscal circumstance. And it‟s having a significant 

impact on the people of this province. My comments, although 

strong here before, are truthful, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And when we look at the mismanagement of this government 

putting forward revenue estimates, Mr. Speaker, that were 

completely out of line with all of the advice — all of the 

analysts‟ suggestions, and what was going on in our world — 

was reckless, irresponsible, and damaging to the financial state 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

When we damage the financial state of Saskatchewan, we 

damage the hopes, the opportunities for prosperity, and for 

well-being in this province, Mr. Speaker. And we see that as 

members opposite cut long-term care facility after long-term 

care facility across this province . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

One of the members opposite calls this a deferral, Mr. Speaker, 

but that‟s not true, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a cut because we don‟t 

know where that money is going to come next year, Mr. 

Speaker, because they‟ve exhausted all of the resources that 

they have on hand. There‟s dollars that aren‟t earmarked. We 

have a government here, Mr. Speaker, who is hiding from 

transparency and accountability and driving us back to the dark 

ages of fiscal management. 

Governments around the world, Mr. Speaker, at every level 

have urged and moved and progressed towards financial 

accountability and transparency. And for this government to 

retreat from those sort of commitments and the kind of progress 

that should be made is shameful, Mr. Speaker. For 

Saskatchewan people to be phoning with question after question 

after question with respect to the mismanagement of this 

budget, to the cuts of this government, and to not be provided 

the opportunity to get answers from this government is 

shameful. 

 

This is a government that hides from the responsibility that they 

owe to Saskatchewan people. We no longer have faith in a 

single number, in a single document that comes forward from 

this government whether that be estimates at first quarter or 

mid-year or budgets . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And, Mr. 

Speaker, I hear opposite, well what would you do? What would 

you‟ve cut? Well, Mr. Speaker, I can be certain on one thing. 

We would always, always set a budget out of balanced budget 

principles. And in a circumstance like we‟re in here this year 

with well over $9 billion of revenues, when just two years ago 

we had 7.8 billion as our budget, we would have advanced very 

important, meaningful priorities for the people of this province. 

And we would have balanced the budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And in doing so we would have kept the hope, the opportunity, 

and the prosperity of this province moving forward. We 

wouldn‟t have kicked out the feet of this economy. We 

wouldn‟t have dragged this economy into recession, and we 

would have understood what was going on in the world around 

us and how it affected the treasury here in this province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Different individuals are weighing in on what this government 

. . . That we hear, in the Leader-Post here: “Minister talking 

nonsense.” Another comment here from the Leader-Post: 

“Province‟s economy has got Gantefoer confused.” Another 

right here from The Estevan Mercury — I can take a look here 

— talks about the irresponsible behaviour has to be turned into 

responsible reactions, Mr. Speaker. Responsible reactions. Do 

we see that, Mr. Speaker? Not a chance. 

 

We have a government who‟s hiding behind blacked out 

document after blacked out document. We have a government 

who has rejected the opportunity to answer to the people of this 

province and the opposition, the Official Opposition of this 

province, for us to fairly question the budget documents of this 

government — the documents, Mr. Speaker, that they‟ve 

mismanaged and the purse of this province that they‟ve 

mismanaged, Mr. Speaker. And as a result of that, Mr. Speaker, 

we don‟t know at this point in time the reality of what‟s going 

on. 

 

Now we hear all sorts of things, Mr. Speaker, about potential 

damage going on. We hear that as a result of this 

mismanagement, we hear that inadequate funding will be 

provided to school boards next year, Mr. Speaker. If that‟s true, 

that‟s a huge concern because that means in classrooms and in 

schools across this province we‟re going to be short of being 

able to provide the meaningful programs that we need for our 

children, for the youth in this province who will be the future 

and part of our knowledge-based economy, Mr. Speaker. 

Underfunding education is a distinct reality that we‟re going 



3834 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2009 

into. 

 

We have IOU [I owe you] after IOU from the Minister of 

Finance and the Premier. They float all sorts of popular 

balloons in the air, Mr. Speaker — long-term care, all sorts of 

different promises — and they‟ve been forced to shoot them out 

of the air, Mr. Speaker. And of no great consequence they 

believe, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I believe there is a great consequence that these members 

opposite that are mismanaging peoples‟ priorities, mismanaging 

the budget, they‟ll be paying for that, Mr. Speaker, in short 

order — in two years, Mr. Speaker, at the polls in 2011 because 

you can‟t treat Saskatchewan people like this. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people in this province have a right to know that 

when they‟re committed to a specific program that enhances 

their community, they need to be able to count on that program, 

that institution being provided. We see a government here 

who‟s canning a children‟s hospital. We see a government here 

that‟s canning long-term care facilities. We see a government 

here who‟s canning their promises on property tax. We see a 

government here that‟s likely to be cutting funding to 

education, all a result of their own financial mismanagement, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have not been afforded, the people of Saskatchewan have 

not been afforded the opportunity to ask the rightful questions 

they have of this government that‟s hidden from the opportunity 

to be accountable. 

 

[11:45] 

 

We have a Premier that when the things heat up, and then he‟s 

got a true test, he leaves the province, leaves the country. 

Leaves the province and leaves the country, Mr. Speaker, at the 

taxpayers‟ expense, to leave his colleagues high and dry for the 

terrible business decisions of his own making, Mr. Speaker. We 

have a shameful circumstance that‟s developing in this 

province. 

 

The opposition New Democrats are proud of our legacy of 

financial management, of our prudent history, and it looks like 

that‟s going to be a huge part of our future as well, Mr. Speaker. 

We‟re proud to bring that to the Assembly and proud to support 

the motion that‟s been . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Cannington. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a pleasure 

to rise today to participate in this debate. After observing the 

buffoonery from the opposite side, Mr. Speaker, there is some 

questions as to the validity of their arguments, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, what we‟re seeing from the other side is political spin, 

Mr. Speaker, nothing but political spin. In fact is I‟m surprised, 

Mr. Speaker, that the Suzuki Foundation hasn‟t put a CO2 

muzzle on them by now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One of the members opposite in their presentation commented 

on what‟s happening in Stoughton, which is in my constituency, 

Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, there is a very large amount of 

growth taking place within this province, Mr. Speaker, and a lot 

of that growth is actually taking place within my constituency, 

Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the growth in the oil patch has 

increased the provincial budget by almost $400 million, Mr. 

Speaker — $400 million increase, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And yet the members opposite don‟t want to mention that, Mr. 

Speaker, because it doesn‟t fit within their frame, Mr. Speaker, 

because their frame for success means that they need 

Saskatchewan to fail. Their vision, their hope for the future, Mr. 

Speaker, is the failure of Saskatchewan, just as it was for the 

last 16 years, Mr. Speaker. They could not see themselves 

progressing unless Saskatchewan was failing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan voted on October 

22nd, 2007, to make . . . I think it was 22nd. November the 7th 

it was, November the 7th to make a determination about the 

NDP method of operating this province. They made the 

determination, Mr. Speaker. And the NDP Party now sits in 

opposition — 32 to 20 members, Mr. Speaker. The judgment 

was made on the NDP, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I‟ve listened to the members opposite talk a lot about how 

they always had a balanced budget. No, Mr. Speaker, for most 

of their 16 years they had deficit budgets. They had deficit 

budgets, Mr. Speaker. Oh yes, they had balanced budgets in the 

GRF [General Revenue Fund], but every year the summary 

financial statements of that government showed a deficit, Mr. 

Speaker, and the debt increased. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‟ve heard from the members opposite, 

especially the member from Regina Rosemont, that he predicted 

that potash sales were going to crash, that the potash price was 

going to nothing, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the prophet of 

potash, Mr. Speaker, still is in this House. You know, if he was 

such a great prophet, why didn‟t he invest and short potash 

sales? Why didn‟t he short the potash prices? You know, our 

latter day Nostradamus, Mr. Speaker, has to, has to be a prophet 

of doom and gloom, Mr. Speaker, for his party to possibly 

succeed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, he kind of reminds me a bit of Miss Cleo, the 

midnight TV psychic who gives you an answer, Mr. Speaker, 

that will fit either side of the spectrum. You know, their 

prophecy can be successful or it cannot be successful, but 

they‟ve got both ends of it covered, Mr. Speaker. And that is 

what the prophet of potash is doing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But there is one prophecy though that the member from Regina 

Rosemont has made that I do support, Mr. Speaker, that I do 

support. And I would like to quote from the member from the 

Estevan Mercury of February 25th, 2009, and I quote, “I don‟t 

think there is any probability as far as a likelihood of winning 

government in 2011.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, that member was addressing the possibilities of 

the NDP in winning government. So, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, 

he claims his prophecy of lack of potash revenues was accurate. 

Well I‟m hoping as well that this prophecy that the member 

made is also accurate. But, you know, I think it‟s a case very 

much like Miss Cleo. You‟ve got to phone in and pay to get the 

answers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the question has been asked about the NDP 



November 26, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3835 

opposite as to what they would do with the budget, Mr. 

Speaker, in the case of a shortfall. And certainly with potash 

prices being down, with sales being completely in the tank, Mr. 

Speaker, there is certainly a deficit. 

 

Well if we look at the NDP‟s record on what they have done, 

Mr. Speaker, they cut rural hospitals. They closed 52 rural 

hospitals. They closed the Plains Hospital, Mr. Speaker. They 

cancelled agriculture programs. They didn‟t build a single 

long-term care facility in this province in 16 years, Mr. Speaker. 

And that‟s not a new record for them because under Allan 

Blakeney and the NDP in the ‟70s, they put a freeze on 

construction of long-term care facilities then as well. So they 

have a history, Mr. Speaker, there. 

 

This government promised to be open and transparent, Mr. 

Speaker, that‟s why we have the numbers, Mr. Speaker. That‟s 

why we have the ability to be in this House and debate the 

mid-term speech, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the past there was no debate on mid-term 

supplementary estimates, Mr. Speaker, because the House 

didn‟t sit. It‟s only been the last few years that that‟s actually 

happened, Mr. Speaker. So this gives the opposition and the 

people of Saskatchewan the opportunity to actually see what‟s 

happening within the budget as the year progresses, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you know I have a note here someplace, a quote 

from the papers that we have the lowest unemployment in 

Canada. And yes, Mr. Speaker, that number has gone up from 

last month. But, Mr. Speaker, you have to take into account that 

we also have a growing population that‟s significantly larger 

than it was during any of the years the members opposite were 

in government. So yes, Mr. Speaker, unemployment numbers 

have gone up from last month to this month, but we have a lot 

more people employed than ever before in the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know the members opposite are railing about the loss of 

revenues from potash sales. And yet, Mr. Speaker, in the last 

two years we have put in almost double the amount of money 

into capital construction in Health, in the last two years, as that 

previous administration did in their last two full years. They put 

in $140 million in capital construction in Health. This 

government has put in $265 million. Mr. Speaker, that‟s actual 

construction taking place. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, while the members opposite may decry the 

failure to sell potash, the potash corporations operating in 

Saskatchewan don‟t have the same pessimistic view that the 

members opposite have. And fact is, Mr. Speaker, they‟re 

investing over $5 billion. Over $5 billion, Mr. Speaker, in new 

potash mines around Saskatchewan. And fact is some of the 

very largest mining companies, such as BHP Billiton, is looking 

to come to Saskatchewan to enhance their opportunities to be a 

partner in the potash corporations, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I listened to the comments of some of the 

members when they were speaking. And the member from 

Nutana was complaining about the lack of an additional eight 

days to speak on this. Mr. Speaker. These rules were put in 

place under the NDP when they thought they were going to 

win. Now that they lost, all of a sudden these rules have to 

change to suit their need, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I think 

that‟s a bit disingenuous of them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, the potash corporations in 

Saskatchewan are expanding. Mr. Speaker, I‟ll put my faith in 

them, rather than a party that needs to see the failure of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, for them to have any hope of 

electoral success. I will be opposing this motion. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m very pleased 

and honoured to join in the debate, in the seventy-five minute 

emergency debate on the billion dollar boondoggle created by 

that party opposite, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And let us be absolutely clear, Mr. Speaker, that my opening 

statement is these guys couldn‟t manage a two-car parade in the 

1980s. And they still can‟t manage a two-car parade come 

2007, 2008, 2009, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What the people of Saskatchewan are saying, what the people 

of Saskatchewan are saying is they trusted them. They give 

them the opportunity. And what did they do? They made a big 

mess of things, Mr. Speaker — $1 billion in one budget year. 

 

And the member before me spoke, Mr. Speaker, and he spoke 

about a wide variety of issues. And the member after me is 

going to speak as well from the opposite side. And guess what, 

Mr. Speaker, he and the member after me have both been fired 

from cabinet because, Mr. Speaker, they offered nothing to the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

So as people watch and listen to some of their words, 

remember: the guy before me and the guy after me got fired 

from cabinet because they couldn‟t offer the people of 

Saskatchewan anything new, anything innovative. And, Mr. 

Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are going to come back 

and they‟re going to make these guys pay in 2011, Mr. Speaker. 

Because of their incompetence, because of their incompetence, 

they are going to be fired, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And one of things that people have been telling me in the North, 

in the cities, in rural Saskatchewan, everywhere I go, 

everywhere I go they say these guys made a complete mess of 

this province in the 1980s — a complete mess. Fifteen and a 

half billion dollars in debt. They destroyed Saskatchewan‟s 

credibility in nine short years, Mr. Speaker, and now they‟re 

coming back to finish off Saskatchewan a full 16 years later 

after NDP rule, Mr. Speaker. And that‟s why I tell them it‟s 

important, it‟s very important right now, that we stop them in 

2011. And that‟s our plan on this side, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One billion dollars, $1.1 billion dollars in deficit, Mr. Speaker 

— that is unforgiveable. Unforgiveable. And they were warned. 

They were told by how many different groups of people, don‟t 

do it. But no, Mr. Speaker, they refused to park their pompoms. 

And they wanted to be everything to everybody. And guess 

what, Mr. Speaker: as a result, they‟re nothing to everybody, 

Mr. Speaker, today. 

 



3836 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2009 

And that‟s why, by great numbers, people that have supported 

these guys before and said, let‟s give them a chance, they are 

extremely disappointed. They are extremely disappointed. And 

some of their long-serving members who I‟ve had discussions 

with, they come back to me and they say, I am going never to 

vote for these guys again. Never vote for these guys again. I 

supported them last time, and I‟m not going to do it again. 

Why? Because they can‟t manage the finances of the people of 

Saskatchewan, and that‟s a clear message we‟re getting. And 

that‟s why in 2011, we are going to get them out of there 

because they‟re tired, they‟re uninspired, and they need to be 

fired, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One billion dollars in debt. And really if you look at it, they 

come along in 2007. And all the NDP said, all the NDP said is, 

look, the people of Saskatchewan have given us a time out. And 

they said, you‟re going to be in the opposition for a while, and 

we‟ll accept that. That‟s the role we‟re given. But one of the 

things we said is, please don‟t screw this up. You have a 

booming economy. You‟ve got $2.3 billion in the bank. People 

of Saskatchewan are optimistic. Okay, if we got a time out. 

Don‟t screw it up. 

 

And what did they do, Mr. Speaker? What did they do their first 

full budget year under their government? They put us $1.1 

billion in debt — $1.1 billion dollars in the hole. And that is 

unforgiveable, Mr. Speaker. Unforgiveable. 

 

And I look at people out there, and again, if you look at what 

they want to do, they want to continue on this path. And what‟s 

going to happen next year? And what‟s going to happen the 

year after? 

 

[12:00] 

 

They know they‟re in trouble financially. We know that they‟re 

in trouble financially. And, Mr. Speaker, that‟s why a change in 

leadership needs to happen and needs to happen in 2011 

because the NDP are not prepared to clean up another mess left 

by that party in the 1980s, Mr. Speaker. We are not prepared to 

clean up another mess. And that‟s why we got to stop them 

now, Mr. Speaker. We got to stop them dead in their tracks 

because the people of Saskatchewan don‟t deserve that 

government anymore. 

 

We give them a chance and what did they do? What did they 

do? They put us $1.1 billion in debt — 1.1 billion. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we have a lot of questions on the cuts and all their 

deferred projects, as they referred to them. What‟s going to 

happen next year? They‟re going to need more money and more 

money and more money to complete what they say are their 

promises that they won‟t break. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we‟ve seen this act before. And it was in the 

1980s. We‟ve seen this act before. And, Mr. Speaker, one of the 

things that people ought to know is that you gave them a 

chance. You gave them a chance and they betrayed that trust. 

They betrayed that trust. Why? Because they wanted to be 

everything to everybody. And when you‟re in government 

sometimes, as my colleague from Saskatoon says, sometimes 

you have to say no. Sometimes you have to say no. 

 

Now the exciting opportunity, Mr. Speaker, that‟s coming up, 

it‟s coming up. And I look at all the people across the way that 

have been fired as cabinet ministers, and I wonder why. I 

wonder how they‟re feeling now. And the reason why is 

because they‟re uninspiring, Mr. Speaker. They‟re tired. And as 

I said before, that whole group is uninspired and they‟re tired 

and they need to be fired in 2011. Because we can‟t afford 

another government as we‟ve seen in the 1980s, Mr. Speaker. 

And that‟s why 2011, we need to stop them. We need to stop 

them. 

 

But the exciting part of what we‟re trying to do, Mr. Speaker, is 

that come 2011, you‟re going to see a brand new vision for the 

people of Saskatchewan under our leader and the next premier 

of Saskatchewan and the NDP, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We‟ve got a plan that not only talks about protecting the 

working people, that talks about building our Crowns, 

rebuilding the credibility of our finances, that talks about the 

Aboriginal people, the northern people, that talks about all the 

different groups of people that need to be involved. You‟re 

going to see that vision in due time. 

 

And you contrast that vision to their bungling of this financial 

management, their so-called financial management, and people 

of Saskatchewan will say one thing very clear: we give these 

guys an opportunity and all we‟ve seen from them is they‟re 

tired, uninspired, and they need to be fired, Mr. Speaker. And 

I‟ll say it again and I‟ll keep saying wherever I go. 

 

But lately, Mr. Speaker, we notice every time they have trouble, 

there‟s three things they do. The first thing they do is they wave 

their pompoms, wave their pompoms. And the people of 

Saskatchewan are saying, burn your pompoms and face reality. 

It‟s time for you guys to grow up. Or they‟ll drape themselves 

in the Saskatchewan Roughrider flag. Well, Mr. Speaker, leave 

the Roughriders alone. It‟s a distraction. Don‟t give them 

anymore bad luck. We want them to win this weekend, so stop 

wrapping yourselves up in the Saskatchewan Roughrider flag. 

We want the Roughriders to win. Don‟t put a pox on them, 

please. 

 

And the last thing they do, Mr. Speaker, is every time they get 

in trouble, they hide behind the NDP. You notice when you get 

a tough question is they say, oh, what did you guys do. What 

would you guys do if you were in our situation? They have 

been so used to being in opposition, they don‟t even know how 

to act like a government, Mr. Speaker. And if you don‟t know 

what you‟re doing over there, if you don‟t know what you‟re 

doing, get off the way. We‟ll come there and we‟ll fix the 

problems for you. And we‟ll show you leadership, Mr. Speaker. 

 

A billion dollar mess, their first full year as the government. 

Because last year in 2007-2008, there‟s a lot of NDP money 

and projects rolled out. But, Mr. Speaker, what we‟re seeing 

now, we‟re seeing not only these guys going in the hole, they‟re 

depleting our savings account. 

 

And what they‟re also doing is they‟re also attacking our 

Crowns, and they‟re having a wall-to-wall sale of our Crowns, 

Mr. Speaker, a wall-to-wall sale of the Crowns. They‟re equity 

stripping so they can make the Crowns so unattractive that 

people have to end up saying, well we ought to sell them. 

Because what‟s happening is they‟re destroying the credibility 



November 26, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3837 

of our Crowns by stripping the money that they have and by 

refusing to recognize that problem. 

 

So again I think there‟s no question in my mind that come 2011 

and even before then, Mr. Speaker, we‟re going to fight these 

guys on the doorstep, Mr. Speaker. We‟re going to fight them in 

northern towns. We‟re going to fight them in committee 

meetings, in this Assembly. We‟re going to fight them in the 

hockey rink. We‟re going to fight them on the farmyard. We‟re 

going to fight them on the reserves. We‟re going to tell 

everybody and anybody out there exactly what they‟re doing. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the truth will guide us, Mr. Speaker. The 

truth will guide us because the facts are there and everywhere 

you look from every agency, they say these guys have bungled 

it. From the media, from the corporations, from the private 

sector, from people that manage money, well, they say these 

guys have made a mess. 

 

To the people of Saskatchewan, yes, you gave them the 

opportunity — fair enough — but these guys have destroyed 

that trust. They have betrayed your faith that they‟ll do things 

right. And the first thing they‟ve done, is they put us a billion 

dollars in the hole. So my message is burn your pompoms. Stop 

draping yourselves in Roughrider flags. Stop blaming the NDP 

for every problem that you have. Grow up. Fix your own mess. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Lloydminster. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will make this 

very brief. May I ask the Assembly for leave to introduce 

guests? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Lloydminster has 

asked leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will make my 

comments brief because I understand that this is a timed period 

we have here. I would just like to mention a couple people who 

have been referenced in the gallery fairly extensively in the last 

couple of weeks. 

 

First off, Mr. David Krughoff and his wife. They are here to 

watch the motion of the private members‟ debate later on the 

wild ponies. I would also like to mention Mr. Tom Hougham 

and his wife Marilyn, who we just heard about in a member‟s 

statement today. Tom is receiving the Cattleman of the Year 

award tomorrow at Canadian Western Agribition. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would be very remiss if I didn‟t recognize 

my beautiful wife and two little girls. It‟s nice to always have 

them in the Assembly. We have many other members, 

gentlemen and ladies that have joined us. But back to the 

debate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Thank you very much. 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress 

Hills. 

 

Openness and Accountability 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a pleasure to 

enter the debate today. I can assure the House and those who 

are watching that there won‟t be nearly as much bluster in my 

presentation as the previous one, but then I‟m not nearly as 

angry as he is. He never had a better job than when he sat over 

here as a cabinet minister, and now he‟s been demoted to the 

opposition benches. And he‟s frustrated as can be, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I can hear that speech over and over and over again. He 

never says anything different. It‟s the same thing. You know, 

the people of Saskatchewan are pretty tired with that type of 

rhetoric. They‟ve moved on to a new and different style of 

politics. They want leadership and vision in this province, and 

they‟re looking to the Saskatchewan Party to give it. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that‟s why I‟m pleased to enter this debate today. 

 

I looked at the motion, Mr. Speaker. You know, it‟s really an 

interesting few words that have been assembled for this motion. 

But it‟s purely political. It‟s rife with misinformation and 

assumption. And I‟m hesitant to use this word, but I think I will 

because the Leader of the Opposition has sort of entered it into 

the lexicon of discussion in the province of Saskatchewan: the 

motion is really disingenuous. 

 

And I‟ll tell you why, Mr. Speaker. I‟d like to inform the House 

why I believe the motion is disingenuous. The assumption in 

the motion is that by saying that this government is not open 

and accountable, when they were government, they were. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I‟m going to put four separate instances on 

the record today in which you will understand, the people of the 

province will understand, that when that group were the 

government of the day, they were no more open and 

accountable — in fact they were much less open and 

accountable — than this government. In fact they were so 

unaccountable to the people of the province that, at one point, a 

minister had to get up and apologize for misleading the House. 

 

But let me give you a couple of examples, Mr. Speaker. The 

first example was the hundreds of millions of dollars that that 

group of men and women invested in dot-coms and ideas, in 

small companies operating all around North America, most of 

which couldn‟t have survived on their own. But they made the 

decision to invest in those companies and wouldn‟t tell anybody 

about it until it showed up in a public record at some point later. 

It was never discussed publicly with the people. 

 

If the people of Saskatchewan had known that they were willing 

to put 300-plus million dollars at risk for these kind of crazy 

adventures and investments, those captains of industry lost 

every nickel of that money. And, Mr. Speaker, that wasn‟t 

reported. That wasn‟t really what I would call open and 

accountable government. That‟s the first item. 

 

The second item was the money spent on SPUDCO 



3838 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2009 

[Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company]. I think 

the SPUDCO fiasco was the idea of the man who is now the 

leader of the opposition. And you know, Mr. Speaker, when 

that particular fiasco came to light, there was a $36 million loss. 

But that, Mr. Speaker, that $36 million wasn‟t the biggest 

problem with the SPUDCO fiasco. The biggest problem, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, was that the government of the day tried to 

hide that fact and managed to do it for six years. And it wasn‟t 

until it was finally ferreted out, the facts were ferreted out, that 

the minister ultimately had to stand up and apologize to the 

House for misleading the House. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the evidence is pretty clear from those 

first two examples that open and accountable government was 

not their style. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟ve got a third item I want to talk about. That was 

the $36 million that those men and women invested in 

Navigata. It sounded like a good idea at the time. It was a BC 

[British Columbia]-based company. It was going to bring all 

sorts of new technology to Internet and wireless service. Mr. 

Speaker, that particular boondoggle turned into a $90 million 

loss. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the $90 million loss, as bad as it was, 

wasn‟t the biggest part of the problem. The biggest part of the 

problem was they took that Navigata purchase and embedded it 

into SaskTel so that the real losses as they accumulated couldn‟t 

be identified. They tried to hide their ongoing losses in that 

investment. And when we became the government, the total had 

amounted to $90 million. And we finally dumped it because it 

was a bottomless pit and would never make the province of 

Saskatchewan or the taxpayers any money. They hid that fact 

and that shows their lack of interest in openness and 

accountability. 

 

And fourthly, the fourth point I want to make, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is the interesting scenario we had running up to the 

2003 election, where there was a very vigorous election 

campaign. It was won ultimately by the NDP. But there was not 

a word during that campaign about the province‟s finances and 

the tough situation the province was facing. 

 

And you know what happened, Mr. Deputy Speaker? The 

campaign was barely over, the NDP were back in power by the 

skin of their teeth. And what did we get? We got a tax increase, 

a sales tax increase from the minister of Finance at that time 

who, when he was asked about that, acknowledged that talking 

about the province‟s finances and the need for a tax increase 

really wasn‟t a good thing to discuss during an election 

campaign. 

 

Open and accountable, who are they trying to kid, Mr. Speaker? 

Those four episodes in themselves are enough to make this 

particular motion very suspect. This is why this motion is so 

disingenuous. It comes from a group of men and women who 

were prepared to hide the facts from the people of 

Saskatchewan when it suited them politically. And, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, the difference in that group of men and women‟s 

method of operation and this government today is openness and 

transparency. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to just go into a little bit of the 

situation. I‟ve heard the members opposite talk about boom and 

bust. You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they‟re the only people 

who think that this province is in a bust situation. The 

billion-dollar deficit that I keep hearing about is a shortage of 

cash. It‟s directly related to the potash industry, and as a result, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there‟s a cash flow problem. But you 

know, if these men and women understood the realities of the 

economy, they would also understand that a shortage of cash 

today is likely to be an abundance of cash tomorrow. 

 

The potash industry is one of our most successful investment 

industries in this province. It produces tremendous revenue for 

the province. And if the industry thought there was any 

likelihood that this scenario would continue, I‟m sure they 

wouldn‟t have announced 7, 8, 9, $10 billion of additional 

monies to go into expanded production in this province. I am 

sure that new greenfield mines wouldn‟t be under consideration 

by the world‟s largest mining company. I‟m sure that China 

wouldn‟t be in Saskatchewan looking for property they could 

develop in the potash industry. 

 

A slowdown in sales and cash flow today is going to transfer 

into one of the largest and most successful resource industries 

in this province. And I hope that when the turnaround comes, 

they‟re as ready to stand to their feet and give this government 

credit for the success of the industry. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I‟ve heard the complaints over there about 

the loss of revenue. I heard them take credit for foreordained 

knowledge on this issue. I guess, you know, when I was looking 

at the budget process, the value that we attach to potash pricing 

was considerably more cautious than had happened in the 

previous year. But what I haven‟t heard any of them say yet, I 

haven‟t seen anybody acknowledge the fact that, with their 

foresight and their insight, they were able to predict totally and 

completely the lack of sales in the international market. Nobody 

predicted that. The pricing issue might be a different story. 

 

[12:15] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The 65-minute debate has ended. 

Now it is 10 minutes of question period. I recognize the 

member from Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Now, Mr. Speaker, we‟ve put in written 

questions to understand how much money . . . or what has been 

cut in the $355.9 million in expenses. We didn‟t get any 

answers. In fact they converted the questions, so they don‟t 

have to answer until after the next budget. 

 

So I guess, to the member from Cannington: can he tell us what 

was cut? Give us all of the information in terms of being open 

and accountable. The $355.9 million in expenses, give us a 

listing of every cut in very government department because that 

way it will then be open and accountable. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Cannington. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

the cuts that the member opposite talked about in most cases are 

not cuts but rather are deferrals, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 

the sense of the long-term care facilities that the members 



November 26, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3839 

opposite didn‟t build for 16 years and froze the construction of 

in the 1960s, Mr. Speaker . . . these projects are in the stage of 

development, Mr. Speaker, where they are getting their plans 

together. They‟re getting their architectural drawings done, Mr. 

Speaker. They‟re not ready to actually start construction with 

nails and hammers, Mr. Speaker. So when those are, Mr. 

Speaker, ready to do that kind of construction, then it will come 

forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite, though, had the 

opportunity to debate the supplementary estimates in 

committee, Mr. Speaker. They‟ve been given that opportunity, 

Mr. Speaker. They want an extra eight hours. We‟ve offered 

them 54 more hours, Mr. Speaker, and every time they call the 

clock and shut the committees down. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our 

Saskatchewan Party government believes that we are elected to 

work for the people of this province. Given the track record of 

the members opposite, I would submit they do not believe that. 

Our track record reflects that commitment. We have improved 

highways, made historic tax cuts. We have reduced the 

provincial debt by 40 per cent. We‟ve invested heavily in 

programming and services for society‟s most vulnerable. 

 

To the member from Athabasca, I would like to ask this simple, 

multiple choice question. Which of these important investments 

would he cut — (a) tax relief, (b) debt paydown, (c) 

programming for the vulnerable, or (d) all of the above? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for his 

question. And I‟ll point out that we‟re not going to do your 

work for you. If you can‟t figure that out on your own, then 

perhaps, like I said before, you ought to step aside and we‟ll 

show you how to govern. 

 

The New Democratic Party will in due course unveil their plan 

for Saskatchewan. And one of the things that . . . Last thing that 

we‟ll do is seek any advice from that party opposite. So when 

you ask us for advice as to where we would cut, sir, I would say 

to you, do your own job. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Question here 

for the member from Biggar. With no excuse for a billion dollar 

deficit and a billion dollar debt growth in the Crown 

corporations and a billion dollar stripping of equity within those 

Crown corporations but for their own mismanagement, how 

does the member from Biggar justify to farmers, to families, to 

business within his constituency the huge, massive increases to 

come on our utility bills, the back door tax, Mr. Speaker, that 

his residents, his families, and his businesses are going to have 

to pay for his own miscompetence? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Well, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, our government, to the constituents of Biggar, 

we have reduced the debt by 40 per cent. That was $2.6 billion. 

We have taken 80,000 people off the tax roll. To Teresa in 

Perdue who works at the Perdue Co-op, we have reduced her 

tax and then she thanked me personally for reducing her taxes. 

She‟s so grateful. What did we do, Mr. Deputy Speaker? We 

paid the livestock producers $40 a head so that they could 

survive the tough times last year through the livestock industry, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

We will continue to do what‟s right for the constituents of 

Biggar. We will continue to be prudent and responsible with the 

finances of Saskatchewan. And you only need to look at all the 

other things that are happening great in the province. 

 

We have the lowest unemployment rate in Canada. Saskatoon 

has the lowest unemployment rate of any city in Canada. 

Regina is second. Housing starts are up in Saskatoon. Our 

population‟s growing faster than any time in the last 50 years. 

We have two new cities in the province since 100 years ago. 

Saskatchewan‟s doing very . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Time‟s member has elapsed. I 

recognize the member from Moose Jaw North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan know our 

government is working hard in order that Saskatchewan people 

can keep more of their hard-earned money. This government 

demonstrated this commitment by delivering the largest income 

tax cuts in the province‟s history. We took 80,000 low-income 

earners off the tax roll altogether. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government has made a commitment to 

review and change education property tax — something the 

members opposite said they would do, but they never did. Since 

1944 they‟ve talked about it, but they never delivered on it. Our 

government made the commitment and made the delivery. 

 

To the member from Saskatoon Nutana: why is the NDP MLA 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly] attacking the history tax 

reliefs of this province that is a benefit to the people of this 

province? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — I thank the member for his question. 

Between 1986 and 1991, I served in this legislature as a 

member of the opposition. And the Conservative Grant Devine 

government racked up $15.5 billion in debt. We had the highest 

debt per capita of any province in the country. And, Mr. 

Speaker, when we tried to start dealing with this fiscal disaster, 

we had to go see the federal Tories in Ottawa to get them to 

give us a little bit of money to bankroll this province because it 

was financially bankrupt. 

 

So if the member is wondering why we‟re so interested in the 

$1 billion deficit, I‟ll tell you why. For 16 years we worked 

hard and long for the citizens to get this financial house in 

order, and we‟re not going to let you mess it up again. 

 



3840 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2009 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What we‟ve got is a $1 

billion deficit six months into this fiscal year. Six months, $1 

billion deficit. We‟ve had $355 million ripped out of the 

budget, much of that money was pegged for education and 

long-term care facilities, Mr. Speaker. The Sask Party brought 

out press release after press release after press release 

announcing the spending seven months ago. 

 

My question to the member for Biggar is, will they devote one 

fraction of the time to debate, to discuss, to apologize to the 

people that have had this $355 million ripped out of the budget? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Our Premier 

made it very clear that the opposition wants more time; they 

will be given more time. We offered to the opposition that they 

can sit every day while we‟re sitting, until midnight or even 

beyond midnight if they like. 

 

But the opposition don‟t want to sit late. We offered it in 

committee, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We actually had to make the 

opposition stay later than what the time was. They wanted to 

adjourn the other night at 9 o‟clock in the evening where it was 

scheduled normally for 10:30. We had to force them to stay till 

10:30 so that they can ask questions to the ministers on the 

government side concerning the estimates. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don‟t know. The NDP are just being 

irresponsible. They don‟t want to actually debate the issues at 

all. They just want to grandstand and pretend that they‟re doing 

something. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu‟Appelle Valley. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Like a broken 

record, the members opposite have been singing the same song 

lately over and over again with the following chorus: where‟s 

the money gone, and then doom and gloom. Notwithstanding 

their woefully inadequate songwriting skills, it is the question 

which members on this side of the House are more than happy 

to answer. 

 

Among the many prudent investments we have made on behalf 

of the people of Saskatchewan, there are several directly 

benefits to my constituency. For example, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

the $34 million Highway No. 1 and Lewvan Drive interchange 

project. Now this important project will prevent fatal collisions. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask the member for Regina 

Rosemont, can I assume he does not support this important 

investment which will ensure the safety of people of Regina? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s a pleasure to take that 

question from that member and to speak about the gross 

mismanagement of this government. The member talks about 

songs that people are singing, and I think that I heard the 

member from Saskatoon Northwest sing one day, I can see 

clearly; the rain has gone. I think more appropriately as the 

Finance critic, I can see clearly, the rainy day . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — We now move on to priority motion. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

BILL No. 606 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by Mr. McMillan that Bill No. 606 — The Protection of 

the Wild Ponies of the Bronson Forest Act be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As I was 

saying when I last spoke to this . . . I won‟t repeat the things I 

said in Hansard, but I left the debate saying that I would 

consult, which was something that the Bill had had very little, if 

any, done — and having found out, as I‟ve done that, that the 

concerns I raised in Hansard were valid. 

 

First Nations and the First Nations bands that are around this 

Bronson Forest do not feel — and they have said it to me that 

they do not feel — that they were adequately consulted. None 

of them saw the Bill. And I understand, as I said in Hansard — 

I won‟t repeat it — when the Bill was presented, that we in the 

opposition support the safety and the protection of the ponies. 

 

What has been done, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that the member 

from Lloydminster has — as I said before, two weeks ago, that 

he is naïve — he has actually totally ignored the process of the 

House with the process of a Bill and as it pertains to 

consultation. And I think we‟ve seen that many, many times 

with this government. Consultation means so little. 

 

And when I have asked people, phoned people and asked them, 

what is their response to this, they have eagerly shared their 

response and have asked me to send the Bill, which I have 

done. I have sent the Bill out far and wide and have received 

responses in the short time that I‟ve been able to do this. I think 

that the fact I said in Hansard last time that this would have 

been better done as a Bill through a minister‟s office, which 

certainly could have been done since I actually sent a letter to 

the Minister of the Environment, who forwarded it to the 

Minister of Agriculture. Could have been done better, but 

despite the fact that it has been done so poorly, there still is a 

very high level of support for protecting the ponies. 

 

So I would want to see this go to committee. And I have 

proposed amendments which I‟ve shared with the member from 

Lloydminster. I‟ve also shared it widely with the people I‟ve 

consulted with, and have got feedback on those as well. And so 

I think that, given the short time we‟ve had to consult and given 



November 26, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3841 

the feedback I have, we can still actually move this Bill forward 

with some significant changes that I think will strengthen the 

Bill, certainly address some of the concerns that are out there. 

 

And I would certainly like to say, I wish the member would 

have had advice from his colleagues who know better the 

process of this House. It‟s an insult to the opposition to expect 

us to do nothing on a Bill that‟s presented to this House. We 

have an obligation to the people that it will affect to actually 

talk to them. And that‟s what I did and that I did on behalf of 

the opposition. 

 

And now we are at this point that we can actually bring the Bill 

forward, move it to committee, and propose some amendments 

that reflect the concerns of the people I spoke to. Thank you, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

a motion by the member from Lloydminster that Bill No. 606, 

The Protection of the Wild Ponies of the Bronson Forest Act be 

now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

[12:30] 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — I designate that this Bill No. 606, The 

Protection of the Wild Ponies of the Bronson Forest Act be 

committed to the Committee of the Whole and request leave of 

the said Bill to be considered in the Committee of the Whole 

immediately. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Lloydminster has 

asked with leave that this Bill be sent to Committee of the 

Whole, and that it be committed today on Bill No. 606, The 

Protection of the Wild Ponies of the Bronson Forest Act. Is 

leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I now leave the Chair for 

Committee of the Whole. Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to introduce 

guests. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m very 

pleased to introduce to you and through you to the Chamber, to 

the committee, a number of special guests seated in the 

Speaker‟s gallery. These are people who are helping to organize 

or are participating in the 2010 Olympic Torch Run across 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Olympic torch relay has already visited La 

Ronge and will be stopping for celebrations in eight more 

Saskatchewan communities on its way west to Vancouver. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have representatives from the committees of 

some of our nine community torch relay celebration locations. 

They are Randy Goulden from Yorkton, city councillor Mike 

O‟Donnell from Regina, Jasmine Jackman from Moose Jaw, 

Nola Smith from Swift Current, Michelle Dezell from 

Saskatoon, Laura Allan from North Battleford, Katlin Pegg 

from Lloydminster, and, Mr. Speaker, Tammy Fiske from La 

Ronge who, while I‟m on my feet, I would like to say that the 

community of La Ronge did an incredible job a couple of weeks 

ago in organizing their celebrations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is also my pleasure to introduce some of 

Saskatchewan‟s Olympic torchbearer cauldron lighters. These 

individuals have the honour of running the last 300 metres with 

the torch and then using it to ignite the cauldron in their home 

community. Mr. Speaker, the lit cauldron symbolizes that 

community‟s inclusion and participation in Canada‟s games. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these individuals are Barry Sharpe from Yorkton. 

Barry is a leader in the business community and organizes 

events that brings people together throughout the Yorkton 

Business Improvement District. Callie Morris from Regina, 

who‟s been involved in wrestling, winning medals at the 

provincial level. She‟s also played softball at the national 

Aboriginal and Indigenous Games. Diane Therrien from Moose 

Jaw who‟s run a number of marathons and she‟s well prepared 

to carry the Olympic flame. 

 

Kathryn Durant from Swift Current. At the 2007 Canada 

Games, Kathryn won silver in Special Olympics figure skating. 

In 2007 she was recognized as the Special Olympic Female 

Athlete of the Year. Fiona Smith-Bell from North Battleford. 

As a member of Canada‟s National Women‟s Hockey Team 

from „94 to 2002, she‟s received a total of seven international 

gold medals. And, Mr. Speaker, Merv Mann from 

Lloydminster, who has played hockey three years at the 

University of Saskatchewan Huskies and also played in Sweden 

and Norway. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we also have three very special guests who 

we are honoured to have today, who hardly need any 

introduction: Clayton Gerein, seated on the floor with us; 

Marcia Gudereit, an Olympic gold medallist in curling, Mr. 

Speaker; and Mr. Tony Cote, who is with us today. 

 

And I also do want to mention, Mr. Speaker, that we‟re joined 

by Joan McCusker who has done such a tremendous job for the 

province of Saskatchewan in organizing the torch relays and the 

organizing for the communities, Mr. Speaker. And I would ask 

all the members that are carrying the torch to stand and give a 



3842 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2009 

wave to their Legislative Chamber, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I‟d like to thank the minister for the 

introduction and, on behalf of the Chair, I would also welcome 

the guests in the gallery today. I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — With leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — On behalf of the official opposition, it gives 

me great pleasure to follow the minister‟s comments and 

welcome all the special guests from the torch relay communities 

and all the cauldron lighters who represent the best in sport in 

Saskatchewan. I have to say welcome . . . I‟m picking out 

Michelle Dezell who I actually know from my own badminton 

days a very, very long time ago. 

 

So with that, I‟d like to just say welcome on behalf of the 

official opposition to your legislature. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE ASSEMBLY 

 

Bill No. 606 — The Protection of the Wild Ponies 

of the Bronson Forest Act 
 

The Deputy Chair: — The item of business before the 

committee is Bill No. 606, The Protection of the Wild Ponies of 

the Bronson Forest Act. Clause 1, short title. Is clause 1 agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

[Clause 1 agreed to.] 

 

[Clause 2 agreed to.] 

 

Clause 3 

 

The Deputy Chair: — Clause 3. Is clause 3 agreed? I 

recognize the member from Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I do have an amendment for 

clause 3, to: 

 

Strike out clause 3 of the printed Bill and substitute the 

following: 

 

Prohibition 

3(1) No person shall in any way wilfully molest, 

interfere with, hurt, capture or kill any of the wild 

ponies of the Bronson Forest. 

 

(2) No person shall transport any wild pony from the 

Bronson Forest for the purpose of wilfully harming, 

hunting or killing it. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — Moved by the member from Eastview: 

 

Strike out clause 3 of the printed Bill and substitute the 

following: 

 

Prohibition 

3(1) No person shall in any way wilfully molest, 

interfere with, hurt, capture or kill any of the wild 

ponies of the Bronson forest. 

 

(2) No person shall transport any wild pony from the 

Bronson Forest for the purpose of wilfully harming, 

hunting or killing it. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

from Lloydminster. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the 

interest of the opposition in this Bill and their attempts to 

improve it. I do have a couple of concerns about this 

amendment that I would like to share briefly as time is short. 

 

In looking at this amendment, the Ministry of Justice, who 

looked at it fairly thoroughly, said subsection (1) is identical to 

the proposed subsection. There is no need for this subsection. It 

adds nothing to subsection (1). If a person was to transport a 

pony, they would have had to have had interfered with or 

logically captured it which are covered in subsection (1). 

 

Normally, Mr. Speaker, a redundancy like this would not be a 

large concern to me, but I would like to make the members 

aware that in talking to local ranchers in the area where they 

haul horse trailers up and down the highway there and in and 

out of the forest to manage their cattle on a regular basis, that 

having the authorities looking inside horse trailers and if a 

family comes up there with ponies in their horse trailers, this 

. . . Being that it does not accomplish anything and that it is 

redundant, I think it weakens the Bill to have this provision and 

would not be that well received from the local residents who 

utilize that forest for grazing cattle and riding their horses. 

 

Thank you for your time, Mr. Chair. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — Are we ready for the question on the 

amendment? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the amendment? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I think the nos have it. 

 

We‟re returning to clause 3. Clause 3. Is it agreed? 

 

[Clause 3 agreed to.] 

 

[Clauses 4 and 5 agreed to.] 

 

Clause 6 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — I have a new clause to follow clause 5 of the 

printed Bill, under Criminal Code penalty. New 6: 



November 26, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3843 

The wild ponies of the Bronson Forest are deemed to be 

“cattle” for the purposes of section 444 of the Criminal 

Code (Canada). 

 

The Deputy Chair: — Ladies and gentlemen of the committee, 

we have a new clause following clause 5 of the printed Bill. 

Criminal Code penalty, I guess it‟d be clause 6 to replace the 

existing clause 6: 

 

The wild ponies of the Bronson Forest are deemed to be 

“cattle” for the purposes of section 444 of the Criminal 

Code (Canada). 

 

I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. This clause I also 

had the Justice officials look at. Their comments were, this 

section would have no effect at all. The provincial government 

cannot amend the Criminal Code. So deeming the ponies as 

cattle would not affect the interpretation of 444, the Criminal 

Code of Canada. 

 

In any event, Mr. Speaker, with doing a little more research on 

the Criminal Code itself, printing off section 444 of the 

Criminal Code, I will read it here: 

 

Section 444 makes it an indictable offence to wilfully 

kill, injure or endanger cattle. 

 

The definition for cattle under the Criminal Code of Canada 

include any cow, horse, mule, pig, ass, or sheep. So, Mr. 

Speaker, this clause that is put forward, on one hand it would 

not have any effect, a provincial legislation on the Criminal 

Code of Canada. But two, it is already included in the Criminal 

Code of Canada. So I would not be supporting that, Mr. Chair. 

 

[12:45] 

 

The Deputy Chair: — Is it the pleasure of the committee to 

adopt the amendment? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — I just want to clarify that my information about 

the certain section of the Criminal Code does not include wild 

ponies in the definition of cattle. It only includes horses. So this 

was to be clear that this would be different and would be added 

strength for conservation officers or wardens to enforce this. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — Is the committee ready for the question 

on the amendment? Those in favour of the proposed 

amendment say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — Those opposed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — The nos have it. 

 

[The division bells rang from 12:46 until 12:50.] 

 

The Deputy Chair: — Those in favour of the amendment, 

please rise. 

 

[Yeas — 20] 

 

Lingenfelter McCall Belanger 

Harper Trew Higgins 

Junor Atkinson Nilson 

Forbes Vermette Broten 

Furber Morin Yates 

Iwanchuk Taylor Quennell 

Wotherspoon Chartier  

 

The Deputy Chair: — Those opposed to the amendment please 

rise. 

 

[Nays — 29] 

 

Bjornerud Draude Krawetz 

Eagles McMorris D‟Autremont 

Hickie Cheveldayoff Harpauer 

Gantefoer Kirsch Norris 

Morgan Hutchinson Huyghebaert 

Brkich Hart Reiter 

Schriemer Allchurch Weekes 

Duncan Michelson LeClerc 

Ottenbreit Ross Chisholm 

Harrison McMillan  

 

The Deputy Chair: — Order. Order. 

 

Principal Clerk: — Mr. Chair, those in favour of the 

amendment, the motion, is 20; those opposed, 29. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I declare the amendment lost. 

 

Returning to clause 6, coming into force. I recognize the 

member from Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I‟d like to add a new clause 

before 6 of the printed Bill. And it would read that: 

 

Nothing in this Act shall be construed or interpreted so as 

to abrogate or derogate directly or indirectly any treaty or 

Aboriginal rights recognized and affirmed by subsection 

35(1) of the Constitution Act, 1982. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — The amendment proposed by the 

member from Eastview reads as follows: 

 

That nothing in this Act shall be construed or interpreted 

so as to abrogate or derogate directly or indirectly any 

treaty or Aboriginal rights recognized and affirmed by 

subsection 35(1) of the Constitution Act, 1982. 

 

Is the committee ready for the question? I recognize the 

member from Lloydminster. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. The amendments 

were provided to me from the opposition a couple days ago so 

that I could peruse them. This one however is substantially 



3844 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2009 

different than the one that was provided to me, but my 

comments that I had prepared are still relevant. 

 

In all law, the Charter applies to all laws irregardless of whether 

it is expressly stated in any one law. Section 35 of the 

Constitution Act . . . 14(1), The Interpretation Act, 1995 already 

applies to protect Aboriginal rights, if any, that might be 

affected in this Act. 

 

Mr. Chair, that being said, this is very similar in theory to the 

trespass Act which had effect across the whole province. In that 

Act, there was no explicit reference to the Constitution and the 

First Nations. However their rights are expressly interpreted 

through all legislation. That makes this particular provision 

redundant, Mr. Speaker, and I won‟t be supporting it. 

 

[13:00] 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair of Committees. 

This change in wording came directly to me from the lawyer 

acting on behalf of the Island Lake First Nation and that is his 

wording that he has submitted. I have had conversations with 

the FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations] as well 

as the various First Nations bands affected by this. They are not 

reassured by what they have heard and the consultation that has 

not occurred. 

 

They would really want this in this legislation and it is their 

wording, their lawyer‟s wording, that I am presenting today. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — Order. Is the committee ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — Is it the will of the committee to adopt 

the amendment? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — Those in favour say no. Sorry. Short 

circuit. Short circuit. I was contemplating which voices were 

louder when I made that comment. 

 

Those in favour of the amendment say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — And those opposed to the amendment 

say no. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I think the nos have it. 

 

[The division bells rang from 13:02 until 13:07.] 

 

The Deputy Chair: — The committee will come to order. Will 

those in favour of the motion please rise? 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Chair: — Will the committee come to order. 

 

[Yeas — 49] 

 

Bjornerud Draude Krawetz 

Eagles McMorris D‟Autremont 

Hickie Cheveldayoff Harpauer 

Gantefoer Kirsch Norris 

Morgan Hutchinson Huyghebaert 

Brkich Hart Reiter 

Schriemer Allchurch Weekes 

Duncan Michelson LeClerc 

Ottenbreit Ross Chisholm 

Harrison McMillan Lingenfelter 

McCall Belanger Harper 

Trew Higgins Junor 

Atkinson Nilson Forbes 

Vermette Broten Furber 

Morin Yates Iwanchuk 

Taylor Quennell Wotherspoon 

Chartier   

 

[Nays — nil] 

 

The Deputy Chair: — The committee will come to order. 

Order, order. The committee will, the committee will come to 

order. The committee will come to order. 

 

Principal Clerk: — Mr. Chair, those in favour of the motion, 

49; those opposed, 0. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — The amendment is carried. We‟re 

moving to clause 6, coming into force. Is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — Carried. 

 

[Clause 6 agreed to.] 

 

The Deputy Chair: — The number will be adjusted 

accordingly by the Law Clerk. The preamble, is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — Carried. 

 

[Preamble agreed to.] 

 

The Deputy Chair: — Her Majesty, by and with the advice 

and consent of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 

enacts as follows: The Protection of the Wild Ponies of the 

Bronson Forest Act. Is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from 

Lloydminster. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — I move that the committee report the Bill 

with amendment. 



November 26, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3845 

The Deputy Chair: — It has been moved that the committee 

report Bill No. 606 with amendment. Is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — Carried. I recognize the House Leader 

of the . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — I move that we rise, report progress 

and ask leave to sit again. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — It has been moved by the Government 

House Leader, the member from Melfort, that the committee 

rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. Is that 

agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — Carried. 

 

[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Committees. 

 

Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the committee 

to report Bill No. 606, The Protection of the Wild Ponies of the 

Bronson Forest Act with amendment and ask for leave to sit 

again. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered the first and 

second time? 

 

Mr. McMillan: — With leave, now. 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 

Bill No. 606 – The Protection of the Wild Ponies 

of the Bronson Forest Act 
 

The Speaker: — The amendments are read a first and second 

time. I recognize the member from Lloydminster. Pardon me, I 

got it now. Sorry about that. The member has asked for leave 

that the amendments be read the first and second time. Is the 

Assembly agreed that the amendments be read the first and 

second time? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Principal Clerk: — First and second reading of the 

amendments. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Lloydminster. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, by leave I move that this Bill 

now be read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Lloydminster has 

requested leave that Bill No. 606, The Protection of the Wild 

Ponies of the Bronson Forest Act be now read the third time 

and passed under its title. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. I recognize the 

member from Lloydminster. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 606 — The Protection of the Wild Ponies 

of the Bronson Forest Act 
 

Mr. McMillan: — I move that this Bill be now read the third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 

Lloydminster that Bill No. 606, The Protection of the Wild 

Ponies of the Bronson Forest Act be now read the third time 

and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Principal Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Next sitting. 

 

The Speaker: — At the next sitting. It being past the hour of 

adjournment, this Assembly stands adjourned until 1:30 p.m. on 

Monday. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 13:18.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Duncan ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3817, 3841 

  Chartier ......................................................................................................................................................................... 3817, 3842 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3817 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3817 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3817 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3817 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3817 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3818 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3818 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 3818 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3818 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3827 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3837 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3818 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3818 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3819 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3819 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3819 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3819 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3819 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3819 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3820 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Elmwood Residences Celebrate 40th Anniversary 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3820 

 Commercial Cattleman of the Year 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3820 

 Troy’s Youth Canoe Quest 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3820 

 Local, Everyday Heroes 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3821 

 Famous Duos 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3821 

 Services for People with Intellectual Disabilities 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3821 

 Premier’s Trip to Washington 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3822 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Management of Provincial Economy 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3822 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3822 

 Provision of High-Speed Internet 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3823 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3823 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3824 

 Big River Saw Mill 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3824 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3824 

 Funding for Boards of Education and Property Tax Issues 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3825 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 3825 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

 International Holodomor Remembrance Week 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 3827 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3828 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3828 

  



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Openness and Accountability 

  Atkinson ......................................................................................................................................................................... 3828, 3838 

  Weekes ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3831, 3839 

  Wotherspoon ................................................................................................................................................................. 3832, 3839 

  D’Autremont ................................................................................................................................................................. 3834, 3838 

  Belanger ......................................................................................................................................................................... 3835, 3839 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3837 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3839 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3839 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3840 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3840 

  Schriemer (point of order) ..................................................................................................................................................... 3833 

  Taylor (point of order) ........................................................................................................................................................... 3833 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 606 — The Protection of the Wild Ponies of the Bronson Forest Act 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3840 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE ASSEMBLY 

 Bill No. 606 — The Protection of the Wild Ponies of the Bronson Forest Act 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3842 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3842 

 Recorded Division............................................................................................................................................................. 3843, 3844 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 Bill No. 606 – The Protection of the Wild Ponies of the Bronson Forest Act 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3845 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 606 — The Protection of the Wild Ponies of the Bronson Forest Act 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3845 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium Development 

Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

 Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

Government House Leader 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. James Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Capital Commission 


