




















































Hansard: December 02, 2009


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 24A  WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 2, 2009, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3913 

 December 2, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to the Assembly, seated in the west gallery, I have 

the great pleasure of introducing a man whose name is 

synonymous with the practice of law — that is, L.A. Law. 

Seated in the west gallery is Mr. Corbin Bernsen, known to 

many of us as lawyer Arnie Becker on the hit series L.A. Law. 

Mr. Bernsen is now starring in the popular TV series Psych and 

is also a successful writer, director, and producer. He is in 

Saskatchewan this week for the world premiere of his film, 

Rust, which was filmed in Kipling. The premiere will take place 

tomorrow night in Kipling. 

 

And I‟m going to ask them all to stand up. If Mr. Bernsen 

would stand up, and with him are filmmakers, Greg Redmond 

and Jay Gianukos who are making a documentary about the 

film, Rust. All three gentlemen are from California. I thank 

them very much for braving the Saskatchewan weather and I 

would ask that all members of the legislature welcome them, 

not just to the legislature, but also to Saskatchewan. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟d like to recognize in 

your gallery at the very top, Darlene Gray, and other survivors 

of ovarian cancer, representing Ovarian Cancer Awareness and 

Treatment in Saskatchewan or OCATS. They‟re here today to 

witness the proceedings of the legislature, and I‟d like everyone 

to welcome them here. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Indian 

Head-Milestone, the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I have a couple of introductions today. The first 

introduction I would like to make are members from the 

Saskatchewan Ophthalmic Dispensers Association. Seated in 

the west gallery are Paul Johnson, the president. If you could 

just stand or give a wave, it‟d be fine. Stand and give a wave, 

both. Also Ken Sorensen who is the assistant registrar, and 

Clarence Mott who is the treasurer. I‟d like all members to 

welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

Also while I‟m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to also 

introduce a number of guests. Some are seated in the west 

gallery and, I believe, one or two in the Speaker‟s gallery, but 

who we have here joining us today is a number of advocates for 

the reduction of tobacco use in our province, Mr. Speaker. They 

do an excellent job and we‟ll be introducing a Bill later on in 

this day that will address that issue. 

 

So seated in the west gallery are Donna Pasiechnik from the 

Canadian Cancer Society; Lynn Greaves who is president of the 

Coalition for Tobacco Reduction, who is in the Speaker‟s 

gallery; Paul Van Loon is in the west gallery and is from the 

Lung Association; Rhae Ann Bromley is in the west gallery as 

well from the Heart and Stroke Foundation; and Jean Ericson is 

the assistant registrar for the Saskatchewan College of 

Pharmacists. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟d like all members to welcome them to their 

Legislative Assembly and thank them for the great work that 

they do to better the health in our province. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too want to welcome 

the people in the gallery today to talk about the tobacco Act. I 

don‟t think many people remember, but in 1999 I was the 

member who moved the motion to set in motion the all-party 

tobacco committee that went out around the province to study 

the issue and then bring back suggestions for legislation. And I 

did that with the help of the member from . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Douglas Park. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Douglas Park. I keep wanting to put you in 

Riversdale. Yes, so that‟s how it all started. So I really am 

pleased to see that the people that have been so diligent in 

watching this tobacco Act are here today to watch it move 

forward yet again, and welcome them to their legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I‟m 

pleased to introduce some visitors that are with us here today in 

the Speaker‟s gallery. Our visitors are with Sinopec 

Engineering of China, and I would like to introduce them as 

follows: Mr. Qi, the vice-director of international project 

management; Mr. Zhou, the director chief engineering; Mr. 

Pang, engineer; and Ms. Xu, the assistant engineer. 

 

We‟re also joined by representatives of the company of 

NuCoal: Alan Cruickshank, the president and CEO [chief 

executive officer]; John Burns, the managing director of coals 

to liquids; Steve Halabura, managing director, geoscience and 

mining; John Rogers, head of project management; and Allison 

Sherdahl, vice-president of industrial relations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these guests are in the legislature today. They are 

going to be signing a very, very important memorandum of 

understanding this afternoon for a very, very significant project 

in the province of Saskatchewan that has tremendous potential 

for development, for jobs, and for investment in our province. I 

would ask all members of the legislature to join with me in 

welcoming them — first of all our guests from China to 

Saskatchewan, and then the NuCoal representatives in terms of 

their participation in this MOU [memorandum of 

understanding] this afternoon. 

 



3914 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2009 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like 

to join with the minister in welcoming the folks here from 

Sinopec and from NuCoal. I had an opportunity, as did some of 

my colleagues, to meet with the folks from NuCoal on what is 

potentially an extremely exciting project for Saskatchewan. So 

we‟re happy to see them in the legislature today. 

 

Additionally I‟d like to introduce, if I could, some folks that are 

here who drove probably well over five hours to be here today 

from Big River. They have grave concerns about the future of 

their saw mill and the viability of their town. And I‟d like to 

introduce, if I could, a few folks from Big River: His Worship 

Brian Brownfield, the mayor; Doug Panter, the reeve; Darren 

Osinchuk, a councillor; Wally Wilson, he‟s a contractor up 

there; and Jeanette Wicinski-Dunn, she‟s with the chamber of 

commerce in town; Trischa Doucette, she works on economic 

development for the region. I‟d like to welcome them to their 

legislature today. 

 

And just because it‟s so infrequent that I get up to introduce 

people, Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to take this opportunity to also 

introduce somebody who‟s no stranger to the legislature, Mr. 

Myron Kowalsky who has joined us — former Speaker of the 

legislature, from Prince Albert — to view the proceedings. I‟m 

sure that he‟ll have a bit of a different view from the top of the 

Speaker‟s gallery today than he‟s used to, but I‟m sure he‟ll 

enjoy the proceedings. Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you I‟d like also to say hello and give a warm welcome to the 

forestry task force who I‟d the pleasure of meeting with today: 

Mayor Brownfield, Reeve Doug Panter, Jeanette 

Wicinski-Dunn, Wally Wilson, Trischa Doucette, and Darren 

Osinchuk, and also the other good folks of Big River that came 

down on the long bus ride. So thank you. We really appreciate 

it. And I‟d like you to give them a warm welcome to their 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena, the Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through I am pleased to rise today in the legislature to 

welcome some of Saskatchewan‟s finest employees to their 

legislature. 

 

Joining us today are six dedicated workers who every day 

provide excellent customer service to all the people in 

Saskatchewan through the SGI‟s [Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance] fair practice office. And I‟ll ask them to stand to be 

recognized. We have Meghan Moormann, Murray Richter, 

Charlotte Hendren, Nadine Williams, Cheryl Cowling, and 

Irene Gaetz. 

 

The fair practice office answers questions about SGI products 

and programs, and they assist their customers in dealing with 

auto and injury claims. Anyone who has been in an accident 

knows first-hand the emotional and traumatic experience it can 

be, and these employees go out of their way to answer 

questions. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I want to single out Irene. Irene‟s a team 

manager, and after nearly three decades of working at SGI, 

Irene is preparing for retirement at the end of the month. Irene 

is known for constantly demonstrating integrity, being patient, 

and she‟s an empathetic listener. And she‟s made sure that 

everybody is treated fairly while sharing their concerns and 

their individual situations. It‟s very likely that every member in 

this House has dealt with her in their office and maybe more 

than once. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I ask all members in this Assembly to 

welcome Irene and the rest of the fair practice office to their 

Legislative Assembly and congratulate Irene in her retirement. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟d like to welcome the 

good folks from the SGI fair practices office as well. They do 

terrific work, almost everyone would agree. Of course the sad 

part is they deal in a department where not all of their clientele 

are happy to begin with, but I can vouch that they do very, very 

good work. 

 

And I want to join the minister in wishing Irene a very happy, 

long retirement. So please, on behalf of the opposition, help me 

welcome the fair practices group from SGI. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, in your gallery there‟s a number of friends. And I 

know my colleague will be formally introducing some of them 

later, but to you and through you to the Assembly, I would like 

to introduce one individual, Mr. Ken Garbutt. Ken is the 

president of the Saskatchewan-Manitoba division of the Last 

Post Fund, and I will be making a member statement regarding 

the Last Post Fund later on. 

 

So I would ask all members of the Assembly to please welcome 

Ken to his Legislative Assembly and thank him for the great 

work he‟s done on the Last Post Fund. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Melville-Saltcoats, the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to the members of the 

Assembly I‟d like to introduce Jack Hextall, president of the 

Sask Cattle Association; Calvin Knoss, president of the Sask 

Stockgrowers; Ed Bothner with the Stockgrowers; and another 

person who‟s very familiar with this legislature, Harold Martens 

with the Stockgrowers; and also Dave Marit from SARM 

[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities]. I want to 

welcome them to their legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 



December 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3915 

Wascana Plains, the Minister Responsible for Government 

Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, I am pleased to rise today to welcome a group of 

grade 4 and 5 students from St. Gabriel here in Regina, Regina 

Wascana Plains. There‟s 22 of them joined by their teacher, 

Denise Reed. I would ask all members to join me in welcoming 

them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to the 

Legislative Assembly, I‟d like to introduce some very special 

guests in the east gallery. That would be my husband, Blair 

McDaid, and Ophelia, who will be two tomorrow. And this is 

her first time in the gallery. So please join me in welcoming 

them to their legislature. I need a new tongue today, I think. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

seated in your gallery is a member from my constituency in the 

name of Lyle Johnson. Lyle is the regional adviser for Prairie 

regions of the Cadet Instructors Cadre Branch Instructor 

Council. I hope I got all that right, Lyle. He is here with the 

cadet instructors from across the province, and I‟d ask them all 

to just stand for a second. 

 

The Cadet Instructors Cadre is celebrating its 100th anniversary 

this year and will be signing a declaration this afternoon in 

appreciation for their work with the air, army, and sea cadets 

throughout Saskatchewan. I would like to ask all members to 

welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you and to all the members of the Assembly, I‟d like to 

introduce two women I‟ve introduced in this House before. In 

the west gallery is my mom, Pat Ottenbreit. Give a wave there, 

mom. 

 

And also with her is my lovely wife, Leone. And you know, it‟s 

been said, Mr. Speaker, behind every successful man or 

somewhat successful man is a supportive woman. That is one 

very supportive woman. But it‟s also been said, at times they‟re 

surprised as well. And I‟m not sure if that‟s the case. But I‟d 

ask all members to welcome my mom and my wife to this 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — And if members will allow, I‟d like to extend 

a welcome as well to a previous Speaker who‟s come to join us 

today, Mr. Myron Kowalsky, and a former member, Mr. Harold 

Martens, both individuals I‟ve had the pleasure of serving in the 

Assembly with, and a special welcome back to the Assembly. 

And I‟ll be chatting with the former Speaker later on for his 

critique of the current Speaker of the Assembly. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

again today to present yet another petition from concerned 

citizens of Saskatchewan who are concerned over the condition 

of Highway 310. This highway has deteriorated rapidly and 

significantly. And the communities, many of these communities 

are reliant upon tourism as economic development, and this 

highway is certainly a barrier to that growth. Mr. Speaker, I‟ll 

read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to commit to providing the 

repairs to Highway 310 that the people of Saskatchewan 

need. 

 

And in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks 

from Ituna and Kelliher, Saskatchewan. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to again 

present petitions. This is almost 1,000 in three days. The 

petition is in support of people with autism who feel they are 

disadvantaged by living in Saskatchewan with the inadequate 

autism spectrum disorder strategies and funding. And the 

petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Saskatchewan Party government to commit to 

providing a comprehensive provincial autism spectrum 

strategy that is based on proven best practice, 

evidence-based research, treatments, and programming; 

and given the complexity of the disorder and its 

treatments, the individualized funding concept be adapted 

for parents and guardians of autistic individuals. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These signatures, Mr. Speaker, today are from Regina, Pilot 

Butte, Balgonie, Weyburn, Yorkton, Regina Beach, Fort 

Qu‟Appelle, Langenburg, Churchbridge, Saskatoon, Stoughton, 

Midale, Yellow Grass, and Radville. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present more petitions in support of affordable housing 

for Saskatchewan seniors. And we know that living costs 

including housing is having a major impact on Saskatchewan 

senior citizens and that more affordable housing options would 

help an awful lot. I‟d like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 



3916 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2009 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to act as quickly as possible to expand 

affordable housing options for Saskatchewan‟s senior 

citizens. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these petitioners come from Chitek Lake, 

Dysart, Kerrobert, Biggar, North Battleford, and Battleford. 

Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

in support of a new long-term care facility in La Ronge. The 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately invest in the planning and 

construction of new long-term care beds in La Ronge. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by and supported by the 

good people of La Ronge, including the new mayor of La 

Ronge. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition in support of fairness for students here in 

Saskatchewan through the necessary expansion of the graduate 

retention program. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately expand the graduate 

retention program to include — oh I‟m stumbling here — 

to immediately expand the graduate retention program to 

include master‟s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, individuals who signed this petition are from the 

city of Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present yet another petition on behalf of rural residents 

of Saskatchewan who question why the Sask Party government 

is leaving them behind with respect to providing safe and 

affordable water and who have yet not had any commitment of 

assistance. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to financially assist the town of Duck 

Lake residents for the good of their health and safety due 

to the exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency, and that this government fulfills its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions, Mr. Speaker, are signed by the good residents 

of Duck Lake and Carlton and Black Lake, Saskatchewan. I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I stand today and present 

petitions in support of the withdrawal of Bill 80. Mr. Speaker, 

the petition‟s about the construction industry relations Act, 

1992. It‟s about stable labour relations environment and about 

apprenticeship programs and quality work and safe work. Mr. 

Speaker, the petition reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to withdraw its ill-conceived Bill 80, the 

construction industrial labour relations amendment Act, 

2009, which dismantles the proud history of the building 

trades in this province, creates instability in the labour 

market, and impacts the quality of training required of 

workers before entering the workforce. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by people in Lanigan, 

Saskatoon, Regina, Martensville, Punnichy, Vanscoy, Prince 

Albert, Mayview, Colonsay, Theodore, and Blaine Lake. I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m 

pleased today to rise to present a petition in support of 

affordable rents and housing for The Battlefords. The 

petitioners note that the vacancy rate for rental accommodation 

in The Battlefords is very low, but the cost of rental 

accommodation is increasing at an alarming rate. The prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to call 

upon the Government of Saskatchewan to develop an 

affordable housing program that will result in a greater 

number of quality and affordable rental units to be made 

available to a greater number of people throughout The 

Battlefords and that will implement a process of rent 

review and rent control to better protect tenants in a 

non-competitive housing environment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by residents of the city of 

North Battleford. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions once again here today on behalf of concerned 

residents from across Saskatchewan as it relates to the 

unprecedented mismanagement of their finances by the Sask 

Party. Of course they allude to the $1 billion deficit that‟s been 



December 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3917 

created and they have concerns. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to start managing our finances 

responsibly and prudently to ensure that it does not 

continue its trend of massive budgetary shortfalls, 

runaway and unsustainable spending, equity stripping 

from our Crowns, and irresponsible revenue setting. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by concerned folks from Carnduff 

and Moose Jaw. I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm River. 

 

Support for the Regina & District Food Bank 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m pleased to rise 

today to tell you and through you to all the members about an 

exciting initiative, an example of co-operation and partnership. 

 

The Saskatchewan public service and the SGEU [Saskatchewan 

Government and General Employees‟ Union] have come 

together to support a joint food drive on behalf of the Regina & 

District Food Bank. They are encouraging all Regina 

government employees to take part in the campaign which will 

run from December 4th through to December 18th. 

 

We are pleased to see the employer and the employees and the 

union working together to help people at this time of giving. 

Food collection bins will be set up in government buildings 

around Regina, and employees in other locations are also being 

encouraged to consider donating to their local food banks. 

 

Employees in the public service are your neighbours, your 

families, and your friends. They are part of our communities. 

They help to provide the services that people need throughout 

their workdays on the job and also through voluntary donations 

and campaigns like this one. This campaign will also support 

CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] Radio-Canada‟s 

upcoming Comfort & Joy campaign, to be launched December 

4th. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to challenge other public sector 

employers and unions and organizations in the private sector 

too to join the public service and the SGEU in this food bank to 

make this time of year happier for everyone. Mr. Speaker, the 

spirit of giving and service is alive and well in Saskatchewan 

public service. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Remembering Victims of Violence 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, today I stand in my place to 

remember a very tragic day in Canadian history — December 6, 

2009 — the day on which we remember the 13 young women 

whose lives were cut short during a massacre at École 

Polytechnique. These young women, Mr. Speaker, are the 

daughters of all Canadians. Their lives were tragically cut short 

by an act of violence by a man, Marc Lépine, who was 

motivated by hatred of women. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a murderer tried to silence these young women, 

but they will never be forgotten. In reading out their names each 

year, we deny Lépine and all the misogynists their victory, and 

we pay tribute to women everywhere who carry on the struggle 

for an end to violence against women and full equality for all. 

 

They are, Mr. Speaker: Geneviève Bergeron, Hélène Colgan, 

Nathalie Croteau, Barbara Daigneault, Anne-Marie Edward, 

Maud Haviernick, Maryse Laganière, Maryse Leclair, 

Anne-Marie Lemay, Sonia Pelletier, Michèle Richard, Annie 

St-Arneault, Annie Turcotte, and Barbara 

Klucznik-Widajewicz. 

 

It is in naming these young women, Mr. Speaker, that we 

remember and carry on the struggle of all for an end to violence 

and for society in which all people are truly equal. It is fitting 

that we do this, Mr. Speaker, not only in this case, the season of 

the White Ribbon campaign, but in each and every day 

throughout the year. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood River. 

 

Celebrating the Last Post Fund’s Centennial 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, this year the Last Post Fund is celebrating its 

centennial. Today our government will officially designate the 

year of 2009 as the 100th anniversary year of the Last Post 

Fund in Saskatchewan. Later today the Premier will be signing 

the proclamation. 

 

For the past 100 years, this organization‟s goal has been to 

ensure that no Canadian or Allied veteran is deprived of a 

dignified funeral, burial, and headstone for lack of financial 

resources. While the Last Post Fund is little known by the 

general public, I‟m pleased to be able to bring it some 

recognition today. The organization originated in 1909 from an 

act of patriotism, respect, and compassion towards a veteran 

who passed away in dire circumstances. For the past century, 

the Last Post Fund has provided funerals, burials, and grave 

markings for over 145,000 veterans from Canada as well as 

other allied countries. From 1995 until today, the Last Post 

Fund has spent nearly 125 million on funeral, burial, and grave 

markings expenses for veterans. In addition to delivering the 

funeral and burial program, the Last Post Fund supports several 

other initiatives to commemorate Canadian veterans including 

its own military cemetery, the National Field of Honour, and a 

provision of military markers for unmarked veterans‟ graves. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join with me in thanking this 

organization for their contribution to our veterans and also in 

congratulating the Last Post Fund on a successful 100 years. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Education Funding 

 

Mr. Taylor: — On November 19th, I along with the MLAs 



3918 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2009 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly] from 

Rosthern-Shellbrook and Biggar met in North Battleford with 

Light of Christ Catholic School Division. The board told us 

emphatically that their administrative priority for 2010 is 

sustainable and predictable funding. At the same time, the board 

indicated that they need a finalized new funding model as 

promised by the Saskatchewan Party that addresses the existing 

inequity in per student funding. 

 

For the benefit of members and the public, Light of Christ 

receives provincial funding of $7,900 per student compared to 

the provincial average of $8,700 and the provincial high of 

$16,900 per student. The board Chair made it clear, and I agree 

with him, education is too important to have to ride the highs 

and lows of the economy. Education funding cannot be 

dependent on potash prices. 

 

This week, the Minister of Education admitted his 

government‟s mismanagement of provincial finances will have 

a negative effect on the delivery of their promise to continue 

education property tax relief, and they will likely not be able to 

put in place a new funding model for school boards until 2011 

or 2012. Boards of education and students in divisions with the 

lowest per capita funding arrangements will find this totally 

unfortunate and unacceptable. 

 

If he needs more information, I call on the minister to talk with 

the members from Rosthern-Shellbrook and Biggar and act 

quickly to establish a program of equitable, sustainable, and 

predictable education funding. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

100th Anniversary of the Cadet Instructor Cadre 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today our 

government officially recognizes the 100th anniversary of the 

Cadet Instructor Cadre in our province. Since 1909, the Cadet 

Instructor Cadre, or CIC, has been responsible for the 

administration, training, and supervision of cadets. These 

dedicated individuals work within 59 cadet corps and squadrons 

throughout the province. 

 

Today the Cadet Instructor Cadre consists of approximately 

7,500 commissioned officers of the Canadian Forces whose 

prime duties include the safety, supervision, administration, and 

training of army, sea, and air cadets. Currently there are 

approximately 220 cadet instructor cadres within the province 

of Saskatchewan, along with 50 civilian instructors. 

 

Mr. Speaker, cadet instructor cadres consist of specially trained, 

part-time members of the Canadian Forces. Cadet Instructor 

Cadre officers are important figures in the life of cadets. They 

are governed by a strong desire to see cadets grow into 

responsible adults. Officers strive to be role models for youth, 

demonstrating strong characteristics in leadership, loyalty, and 

dedication. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, I ask all 

members to join me in thanking the Cadet Instructor Cadre for 

their service to this province and nation and congratulate them 

on the successful 100 years. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Birds of a Feather 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — As the old saying goes, Mr. Speaker, 

birds of a feather flock together. Last month the Health minister 

had to eat crow when his BC [British Columbia] counterpart, 

Kevin Falcon, sang like a canary about a plan to fly 

Saskatchewan patients over the mountains to pay premiums for 

surgeries. 

 

Now we learn of another migration, Mr. Speaker, as our very 

own yellow-capped cheerleading chickadee flew to the home of 

the Blue Jays, Toronto, for a fundraiser, joining a flock of very 

blue birds. Helping the Premier to feather his nest was none 

other than Kory Teneycke, Mr. Speaker, former mouthpiece for 

Stephen Harper‟s PMO [Prime Minister‟s Office]. There to 

introduce and thank the Premier were deficit Jim Flaherty and 

Mike the knife Harris. 

 

Harris, Mr. Speaker, claimed to speak for common sense, but 

was eventually identified as a specimen of the Canadian 

common loon for having fouled his own nest for program cuts 

and attacks on working people. And before he took his federal 

perch, Mr. Speaker, Jim Flaherty helped Harris wreck Ontario‟s 

finances and now runs record federal deficits in the middle of a 

recession he said wasn‟t coming. 

 

Sounds like the line the Premier has been parroting, Mr. 

Speaker, after placing too many eggs in the potash basket and 

burying his head in the sand. Mr. Speaker, when the Premier is 

flying in formation with birdbrains like these, it‟s no wonder 

people are saying birds of a feather flock together. 

 

The Speaker: — I would just ask that members, even in 

members‟ statements, be mindful of the words they use and the 

words that could be and can be constrained as reflecting upon 

other members. It‟s certainly not appropriate. 

 

I recognize the member from Martensville. 

 

Movember, A Great Success 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my 

privilege to rise in the House today and announce that last 

month‟s Movember was a great success. 

 

Movember is all about raising funds for prostate cancer research 

in Canada. One in six men will be diagnosed with prostate 

cancer and, in fact, it is the most common cancer to affect 

Canadian men. Prostate Cancer Canada uses these funds to help 

with education and support people who are affected. Movember 

sends the message that prostate cancer is a non-discriminating 

disease that can affect all men. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to point out what has been achieved. 

SaskTel‟s president and CEO Robert Watson was successful in 

raising close to $40,000 for prostate cancer research. And here 

in this House, Sask Party MLAs and staff raised about $9,000. 



December 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3919 

And I would like to thank everybody who gave so generously. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I‟d also like to add that Movember is not the 

only month where we recognize the need to raise awareness 

about prostate cancer. My father was successful in passing a 

private member‟s Bill that named September as Prostate Cancer 

Awareness Month in our province. And, Mr. Speaker, while my 

father is no longer with us — he has lost his battle with cancer 

— he certainly left a legacy. 

 

He was a very private man who chose to be very public about 

his battle with cancer and encouraging men to get tested. I‟m 

very proud of him and his efforts. And, Mr. Speaker, we miss 

him a lot. And in his memory, I would urge all men who have 

not yet been tested to do so. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — Before we move to oral questions, I want to 

just ask our audience, and remind them of the rules that we ask 

that they not participate in any of the further debate on the floor 

of the Assembly in any form. And that would be greatly 

appreciated. Oral questions. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Leader. 

 

Provincial Finances 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, for a number 

of days now we‟ve been raising the issue of the budget cuts and 

the government‟s incompetence here in the Assembly. And 

yesterday Eric Howe, the University of Saskatchewan 

economics professor and self-described fiscal conservative, 

classified the fiscal mess here in Saskatchewan as a spending 

problem, not a revenue problem. He said, and I quote: 

 

If you look just three years ago, the provincial government 

in Saskatchewan had revenues of about $8 billion, and 

nonetheless had a surplus of nearly $1 billion. Now in 

2009, even with the low value of potash royalties that are 

forecast, nonetheless the Saskatchewan provincial 

government has revenues of $10 billion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of Finance: will he 

now admit that he has a serious spending problem, not a 

revenue problem? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, there is 

obviously a challenge with respect to revenues in the province 

of Saskatchewan, resulting from a significant decline in potash 

revenue to the province, a decline of almost the entire amount 

budgeted, Mr. Speaker, because of an almost complete lack of 

sales made on potash. However it‟s also true that we are ahead 

in terms of revenues with respect to oil, Mr. Speaker. We are 

ahead in terms of revenues with respect to a number of other 

sources of revenue for the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some of the expenditures that the hon. member points to result 

from record infrastructure investment, which are the reasons 

why our economy is stronger perhaps than any other on the 

continent. Some of the other reasons for the expenditure 

increase is actually a tax cut. When you reduce property taxes, 

when you finally deliver meaningful education property tax 

relief, you do so by properly funding education, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I will say this: this government is committed to the balanced 

budget that exists today. It‟ll balance the next budget. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we‟ll have 40 per cent less debt than when we took 

over from members opposite. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier will be one of 

the few left in the province who believe the budget is balanced, 

one of the few. In his comments yesterday, Mr. Speaker, 

Professor Howe compared this government‟s fiscal 

mismanagement and the incompetence in their billion dollar 

deficit, and now the recession, with that of Grant Devine‟s 

government in the 1980s. 

 

He said both governments inherited a solid fiscal position and 

thought they could buy anything they wanted with our money. 

He said, and I quote, “The deficits that were run up by Devine 

and the deficit that is now being run up by the Wall government 

are in fact entirely analogous.” That‟s what he said. 

 

My question to the Premier is this: does he now admit that he‟s 

following in the footsteps of his mentor and former boss, Grant 

Devine? Is that where he‟s taking the province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the debt of the province of 

Saskatchewan is 40 per cent less than when we took office. We 

have reduced the debt of this province by 40 per cent. Mr. 

Speaker, the net gain in the province‟s financial health since we 

took office is $2 billion. 

 

When you consider the debt that has been paid off, when you 

consider $600 million still in a savings account, the only 

province in the Dominion of Canada with a balanced budget, 

and also the province, the province of Saskatchewan that has 

invested in infrastructure at historic levels because of a massive 

infrastructure deficit left behind by members opposite, Mr. 

Speaker, no wonder, no wonder people from across Canada, 

those that were gathered at Grey Cup and those that are across 

today, say we would rather be in the province of Saskatchewan 

with its fiscal health, with its fiscal balance sheet, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — As Professor Howe has indicated and 

supported statements made by members of the opposition and 

many people in fact in the public of Saskatchewan, the problem 

with this government is they have no plan and no restraint at all. 

They spend money like drunken sailors. They jump from one 

project to the other. But unlike the Devine government, which 

went bankrupt doing projects, this government is going broke 

thinking about projects. That‟s the problem. 

 

My question to the Premier is this: why are the people of this 

province being forced to pay for the mistakes, the 

mismanagement, and the incompetence of this government? 

 



3920 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2009 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the debt of the 

province of Saskatchewan is almost 40 per cent less than it was 

when we took office. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I would ask the members of the 

opposition to give the Premier now the same opportunity to 

respond to the question as they gave the Leader of the 

Opposition to ask the question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the member from Wakamow 

says from her seat, what else is there? Well we‟ll say what else 

there is. Mr. Speaker, we inherited a situation where there were 

800 fewer nurses than were needed in the province of 

Saskatchewan. We inherited a situation where the CAA 

[Canadian Automobile Association] said the pothole in terms of 

the deficit and infrastructure in highways infrastructure was $1 

billion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We inherited a situation where no government in Canada relied 

more on property, including agriculture property, to fund 

education than the province of Saskatchewan under that 

government. And we inherited a province of Saskatchewan, a 

fiscal situation where there was $6.8 billion in debt. 

 

There is 40 per cent less debt in the province. We are dealing 

with the infrastructure deficit in terms of highways left behind 

by members opposite. Mr. Speaker, we are dealing with the 

neglect of health care in the cities and in rural Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. We‟re doing so with I think probably the only 

balanced budget in the country. The budget will be balanced 

next year as well. 

 

Our economy‟s continuing to grow. That‟s why people have 

voted with their feet, and they‟re coming here despite the fact 

that that member does nothing but run down the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I heard a number of members talking 

about time. We‟ve already agreed upon what the time for 

questions and answers is but also, when it‟s hard to hear, then 

it‟s difficult to start asking someone to sit down when it‟s hard 

to hear the answers. I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the 

Premier. And I listened with interest as the Premier talked about 

where he had spent the money, and making it sound like it is 

their money. But in fact it‟s the public‟s money. 

 

And I want to quote what Professor Howe has said about 

similarities between the Devine government‟s spending and this 

government‟s. And here‟s what he said, and I quote. And I 

might add before I quote, he didn‟t indicate the same list as the 

Premier. He said, and I quote: “The cabinet was madly off in all 

directions, spending money on all sorts of different things as 

though there was no budget constraint.” 

 

My question to the Premier is this: in light of this runaway 

spending and the fact that we have gone from boom to bust, 

from surplus to deficit, and we‟ve done that in two years, can he 

tell the people of Saskatchewan, if he can do that much damage 

in two years, why would they give him another term in office 

with that kind of a record? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there he goes again. He 

referred to the economy of the province of Saskatchewan as a 

bust. That‟s what he just said. Well I have several other 

occasions where that member has said the very same thing in 

this House. Referred to the economy of Saskatchewan as a bust, 

Mr. Speaker, the economy that has the lowest unemployment 

rate in the country . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the economy that has 

experiencing the fastest population growth that we have in 50 

years, the economy that‟s posting the highest increases in 

weekly earnings for Saskatchewan people, the economy that 

Dale Orr, another long-time economist, says will surpass 

Ontario as the second wealthiest economy in the country ahead 

of Ontario. That‟s the economy he‟s referring to as a bust. 

That‟s the depth, that‟s the breadth of the disconnect, of the gap 

between that member who recently came back from Calgary 

and is characterizing this province, the economy as a bust. The 

gap between him and the people of Saskatchewan is obvious. 

It‟s interesting . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — We‟ll see. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well he says, we‟ll see. We were just 

looking at some polling numbers this morning, Mr. Speaker. 

It‟s not just the economy of this province that‟s on the way up, 

Mr. Speaker. It‟s that member‟s disapproval ratings amongst 

the people of Saskatchewan that are on their way up. Yes. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Big River Saw Mill 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, today people from Big River are 

visiting their legislature. They‟re angry, they‟re frustrated, and 

they‟re deeply worried about the future of their community, a 

town that has for over 100 years depended on forestry. They 

want answers. They want to know why this minister refused to 

communicate with them until pressured by the NDP [New 

Democratic Party]. They want to know why this Sask Party 

minister said in June that he‟d advise them before any decision 

is made on the FMA [forest management agreement], then 

refused to give them the courtesy of even a phone call. 

 

To this minister: when dividing the FMA, why did he choose to 

play one community against the other instead of trying to build 

an industry bringing all players to the table? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 



December 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3921 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. No doubt, Mr. 

Speaker, that the minister will also want to engage in the debate 

and answer the questions that the members will ask. We just 

had a very good meeting with the task force that‟s here from 

Big River, and with the mayor and members of council, where I 

frankly don‟t think the meeting is concluded yet. We ran out of 

time before the session began here this afternoon. And so, Mr. 

Speaker, I think we‟ll be following up with that group, the 

minister and officials from my office will as well. 

 

We talked about concerns that the community has. I was an 

economic development officer, Mr. Speaker. I understand, I 

understand what that‟s like to be going through, to be going 

through what that community‟s going through. 

 

Well members are laughing and I guess that‟s fair enough. I 

would just say this, Mr. Speaker. We are interested in the very 

same things that the community of Big River‟s interested, in the 

viability of that community and specifically in the facility that‟s 

there and what can be done with that facility so people can be to 

work in it, and also so that those who supply the facility and the 

forestry sector can do that. That was the point behind the 

allocation in the first place. That was the intent. And we look 

forward to continued dialogue with the group that has come all 

the way from Big River today to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Well there you have it, Mr. Speaker. The 

Premier wants to write another IOU [I owe you] in this 

province. He‟s got an IOU now to Big River. He‟s got one for 

property tax. He‟s got one for municipal revenue sharing. He‟s 

got one for just about everything that they failed to deliver on as 

a government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister seems to have had it out for Big River 

right from the start, but neither Eacom nor the people in the 

gallery today can figure out why. The same minister went far 

out of his way to make negative claims about Eacom and its 

CEO while in Big River. I‟d like to give the minister now 

another chance to show some guts and set the record straight. 

 

To the minister: why did he say that Eacom is “a shady 

company,” and will he again deny making the same statements 

that he made in Big River today in this legislature? 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Before we move to the response, I ask 

members again to be mindful of the phrases they use or the 

words they use to impute negativity on other members. It isn‟t 

becoming of any member in the Assembly to use that type of 

language. 

 

I recognize the Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, you 

would know, and all members of this Assembly would know, 

that the history of this facility was one that closed in 2006 under 

the NDP watch. In addition to that, we would also know that in 

the dying days of the former government, the last few days that 

they were in office, they signed an MOU with Domtar. And 

while the NDP now say that they are very much on the side of 

the community with respect to this, section 13 of that MOU 

indicates this: 

 

Domtar will not be reopening the Big River mill, but will 

transfer the following equipment from Big River to 

Wapawekka to facilitate its expansion: one saw line, three 

kilns, two debarkers, stream line and planer. 

 

So the NDP now say they are concerned about this facility, Mr. 

Speaker, when the real facts are that when they had the 

opportunity to do something for the community of Big River, 

they were going to continue to keep the mill closed and move 

all of the equipment to another facility, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Now I‟m not surprised and neither are the 

people from Big River that the member opposite would not tell 

the whole story when it comes to this issue. What these people 

came here today to understand was what their position is on the 

FMA, not what the NDP wanted to do in 2007. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on July 3rd, 2009, the member from 

Saskatchewan Rivers told the Spiritwood Herald, “Should a 

corporation purchase the Big River assets from Domtar, the 

Government of Saskatchewan will work with the purchaser to 

ensure that an appropriate supply of wood is made available.” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that didn‟t happen. And according to the 

P.A. [Prince Albert] Herald, the member from Sask Rivers‟ 

only excuse for her broken promise was that she doesn‟t sit at 

the cabinet table to decide when the FMA was divided up. 

 

So why has the member from Saskatchewan Rivers now broken 

her promise and why is it that the minister has sold out the 

ineffectual member from Sask Rivers? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, right from the very outset, the 

Government of Saskatchewan, early last year, set out allocation 

criteria that had to be met in order to qualify for allocations: 

that harvesting must be sustainable; economic wood supplies 

must be provided to existing forestry companies. There must be 

full participation of First Nations within this, and proposals 

have to meet the criteria of economic viability. We wanted to 

include small companies, large communities, large forestry 

companies, independent operators, and very importantly, First 

Nations people into that discussion. And that is exactly what 

happened, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in addition to all of the various groups that got 

allocations, there was 200 000 cubic metres set aside for the 

community of Big River or proposals that would come forward 

from that community. That is indeed what has happened, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

There‟s opportunity as well to work with the Agency Chiefs 

who received allocation, to work with the Montreal Lake Cree 

Nation that received allocation, and to work with the village of 

Green Lake that got allocation, Mr. Speaker. 

 



3922 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2009 

So, Mr. Speaker, there certainly is opportunity here for all 

players to have a allocation and to have the forestry services in 

their communities. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — It‟s shocking that the minister would take that 

view in front of the people here from Big River. It‟s 

unbelievable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister has said that one reason the 

Saskatchewan Party won‟t work with Eacom is because Eacom 

has “lawsuits against them.” The company assures me that it‟s 

not true. And John Reynolds states in reference to the minister, 

I quote, “It shows how poor his research was.” 

 

But it takes little research, Mr. Speaker, to find out that another 

company that the minister dove into bed with, Bruce Power, has 

lawsuits against them. 

 

So my question to the minister is simple: with his condemnation 

of companies that have lawsuits against them, if the minister 

has a lawsuit come against him, will he resign from cabinet? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, when we worked through the 

allocation process, not only did we seek advice from the 

forestry services within government; we also had an outside 

agency, Deloitte, take a look at this. They came to the same 

conclusion that we came to in terms of economic viability of the 

company associated here. 

 

There was concern about the fact that when the proposal came 

forward, we were understanding that there was going to be a 

large forestry partner in this agreement. There was no mention 

whatsoever of that. 

 

We also were aware of the fact that we wanted to have First 

Nations involvement in this. There has been no communication 

between Eacom and the Agency Chiefs with respect to this. We 

have checked with the Agency Chiefs with respect to that, and 

they have indicated that the company, even though they are 

saying they want to have involvement, has made no 

representations of any kind to the Agency Chiefs. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Participation in Elections 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, will the Premier agree to the 

immediate appointment of an independent judicial inquiry to 

investigate the serious allegation that he, his Deputy Premier, 

his senior adviser Reg Downs, and the head of his transition 

team Doug Emsley, conspired to rig the 2007 provincial general 

election by preventing PC [Progressive Conservative] Party 

candidates from contesting that election? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the answer is no. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, does the Premier understand the 

seriousness of these allegations? He, members of his senior 

staff, and senior members of his caucus are accused of 

conspiring with Doug Emsley and other PC trust fund trustees 

to prevent the PC Party from receiving money to help field 

candidates for the 2007 provincial election. In other words, he‟s 

being accused of trying to influence the results of that election 

by keeping potential competitors from running. If the Premier 

did no such thing, why isn‟t he anxious to have this matter dealt 

with by an independent body as soon as possible? 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I‟d just like to remind members of the 

rules of the Assembly that were brought to members‟ attention 

about a couple of weeks ago in regards to questions. Questions 

must relate to ministerial duties and responsibilities. Questions 

relating to party or caucuses have nothing to do with the 

Chamber. And the Premier can choose, if he wishes, to respond, 

or we can move on to the next question if you wish. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it‟s interesting. I know 

they‟ve been talking about this issue from their seat. In fact I 

think the Leader of the Opposition threatened us with having 

Mr. Schmidt run against the current member from Melville 

except, of course, that that‟s already happened, Mr. Speaker. 

That would be point number one. 

 

Point number two, maybe we should expand . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I‟m prepared to stand 

here as long as members want to interfere and we‟ll just cut 

down on question period. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Also I‟m reminded by the member for 

Thunder Creek that obviously this conspiracy theory of the hon. 

member wasn‟t very effective because the Leader of the 

Conservative Party ran against the member for Thunder Creek. 

He garnered 279 votes. 

 

Now, now we may want to expand this inquiry he‟s calling for 

and determine whether or not it‟s true that a sitting member of 

this legislature on the NDP‟s side now — way back in 1982 

when he was running in Shaunavon — conspired with 

separatists to have the Western Canada Concept run in his 

constituency. Because apparently the candidate‟s prepared to 

say that‟s happened. 

 

And maybe while we‟re at it, we could investigate the 

nomination campaign of the NDP in Riversdale when he ran 

there, and I understand there may be a matter under 

investigation currently in another constituency, in another 

campaign, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, free and fair elections are at the 



December 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3923 

core of why we are here in this Assembly. It‟s fundamental to 

our democratic system. Mr. Speaker, the Premier mentions that 

the Ag minister ran against Grant Schmidt. And it‟s true. The 

Ag minister ran against Grant Schmidt for the nomination in 

that seat, and the Ag minister lost to the member, Grant 

Schmidt, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a new question related to the transition team and 

staff of Executive Council, Mr. Speaker. These allegations are 

eerily reminiscent of the Filmon vote-rigging scandal in 

Manitoba a few years ago. That whole mess resulted in a 

judicial inquiry, the resignation of many senior government 

staff, and the defeat of Premier Filmon at the next election. 

 

Again if the Premier is confident he did nothing wrong, why 

won‟t he launch an independent judicial inquiry to let the 

people of Saskatchewan know whether he was involved in a 

conspiracy to rig the 2007 provincial election by preventing the 

rebirth of the PC Party of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Again I must remind the member, the 

questions must be related to ministerial duty responsibility. That 

question would be more responsibly related to an independent 

member of the government, the Chief Electoral Officer. But if 

there‟s a minister who wants to respond, they‟ll be allowed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I don‟t know the details of the 

situation involving Premier Filmon, but I understand it had to 

do with First Nations. 

 

And this is an interesting line of question from members 

opposite, especially considering who their leader is and what 

has been said about the leadership campaign that that gentleman 

ran by First Nations people in this province, including the chief 

of the Flying Dust First Nation who said band members are 

upset about being dragged into the controversy over the NDP 

memberships sold on-reserve. 

 

Chief Jim Norman [I‟m quoting from an article in The 

StarPhoenix] said there is unhappiness with leadership 

candidate [and I quote] Dwain Lingenfelter, whose 

campaign bought $10 party memberships en masse for 

residents of the Flying Dust and Waterhen Lake First 

Nations [Mr. Speaker] without their consent or knowledge. 

 

If anyone ought to be concerned about a public inquiry into 

their conduct, it should be the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this is about openness. This is 

about transparency, something this side is fully committed to, 

unlike members opposite. Mr. Speaker, I‟m glad the Premier‟s 

choosing to answer these questions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

New question. Mr. Speaker, the day after the 2007 provincial 

election, the Premier was asked about Doug Emsley‟s 

appointment to his transition team when he was also a trustee of 

the PC Party trust fund. The Premier‟s response to reporters 

was, and I quote, “I believe he has resigned from that. This was 

a decision he made, I think, a number of months ago.” 

The problem, Mr. Speaker, is that no one knew of Mr. Emsley‟s 

resignation before the Premier made that statement. How is it 

that the Premier was the only one to know of Mr. Emsley‟s 

resignation from the PC Party trust fund on the day he made 

that statement? 

 

[14:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we‟ve had PC candidates 

running unsuccessfully against the member from Melville and 

the current Agriculture minister. We had the Leader of the PC 

run unsuccessfully against the MLA for Thunder Creek. So I 

think free and fair elections are happening, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It‟s also interesting to note in terms of the results of the ‟07 

election that . . . You know what? I‟m just looking over here 

and I‟m pretty sure the people have spoken as to who they want 

the Government of Saskatchewan to be, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I will say this. I will say this. If members opposite are 

interested in inquiring as to the proper conduct of election 

campaigns and leadership campaigns, they should be directing 

their questions to their own leader. Mr. Speaker, here‟s another 

First Nations chief as reported in The StarPhoenix, who said 

he‟s upset that his picture has appeared on an online social 

network, Facebook, as a supporter of Saskatchewan NDP 

leadership candidate Dwain Lingenfelter. And I quote. He said 

this: “„That‟s what he said,‟ Burns recalled.” 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. The 

member asked the question. The Premier has the opportunity if 

he chooses to respond. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Here‟s what the chief said about the 

conduct of members of his campaign, of his election campaign, 

the Leader of the Opposition. He said, quote — this is Chief 

Wally Burns — “I want my pictures taken off of that Facebook 

because he had no consent . . . to do that.” 

 

Then there are the thousands of people at Waterhen, Mr. 

Speaker, and Flying Dust, who didn‟t give their permission to 

support that gentleman in his leadership campaign, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We have the fact of the matter. And candidates for all parties 

contested the last election. That election was decided, Mr. 

Speaker, and I would say this based on some recent information 

we have. If that member doesn‟t change his conduct, and if that 

member doesn‟t get more, I think, more in line with 

Saskatchewan people about the promise of this province as it 

exists today, they‟re going to be there for a long time, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 129 — The Enforcement of Money Judgments Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 



3924 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2009 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 129, 

The Enforcement of Money Judgments Act be now introduced 

and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved first 

reading of Bill No. 129, The Enforcement of Money Judgments 

Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 130 — The Enforcement of Money Judgments 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2009/Loi de 2009 portant 

modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Enforcement 

of Money Judgments Act 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 130, 

The Enforcement of Money Judgments Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2009 be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved first 

reading of Bill No. 130, The Enforcement of Money Judgments 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2009. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 131 — The Conservation Easements 

Amendment Act, 2009 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

Bill No. 131, The Conservation Easements Amendment Act, 

2009 be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for the 

Environment has moved first reading of Bill No. 131, The 

Conservation Easements Amendment Act, 2009. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 132 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection 

(Land Designation) Amendment Act, 2009 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

Bill No. 132, The Wildlife Habitat Protection (Land 

Designation) Amendment Act, 2009 be now introduced and read 

a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for the 

Environment has moved first reading of Bill 132, The Wildlife 

Habitat Protection (Land Designation) Amendment Act, 2009 

be now read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 133 — The Tobacco Control Amendment Act, 2009 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I move that Bill No. 133, The Tobacco Control 

Amendment Act, 2009 be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Health has moved first 

reading of Bill No. 133, The Tobacco Control Amendment Act, 

2009. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



December 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3925 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Bill No. 134 — The Opticians Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I move that Bill No. 134, The Opticians Act be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Health has moved that Bill 

No. 134, The Opticians Act be now read the first time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 135 — The Prescription Drugs 

Amendment Act, 2009 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I move that Bill No. 135, The Prescription Drugs 

Amendment Act, 2009 be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Health has moved first 

reading of Bill No. 135, The Prescription Drugs Amendment 

Act, 2009. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND 

SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Standing Committee on House Services 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am instructed by the 

Standing Committee on House Services to report that it has 

considered certain estimates and to present its eighth report. 

And I move: 

 

That the eighth report of the Standing Committee on 

House Services now be concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Dewdney has 

moved: 

 

That the eighth report of the Standing Committee on 

House Services be now concurred in. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 562 to 586. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 562 through 586 are tabled. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 126 — The Management and Reduction of 

Greenhouse Gases Act 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the end of 

my remarks, I‟ll be moving second reading of The Management 

and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases Act. 

 

Our government is committed to taking action to reduce 

greenhouse gas emissions to meet our national-international 

obligations. The sustained growth of our economy can come at 

a high environmental price due to increased greenhouse gas 

emissions from coal-fired power plants, oil and gas production, 

and other sectors. As a result, Saskatchewan accounts for 10 per 

cent of the total Canadian greenhouse gas emissions, but only 3 

per cent of our country‟s population. 



3926 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2009 

Today in the lead up to the Copenhagen climate change 

negotiations, governments, lobby groups, scientists, and 

environmental organizations are all looking for action. The US 

[United States] administration has announced that President 

Obama will propose provisional targets for reducing greenhouse 

gas emissions in the range of 17 per cent based on targets set in 

the Waxman-Markey legislation. In Canada, the federal climate 

change plan, Turning the Corner, is being aligned with key 

provisions in the US legislation to maintain Canadian 

competitiveness in exports and production. And Prime Minister 

Harper has announced he will be attending the Copenhagen 

conference. 

 

The climate change plan for Saskatchewan that is described in 

this Bill will reduce provincial greenhouse gas emissions, 

sustain our provincial economic growth, and foster widespread 

industry and public involvement in the solutions. In May 2009, 

we tabled The Management and Reduction of Greenhouse 

Gases Act in the legislature for consultation after consultation 

with industry and stakeholder groups. 

 

Our government has adopted a target of emissions by 20 per 

cent by 2020 from 2006 levels. Under our legislation, large 

emitters such as SaskPower, the oil and gas, mining, steel, and 

fertilizer industries will be regulated, will report their 

emissions, and will be required to reduce them to meet annual 

targets. A carbon compliance price will be set which is 

competitive with developments in the US, Canada, and the rest 

of the world. 

 

Regulated emitters who exceed their emissions targets will be 

required to pay into Saskatchewan Technology Fund which is a 

non-profit corporation outside of government. The Tech Fund 

will increase capital investment in low-carbon technologies that 

will actually reduce emissions. In the early years, we expect a 

significant amount of money to go into the fund, which is a 

good thing because emission-reducing investments can be very 

expensive. The Tech Fund will make investments in eligible 

activities. Our major emitters will be able to access the fund for 

re-investment into low-carbon technologies. 

 

Consultations with industry have made it very clear that they 

prefer a Tech Fund located outside the government to ensure 

that contributed funds are directed towards greenhouse gas 

emission reductions and don‟t just sit in the GRF [General 

Revenue Fund]. And, Mr. Speaker, we agree. Industry will 

participate in the governance of this fund since they have the 

most knowledge on the best opportunities to reduce greenhouse 

gas emissions in their sectors. The board of directors of the fund 

will be appointed by cabinet to maintain accountability. 

 

The government target of a 20 per cent reduction in emissions 

by 2020 can only be met with a major contribution from 

regulated emitters. This co-operative framework allows 

government to work with them to meet our own greenhouse gas 

targets. Non-regulated sectors such as government, 

transportation, agriculture, and residential and commercial 

buildings will also need to reduce emissions. This will be done 

through guidelines, financial incentives, research and 

development, education, and awareness initiatives. 

 

The legislation creates two other institutions as central parts of 

our program. One is the climate change foundation which will 

receive any unused funds from the Tech Fund to promote 

research and development and the demonstration of 

cost-effective emissions reducing technologies. The foundation 

will be responsible for public education and adaptation 

planning. It will work with regulated and non-regulated sectors 

to develop innovative solutions for reducing emissions and 

adapting to warmer temperatures and extreme weather 

conditions. 

 

Secondly, an office of climate change will established for the 

Ministry of Environment to administer the climate change 

program and introduce other related aspects of the plan 

including offsets, pre-certified investments, credit for early 

action, and other related regulations. This office will also draft 

additional practice and guidance documents in a code to assist 

industry with the technical and legal aspects of regulatory 

compliance. When the new federal climate change program is in 

place, Saskatchewan will sign an equivalency agreement with 

Canada, allowing our provincial legislation and regulations to 

provide outcomes equivalent to the federal plan. Saskatchewan 

has already signed an agreement in principle with the federal 

government to conclude these negotiations once both the 

federal and provincial legislation and regulations have been 

passed. 

 

Provincial officials have consulted on all aspects of this 

legislation and are working to accommodate stakeholders‟ main 

concerns. These concerns include administrative simplicity, 

flexibility to offset sources, credit for early action, and 

pre-certified investments, as well as aligning with federal and 

US policies. Saskatchewan is a world leader in carbon capture 

and storage technologies, and this legislation strengthens that 

leadership. 

 

There are two additions to this Bill from its first introduction in 

the spring. The first is setting up the allowance for performance 

agreements. These agreements would be set up with 

non-regulated sectors who are not covered by the Bill, but will 

allow them to have performance agreements with the 

government, and it will act as a social licence so that these 

organizations can show that they are making reductions in their 

emissions. The second is the incorporation of the environmental 

code which is part of our overall approach to regulation through 

results-based regulatory system. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, The Management and Reduction of 

Greenhouse Gases Act is a made-in-Saskatchewan, 

action-oriented solution. This legislation will reduce emissions 

to meet provincial targets and will promote investment in 

low-carbon technologies. And, Mr. Speaker, I now move 

second reading of The Management and Reduction of 

Greenhouse Gases Act. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for the 

Environment has moved second reading of Bill No. 126, The 

Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases Act. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member from 

Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, this is a long-awaited piece of legislation. There are 

many, many across the province who have been waiting to see 

what exactly this government was going to put forward on the 



December 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3927 

issue of greenhouse gas emissions and climate change. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when this legislation finally receives or goes 

into second reading on the day before the end of this session, 

well it raises a number of questions. But just looking at the 

piece of legislation, does it meet some of the requirements there 

are in the province? And I know that . . . I mean the member‟s 

comments were fairly quick on a fairly complicated process, 

and there‟s a number of areas that are pointed to in the 

legislation that raise a number of questions. 

 

[14:45] 

 

Determination of standards, I guess, is one thing that just 

popped to mind quickly for me. And I know the minister made 

the comments that 10 per cent of greenhouse gas emissions 

originate in the province of Saskatchewan, but yet we only have 

3 per cent of Canada‟s population. And that is alarming. 

 

But it‟s also surprising that two years into the mandate of this 

government and we are finally seeing some action being taken 

and just a couple of short weeks — not even — well maybe a 

couple of short weeks before the minister flies off to 

Copenhagen for a major conference looking at this issue 

worldwide. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s also interesting that economic growth and 

reducing emissions are being tied hand in hand. And no one 

wants our economy to be hurt, but we also have to realize that 

there is effects on our environment that need to be addressed. 

And we don‟t have to look much farther than stepping outside 

of our front doors last week in the province of Saskatchewan 

where we had some pretty balmy weather. And while it‟s 

unusual, Mr. Speaker, I know each of us can think back to when 

we were younger; and not that many years ago, winters were 

substantially different. The climate has changed, and you would 

be hard-pressed to find people that would disagree. Where the 

disagreement may come is what has caused that change and 

what needs to be done to address it. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, while we have had this piece of legislation 

now in our hands and we‟re able to sit down and go through it 

in detail, at this point in time I would like to adjourn debate 

because I know many of my colleagues have comments that 

will be made on this piece of legislation. 

 

But I know between now and the next set of comments and the 

next time that this Bill is brought before this Assembly that 

there are many, many stakeholders that need to be consulted 

with. And there is a great deal of reading and scrutiny that has 

to be put forward on this piece of legislation to make sure it 

truly is the best that it can be for the province of Saskatchewan 

to maintain the quality of life that we expect in this province 

and also to be able to move this province forward in the best 

way possible. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would adjourn debate on the 

management and reduction of greenhouse gases and adaptation 

to climate change, Bill No. 126. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Moose Jaw Wakamow has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 126. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 121 — The Environmental Management and 

Protection Act, 2009 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Following my 

remarks, I‟ll be moving second reading of The Environmental 

Management and Protection Act, 2009. The changes being 

proposed are part of our government‟s larger results-based 

environmental regulatory reform initiative that will modernize 

Saskatchewan‟s environmental management regulations. 

 

The Ministry of Environment is adopting a results-based model 

that will be more responsive to increasing demands on the 

environment while allowing for increased economic activity. 

With regard to modernizing Saskatchewan‟s environmental 

regulations, the aim of the results-based framework is to focus 

on desired environmental outcomes instead of prescriptive 

remedies. In other words, under the new model, the province‟s 

environmental protection regulations will describe what is to be 

achieved but leave the how to those with the expertise and 

knowledge. 

 

Results-based environmental regulations will allow us to focus 

on the use of effective, custom-designed environmental 

safeguards rather than a one-size-fits-all solution. It will be built 

on the useful management and protection tools that we already 

use. And more tools will be created, for example, a 

Saskatchewan environment code with guidelines and best 

practices which will outline our performance objectives, 

policies, regulations, and standards. 

 

The private sector and other regulated communities will be 

accountable to meet these established environmental outcomes. 

Saskatchewan will be a leader in Canada with its results-based 

model, but we are by no means inventing this approach. 

Environmental regulations in the Netherlands, Denmark, 

Australia, and the United Kingdom are also based on this 

successful model. 

 

Over the last year and a half, we have engaged with a wide 

range of representatives from municipalities, environmental 

non-governmental organizations, industry, First Nations and 

Métis communities. After three rounds of stakeholder meetings, 

we are now able to bring forward this piece of legislation as 

well as amendments to The Environmental Assessment Act and 

The Forest Resources Management Act. We will continue to 

engage with these groups as we move forward, as well as 

continuing our ongoing dialogue with First Nations and Métis 

communities. 

 

The overall purpose of this Act is to support and promote the 

protection, management, and wise use of the environment in a 

way that will ensure that we can continue to sustain a high 

quality of life, including food production, social and economic 

development, recreation and leisure for this and future 

generations. 

 

The new EMPA 2009 [The Environmental Management and 



3928 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2009 

Protection Act] will consolidate EMPA 2002, The Clean Air 

Act, The Litter Control Act, and The State of the Environment 

Report Act into a single piece of legislation. This will reduce 

duplication and establish the results-based regulatory 

framework. 

 

One of the most important changes is the authority to establish a 

Saskatchewan environmental code. The code is a key element 

of the new results-based model. The code, comparable to other 

codes such as the National Building Code, will clearly state one 

set of consolidated provisions regarding environmental 

objectives and standards under which companies must operate. 

It will provide guidance to regulated persons on the design of 

environmental systems and facilities. It will also require 

proponents to register with the ministry before engaging in 

particular activities. The code will establish objectives that 

regulated parties must meet to engage in particular activities, 

which they will achieve through best management practices 

identified in the code and through the preparation of 

environmental protection plans by qualified persons. 

 

In developing the code, the ministry will seek the advice of 

municipalities, non-profit organizations, industry associations, 

First Nation and Métis communities, stewardship organizations, 

and professional associations. An advisory committee 

consisting of representatives from these groups will make 

recommendations to the ministry and to me as minister on the 

content of the code. 

 

EMPA 2009 will describe the authority to establish a new air 

management system. The emphasis of this system will be on 

action and accountability. Activities will include establishing 

air management zones or airsheds, enhancing public reporting, 

and setting baseline emission requirements for all major 

industrial emitters. Saskatchewan‟s ambient air quality 

concentrations in airsheds will be compared to the national 

ambient air quality standards. This could lead to progressively 

tougher action if air quality deteriorates. Our aim is to keep 

airsheds clean and bring the polluted airsheds in line with 

national levels. 

 

Another major change in EMPA 2009 is increased authority for 

environmental audits and compliance. The core of the new 

compliance assurance program will be technical audits more 

thorough than inspections. The ministry will develop teams of 

qualified environmental auditors. The new Act will enable an 

audit to be conducted on any activity governed by the 

Saskatchewan environmental code or by an environmental 

protection plan. 

 

EMPA 2009 covers impacted or contaminated sites. It increases 

ministerial power to gain access to and inspect impacted sites 

and to reject corrective plans that are not sustainable. EMPA 

2009 lends more clarity to important definitions, more 

immediacy for reporting on impacted sites, more certainty of 

reclamation, and more transparency with the creation of a 

public registry. It will also expand current requirements for 

financial assurance with regard to high-risk activities and 

decommissioning and reclamation plans. The aim is to ensure 

economic development proceeds in an environmentally 

responsible and sustainable fashion and to have in place 

stronger tools to ensure that those who directly benefit from a 

development are financially responsible for its cleanup. 

We will be increasing fines and penalties for any violations 

under this Act. A fine of up to $1 million per day for the 

duration of an offence could be issued upon a decision by a 

court. The new Act will establish a fund for orphaned, 

impacted, or contaminated sites. Revenues collected from 

offences, administrative penalties, acquired through donations, 

gifts, grants, or appropriated by the legislature for the fund 

could be used for site cleanup. 

 

Another proposed change is added responsibilities for qualified 

persons in certifying the accuracy of environmental protection 

plans. Experienced professionals will be used to ensure that the 

environment is properly protected. Existing qualified person 

requirements such as certified water and waste water facilities 

operators and fuel tank installers will remain in place. 

 

Finally, we are proposing to repeal The Litter Control Act and 

build new tools into EMPA 2009 which will help the ministry 

support and enhance waste minimization and waste diversion 

activities. No changes are being proposed to Saskatchewan‟s 

existing and very successful stewardship programs for recycling 

materials such as beverage containers and used oil and filters. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, EMPA 2009 encourages innovation 

and sustainable growth and investment by removing 

unnecessary and inefficient processes while clarifying 

accountability for environmental protection through clear 

standards and objectives. And, Mr. Speaker, I now move second 

reading of The Environmental Management and Protection Act, 

2009. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for the 

Environment has moved second reading of Bill No. 121, The 

Environmental Management and Protection Act, 2009. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member from 

Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, this 

Bill covers a great number of areas. And you look at the Acts 

that it will be encompassing and which are repealed by this 

piece of legislation, this new Bill. The management and 

protection of the environment Act, repealed and, by the 

minister‟s comments, that will be included in this Act will be 

The Clean Air Act, The Environmental Management and 

Protection Act, 2002, The Litter Control Act, and The State of 

the Environment Report Act and it makes consequential 

amendments to other certain Acts. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this is fairly detailed. It encompasses a 

number of pieces that previously have been stand-alone 

legislation. And, Mr. Speaker, we also have to look at why they 

were previously stand-alone legislation. They are important 

areas of concern not only for the Government of Saskatchewan 

but for citizens right across the province, affect each and every 

one of us in our day-to-day lives, and deserve to be specific in 

the actions and the direction and the areas of concern. 

 

So now the minister is looking at encompassing all these pieces 

of legislation into one Bill, one new Bill. And I guess one thing 

that quite surprised me was . . . while the minister in the 

previous Bill that we spoke of, Bill 126, management and 

reduction of greenhouse gas and adaptation to climate change, 

really is a wait and see in many cases. While the government 



December 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3929 

initially tabled, made a commitment during the election 

campaign of course and has since stepped back from that 

commitment and the targets that it had set, they have reduced 

those targets for whatever reasons. We won‟t go into that here. 

But in that Bill, it‟s kind of wait to see what the federal 

government does and wait to see what the United States does 

with the legislation and climate change initiatives or greenhouse 

gas emissions reduction, what steps that they will take. So we 

will be in lockstep with them. 

 

But somewhere along the line, we have decided that we should 

look worldwide and look at best practices. And that‟s what the 

minister says when she talks about this piece of legislation, that 

we should take the best and put it into this piece of legislation. 

It‟s not a wait-and-see model such as the Bill 126 is. 

 

So is it . . . Two different initiatives here that have taken quite a 

different path to get to what we see today in the House, these 

Bills before us. And, Mr. Speaker, there are questions about a 

results-based model and what priority that places on the 

environment and how this all fits together. So, Mr. Speaker, it is 

quite detailed. And there is many, many organizations that will 

need to be consulted with and will need to have input into the 

proposed new Bill that is before us, and also give consideration 

not only to the new piece of legislation but what‟s being 

replaced and repealed with this legislation, how it works, how it 

fits, and what we see as the pluses. 

 

And of course, there‟s always some minuses and some concerns 

that not only opposition members but constituents and 

environmental organizations will have, and not just 

environmental because this Bill will also replace The Litter 

Control Act and also The State of the Environment Report Act 

. . . how that fits in and if all of the needed information will be 

available and if it‟s appropriate to the needs of the province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there is a great deal of detail that goes with 

this Bill. And as I said previously, I know my colleagues have 

many, many questions to ask on this Bill. So at this point in 

time, I would adjourn debate on Bill No. 121, the Act 

respecting the management and protection of the environment 

Act. Thank you very much. 

 

[15:00] 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Moose Jaw Wakamow has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 121. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 122 — The Environmental Assessment 

Amendment Act, 2009 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the end of 

my remarks I‟ll be moving second reading of The 

Environmental Assessment Amendment Act, 2009. 

 

It has been almost 30 years since The Environmental 

Assessment Act was first passed. A lot has changed in that time 

with regard to environmental science and technology. Factors 

such as climate change, environmental protection, water 

conservation, and readiness for economic growth are driving 

this need to evolve. The Ministry of Environment is working to 

ensure its regulatory framework conserves and protects the 

environment while working at the pace of our growing 

economy. The changes that we are proposing are in line with 

the ministry‟s move to a results-based regulatory model. 

 

The purpose of this Act is to ensure that economic development 

in Saskatchewan proceeds with environmental safeguards in 

place. The proposed amendments are based on the initial review 

of the ministry‟s mandate and three rounds of stakeholder 

consultations. A number of amendments are being proposed, of 

which I will briefly outline a few of those changes. 

 

The amendments proposed provide a formal process allowing a 

proponent to voluntarily apply for a minister‟s screening 

decision, thus providing enhanced legal certainty for projects 

that are deemed not to be a development under the Act. This 

change will result in more consistent and predictable review 

processes by the ministry. 

 

The amendments include the ability to establish class 

assessment processes where projects have common 

characteristics. This should reduce proponents‟ costs and time 

by providing greater certainty about information requirements, 

desired outcomes, and standard mitigation measures. A 

regulation will be required to establish what kinds of 

developments may be subject to class assessment. Our intention 

would be to seek advice from industry and other stakeholders 

about what sectors of the economy might benefit from a class 

assessment approach. 

 

The amendments will update and modernize offence and 

penalty provisions. These provisions have not been amended in 

close to 30 years and are completely out of step with other 

jurisdictions. The financial penalty amounts have been 

significantly increased and are now a more credible deterrent to 

non-compliance with the requirements of the Act. Financial 

penalties for non-compliance will be increased from $5,000 to 

$500,000. In addition the possibility of penalties for a 

continuing offence will increase from $1,000 per day to 

$250,000 per day. Courts will have new powers to impose 

additional financial penalties and requirements that offenders 

repair or restore environmental damage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in closing, extensive consultations have occurred 

with industry and stakeholders, and we are acting on their key 

recommendations. The proposed amendments to The 

Environmental Assessment Act will contribute to enhanced 

environmental protection in our province. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

now move second reading of The Environmental Assessment 

Amendment Act, 2009. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — The Minister of 

Environment has moved second reading of Bill 122, The 

Environmental Assessment Amendment Act, 2009. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member from 

Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 



3930 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2009 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It seems 

to be an afternoon for the environment this afternoon, Mr. 

Speaker. We seem to be trying to push all this out the door, or 

off the minister‟s desk anyway, before the end of session. She‟s 

probably had it stacked on the corner for a while. But whatever, 

we‟re glad to see it here, and we‟re glad to have a bit of time. 

Once this session ends for Christmas, it will give a bit of time to 

be able to do consultations with stakeholders and look at the 

specifics of the Bill. 

 

It was interesting, Mr. Speaker . . . I think I‟m rummaging 

around through the wrong set of explanatory notes. But there 

was a couple questions that have come to mind for me, just 

looking at the legislation and listening to the minister‟s 

comments that were made. The changes to The Environmental 

Assessment Act, again we‟re making the changes that will be 

appropriate for changes in other Bills with the results-based 

model that this government is looking to move to. 

 

Also the minister made comments about more predictable 

review process. And I mean it just kind of caught my attention, 

and there‟s a number of questions that I have to ask on the 

ministerial determination respecting proposed undertaking. 

And, Mr. Speaker, when you move down to section 7.5: 

 

“Approval required to proceed with development 

 

If the minister makes a determination pursuant to clause 

7.3(1)(a) that the proposed undertaking is a 

development, the applicant shall not proceed with the 

development until the applicant has received ministerial 

approval to proceed with the development pursuant to 

section 15.”  

 

Or section 7.6: 

 

“Approval not required to proceed with undertaking 

 

If the minister makes a determination pursuant to clause 

[again] 7.3(1)(b) that the proposed undertaking is not a 

development, ministerial approval to proceed pursuant 

to section 15 is not required”.  

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what I was doing is flipping through, looking 

for definitions, and how this would affect whether it is a 

development, what constitutes a development, and what does 

not. And I was looking also in the explanatory notes which I 

will have to do in more detail, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But I guess 

all in all, Mr. Speaker, The Environmental Assessment Act and 

the changes that are being proposed, there is a great deal of 

interest from many of my colleagues. 

 

And I know the minister made the comment that many people 

have been consulted. So as we get farther along in this process 

and we have an opportunity to ask questions of the minister, we 

would like to know who exactly was consulted, how broad of a 

cross-section across the province had input or were consulted in 

any of these pieces of legislation when it has to do with the 

environmental assessment or management and protection of the 

environment. These are all important, and we need to make sure 

that we have a good base to move forward in this age when all 

of these issues are top of concern for many, many of our 

constituents. 

And we can see the impact, and we can see the need for 

regulation and for changes in the way we live. And I know 

many, many people looking at these three pieces of legislation 

more as a group and the environment as a whole, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. Many people as individuals have made changes in 

their lifestyle, changes, whether it‟s their homes or their 

business or the vehicles we drive to make sure that our footprint 

on this earth is not as drastic as what it may have been in a 

number of decades ago — or not even that far ago — but within 

the last short period of time. 

 

And I know that citizens also expect governments to make sure 

that they are taking the appropriate steps, putting in place the 

appropriate legislation and regulation to make sure that the life 

that we enjoy here in the province of Saskatchewan and beyond, 

in fact the world . . . There isn‟t a day go by when you don‟t 

turn on the news or read the newspaper or pick up a magazine 

and read an article about concerns about the environment, 

things that are changing that we do have some control over, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And citizens will all agree that there needs to 

be action taken. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this, along with the other pieces of 

legislation that we have touched on today, we have heard the 

minister‟s comments. But I know there are many, many 

questions, and I know a number of my colleagues are anxious to 

make comments on these pieces of legislation. But in the 

meantime, there are stakeholders that we need to discuss with 

and sit down and look at the legislation in detail. So at this time, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would adjourn debate on Bill No. 122, 

The Environmental Assessment Act. Thank you. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — The member from 

Moose Jaw Wakamow has moved adjournment of debate on 

Bill 122, The Environmental Assessment Amendment Act, 2009. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 123 — The Forest Resources Management 

Amendment Act, 2009 
 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the Minister 

of Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. After 

my remarks I‟ll be moving second reading of The Forest 

Resources Management Amendment Act, 2009. 

 

More than half of Saskatchewan is forested, and these forests 

are vital to both our ecology and our economy. Sustaining our 

forest ecosystems and the industry sector that depends on them 

are both important parts of the Ministry of Environment‟s 

mandate. To better fulfill this important commitment, the 

ministry is moving towards a results-based environmental 

regulatory system. Using the results-based framework, we will 

focus on achieving critical environmental outcomes while 

streamlining regulation and encouraging innovation. 

 

The amendments before us today are part of a suite of 

legislative changes needed to implement this framework. The 



December 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3931 

amendments will help our forest industry adapt to changing 

competitive pressures while continuing to meet high 

environmental standards. As part of a results-based regulatory 

approach, the amendments will achieve several important 

objectives. The changes will place a greater emphasis on using 

the expertise of forestry professionals to achieve clearly defined 

results. Licensing requirements will be streamlined in a variety 

of ways. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, these amendments have been developed 

following extensive discussions that include industry, both large 

and small; environmental groups; and forest professionals. 

These discussions revealed broad support for the general 

approach and for specific changes that we are proposing. We 

continue to work with First Nation and Métis people to find 

meaningful approaches to incorporate their interests as we 

move forward on the results-based environmental regulatory 

system. 

 

The amended legislation will enable a regulatory system that 

moves away from controlling activities with permits to 

requiring the regulated parties to meet defined objectives to be 

established in the Saskatchewan environmental code. It calls for 

a greater reliance on audits to ensure that licensees are 

achieving environmental performance objectives and are in 

compliance. 

 

The amendments removing licensing requirements for activities 

posing a low environmental risk, activities such as berry 

picking and research activities, instead of needing a permit, 

those pursuing such activities will now comply within the 

environmental code. 

 

The legislation calls for greater transparency and public access 

to information. New provisions will allow all information 

submitted as a requirement of the legislation to be made public 

except in cases where information is confidential or proprietary. 

The amended legislation provides authority to require those 

who damage Crown land or Crown forest products to fix that 

damage. It provides for an enhanced preparation and approval 

process for 20-year forest management plans, and it eliminates 

the need for a separate environmental assessment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a key objective of these amendments is to help 

Saskatchewan‟s forest sector grow and thrive. Therefore the 

government will continue to work closely with industry to make 

sure that these changes are effective. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the amended legislation supports the core 

principles of high standards of environmental protection, 

operator accountability and transparency and processes and 

information. These amendments will allow the government to 

provide responsive and effective leadership while fostering 

competitiveness and innovation. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

now move second reading of The Forest Resources 

Management Amendment Act, 2009 . 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — The minister has moved 

second reading of Bill No. 123, The Forest Resources 

Management Amendment Act, 2009. Is the Assembly ready for 

the question? I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And again we are dealing with a piece of legislation, Bill No. 

123, The Forest Resources Management Act, and it also makes 

related amendments to The Parks Act that deals with or is 

connected to the previous three pieces of legislation. 

 

And again we are looking at changes to accommodate a 

results-based model which I don‟t know whether we are all 

comfortable with or we all understand the true impact of. But 

that‟s part of what we need to do in our discussions that we will 

have with stakeholders and amongst my colleagues and 

interested parties when we are looking at these Bills and the 

impact that they will have and the changes they will make and 

whether it‟s, again, pluses or minuses and how it‟s seen by the 

general public and the organizations that will be affected by 

this. 

 

Now it‟s interesting too that we have The Forest Resources 

Management Act coming before us on a day when we had a 

number of questions brought forward about Big River and the 

disagreement or — I‟ll try and be kind here, Mr. Speaker — the 

misunderstanding as to how the FMA was divided, and the 

seemingly poor communications that there was between the 

minister and the community of Big River and the issues that 

they‟ve been dealing with there. Because while we stand in this 

House, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and we deal with legislation and it 

quite often seems quite remote from our day-to-day lives. And 

many people, when they look at the language that‟s used in 

legislation or may even hear us speaking about it, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, may feel that it doesn‟t affect them on a day-to-day 

basis either. 

 

[15:15] 

 

And that‟s one of the things that we have to realize, that 

legislated changes that we are looking at today and every day 

that we look at legislation in this Assembly, it does affect 

people, and it does affect citizens of Saskatchewan. Sometimes 

it‟s a benefit. And we always hope that it is more of a benefit 

than the legislation that it may be replacing, instead of a 

hindrance or a detriment to citizens, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Now 

we all know that you can‟t keep everyone happy all the time. 

But we truly do work towards providing improvements for the 

majority of Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

So when I look at this — and it sounded pretty straightforward 

from the comments that the minister said — it seems to be 

largely about the ability for contracting for audits of provincial 

forests. And I‟m not sure how far that goes or what kind of an 

effect it has, but I guess the first things that popped to mind for 

me is, who pays? How does this all flow together because none 

of these issues are dealt with in isolation. They affect 

communities. They affect individuals. And they affect 

companies, both large and small. 

 

So some of this basically gets down to who pays. Many of the 

companies that deal in forest resources in this province are 

small companies. There are some larger ones, but many are 

small community operations. Does this affect them or doesn‟t 

it? Is it a good thing for those companies, or is it something that 

could be detrimental? And those are all issues that we need to 

look into, that we need to have more discussion on. 

 



3932 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2009 

The minister also talked about removing the licence for . . . 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Why is the member on 

his feet? 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — In order to make an introduction, sir. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — The member from 

Carrot River Valley. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you. And thank you to the member 

for allowing me to speak. It‟s not very often I get to make an 

introduction in this House, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because not 

many people come from the Great White North down here to 

visit us. 

 

In the west gallery, Mr. Speaker, there is Mrs. Kathy Lindsay 

who is a member of our executive, has travelled all the way 

from Arborfield down here to watch a proceeding of the 

legislature. So I would like all of our members, all the members 

of the House to please welcome her to her legislature. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 123 — The Forest Resources Management 

Amendment Act, 2009 

(continued) 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And it‟s always nice to have a bit of a break when you‟re 

speaking to legislation. And I know members of this Assembly 

are always happy to have constituents that show up at the 

legislature, I think maybe just checking to see if the MLA is 

actually working or what he‟s doing. That could be part of it, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, but always a privilege to have constituents 

show up here in the Assembly. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, part of the comments that the minister made 

on Bill No. 123, The Forest Resources Management Act is the 

removal of licence for activities of low environmental impact. I 

believe that was the terminology that was used. And there‟s a 

number of questions. Who determines whether it‟s low 

environmental impact? If there is a removal of licence and 

permit, how would we know what the activity is until after the 

fact? Now maybe I‟m being rather simplistic in my comments 

here, but this is just one of the areas that there is a number of 

questions. 

 

After the fact, it‟s pretty difficult to remediate damage that can 

be done in a number of these areas. I would say that forests in 

the province of Saskatchewan and the ecosystems that are there 

are slow to recover in many areas of our province. All you have 

to do is go to areas where there has been forest fires or there has 

been other work done. Trees don‟t have an unusually speedy 

growth pattern in the province of Saskatchewan. So how do you 

start going back into the forests and remediating damage that‟s 

been done after the fact? So while it does sound simpler and it 

may remove what some may view as red tape, it also leaves a 

number of areas as to what this actually will help or what it 

won‟t. 

 

Now I‟m not sure, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what the whole point of 

this is and why we feel that removal of so many areas, whether 

it‟s the licensing, whether it‟s the checks that are to be done 

upfront, and going to this results-based model. I really need to 

see if this has been put in place in other jurisdictions and, if it 

has proved to be successful, what kind of issues they are 

running across and what kind of, I guess, successes there have 

been with the whole system because this results-based model is 

being put through all of the environmental legislation in this 

province by this government. 

 

And I would feel and I think many stakeholders and many of 

my colleagues would feel much more comfortable if we had a 

good understanding of where it has been successful in other 

areas because there are questions. When we see one piece of 

legislation that will require emissions standards, we don‟t want 

to be out of sync with the federal government or the United 

States, but yet in other pieces of legislation the minister seems 

quite comfortable to strike out and do something unique to 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So it‟s a bit of a contradiction, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it 

causes a number of areas of concern and question, and that‟s 

what my colleagues . . . we will be doing this work over the 

next few months. So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, while many of my 

colleagues are anxious to get up and speak to this legislation 

also, at this point in time to allow for discussion with 

stakeholders and some research to be done on this legislation, at 

this point in time I would adjourn debate. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — The member from 

Moose Jaw Wakamow has moved that we adjourn debate on 

Bill No. 123, The Forest Resources Management Amendment 

Act, 2009. Is the Assembly ready for the question? Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Yes. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Is it agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 114 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 114 — The Small 

Claims Amendment Act, 2009/Loi de 2009 modifiant la Loi de 

1997 sur les petites créances be now read a second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Fairview. 

 



December 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3933 

Ms. Junor: — Saskatoon Eastview, thanks. Thank you, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. The small claims court is very often the only 

recourse that many people have, given the fact that they can‟t 

afford a lawyer or if their claim or their problem is not of a 

major, major content. So it‟s sort of the last resort for many 

people, and that‟s why I think the minister categorized it rightly 

as the people‟s court. 

 

And I think the Act itself has had many changes over the last 

few years, and I have served on a legislative instrument 

committee of the NDP government when we were in 

government and saw this Bill come through several times. One 

of the things that I was very pleased to see that over the years 

we‟ve raised the limit, the claim limit to 20,000 and also put in 

case management. 

 

Whatever strengthens the process to make it fair and equitable 

so that the people who use it actually find it useful, 

understandable . . . and it meets their needs to get justice and 

recourse in many ways, sometimes financial. The Act itself 

apparently has four relatively significant changes, and those 

we‟ll be interested in exploring more in depth when it gets to 

committee. 

 

The first change does allow for a judge to order a judgment 

against a party summoned to small claims court, and we have to 

make sure that people who use small claims court — which are 

usually people who aren‟t that familiar with the law and who 

don‟t come with a lawyer to represent them — understand how 

this works and that the case management between the two 

parties is fair to both parties. The judge then ordering a 

judgment will be interesting to see how this works. 

 

The second change apparently is going to mandate that the 

claim, the summons, be delivered personally or by registered 

mail to ensure that the party knows they‟re involved in the 

claim. Well this is a bit of a narrowing of the range of ways that 

the defendant can be contacted. It is reasonable to believe that 

someone having a claim made against them should be aware of 

the claim, and this change would likely provide a higher degree 

of certainty that the person against whom the claim is being 

made is aware of the claim. 

 

The third change will allow a judge to consider evidence that 

would not strictly speaking be considered legal evidence. Now 

that is something we have be really clear about. What does that 

mean? What kind of evidence that‟s not considered legal 

evidence can be brought into a process that is clearly a court 

process so how would you determine . . . How is that going to 

be determined and what will be the limitations on it and what 

will be the definition of it? 

 

We need to make sure that people know that what‟s being 

presented in people‟s court, since it is their court, is fair to 

them, that they understand what‟s happening and that they 

understand the kind of jargon that‟s being spoken. Since they 

don‟t have any legal counsel, they do rely on the fact that this 

should be as easy as possible for them to use to meet their 

needs, and they probably need a fairly clear definition of what 

is evidence. And it will be fairly technical, I imagine, but it has 

to be understandable, too, when people talk about this being the 

people‟s court, that the majority of people would understand it. 

 

And the fourth change refers to the setting aside of default 

judgments, and the parties should now be able to get a judgment 

in the absence of the other party. That‟s interesting to see how 

that would happen, that both parties that don‟t have to be 

present. It‟s not exactly clear what that means. By one party not 

showing up, the process may not be quite as satisfactory. And 

I‟m not sure how that‟s going to work, so I‟m interested to see 

what questions and what answers we will get to these questions 

when the Bill gets to committee. 

 

It‟s going to be very interesting also to see the consultation 

because if this is the people‟s court, how were the people 

consulted? People that use the court, people that have used the 

court, that may use the court, how were they consulted? And 

how do we gather information about what improvements need 

to be made to this process to better meet the needs of the people 

that use it? 

 

These amendments do seem reasonable on the surface, if it 

strengthens the Bill, as I said. Being the people‟s court, then we 

have to make sure that the people that use it find it easy enough 

to use and that it does meet their needs and that there are 

successful judgments and fair judgments, and what else do we 

see that could maybe make the Bill stronger and perhaps meet 

some of the needs of the people that we haven‟t heard. 

 

So I‟m interested particularly to see who was consulted and 

how. And I‟m not just interested in who‟s been consulted from 

Justice. I‟m interested to see how the people who use small 

claims courts will actually be represented in this. So we will 

have some work to do as well as the opposition to scrutinize the 

Bill and to ask the questions in committee of how this will 

better serve the needs of the people who come to small claims 

court expecting fairness and recourse. 

 

So I think that the Bill itself has certainly some things that we 

like to see, that we want to see strengthen it. I‟m hoping that 

small claims court doesn‟t become something that is too 

wrapped up in legalese and that there isn‟t a deterrent to the 

public to use small claims court because for many people, that‟s 

it for them. They don‟t have any other recourse. And I would 

hate to see that people would be turned away from this one 

avenue of receiving justice or receiving financial recourse or 

recompense for losses or damages that they have incurred. 

 

So I‟m anxious to see how this strengthens that, and also how 

people see not only these amendments, but to see what else can 

come forward. And perhaps there‟s other things that we might 

have missed because we don‟t know who was spoken to. So the 

consultation on this one I think is interesting. I would really like 

see who‟s been consulted and reach out on our own to consult 

the people that we need to speak to. 

 

At this time, I think I will adjourn debate. I know there‟s . . . 

Okay. Sorry. We‟re not going to adjourn debate. There‟s other 

people that want to speak to this, and I‟ll certainly take my seat 

then and allow those members to speak. Thank you. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from Regina Dewdney. 

 

[15:30] 

 



3934 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2009 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I‟m 

extremely pleased this afternoon to enter into the debate on 

what is a very important set of amendments to a Bill that is 

often referred to in many cases as the people‟s court, Mr. 

Speaker, and that even has more relevance to today. 

 

And just about any major network in the United States, there 

are several shows that talk about small claims courts where 

people can in fact make, place before a judge cases dealing with 

a dispute between two individuals. And, Mr. Speaker, we‟ve all 

seen those popular court shows on television, Mr. Speaker. 

Here in Canada, we don‟t have those individual shows 

portrayed. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it is nonetheless a very important vehicle for 

people to bring forward a dispute between themselves and 

another individual over generally monetary issues, Mr. Speaker, 

where there is a difference of opinion in regards to a settlement 

of a monetary issue or for that matter, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a 

settlement of an issue or division of property and those very 

similar types of circumstances, Mr. Speaker. When I have a 

claim against an individual or somebody else would have a 

claim against me for not having repaid a loan given to them, 

those types of things generally appear before a small claims 

court. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in Canada here, it‟s often referred to as the 

people‟s court because it‟s a relatively inexpensive vehicle to 

seek resolution to a dispute. It is generally or the option is 

generally there to do it without legal assistance, without having 

a lawyer present. It allows some variation from the very, very 

strict rules of evidence that are expected in the criminal system, 

Mr. Speaker, in the higher courts. And for those very simple 

reasons, Mr. Speaker, many people refer to it as the people‟s 

court. 

 

Now from time to time with any piece of legislation like this 

that exists, you need to examine the legislation to see that in 

fact that the Bill itself reflects what is actually being undertaken 

by the court, what the expectations of the population is in 

dealing with these issues before the court, and to make the 

process as user-friendly as possible, yet maintaining the balance 

between fairness and ensuring that the judgments that are 

brought forward by the court in fact meet the standard and test 

of law, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And in doing so, Mr. Speaker, from time to time the court itself 

will recommend changes from time to time. The law society 

would recommend changes. And, Mr. Speaker, even for that 

matter, citizens who have participated in the small claims 

process may make a number of recommendations to their 

members of the legislature about things that could be done to 

both make the system easier to use, more accessible, to allow 

settlement of an issue if an individual didn‟t appear, as an 

example. 

 

One of the things that a plaintiff may have difficulty in getting a 

judgment would be because the person in which the plaintiff is 

making a case against doesn‟t appear in small claims court. And 

in the past, Mr. Speaker, the legislation only allowed an order to 

be established if a defendant did not appear in small claims 

court. 

 

So now the new legislation makes four, I would say, 

fundamental changes which on the surface we all see as very 

positive. They‟re the type of changes that both make the system 

easier, make it more user-friendly, allow the judge to seek 

resolution when a defendant would attempt not to attend the 

court when they have been asked to do so. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, so the four changes really meet that test, I 

believe, at least on the surface meet that test of improving the 

system, making it better, making it more expeditious when there 

is clearly an intent by a defendant not to participate in the 

process by trying to avoid participation in a process and thus 

delaying the fact that they may be accountable to the plaintiff 

and, Mr. Speaker, in many cases owe that plaintiff some sort of 

monetary penalty. 

 

I‟m going to spend a few minutes dealing in detail with some of 

the changes that are in this particular piece of legislation 

because I think it‟s important to do so. The first change 

explicitly allows for a judge to order a judgment or to make a 

judgment against a party summoned to small claims court who 

failed to appear at the case management conference between the 

two parties. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the judge would set aside a time for a case 

management conference on a particular issue before him. Both 

parties would be notified of the time to appear before the judge 

to make their case and bring their evidence and have the 

opportunity to share their position on the events that occurred 

that resulted in the dispute — what the potential loss of the 

plaintiff was, what mitigating factors would be considered, Mr. 

Speaker — and make their case before the judge. 

 

If you failed to do so in the past, all that the judge could do was 

make an order. He couldn‟t actually make a judgment in the 

absence of the defendant actually appearing in the case 

management conference, Mr. Speaker. But now with this 

amendment, if it‟s clear to the judge that there is an individual 

simply trying to avoid accountability, avoid their responsibility 

in this issue, Mr. Speaker, they in fact can make a judgment and 

that judgment then can become enforceable, Mr. Speaker. And 

that is an improvement. 

 

So it allows, when a judge has determined that an individual 

who has been notified about the case management conference 

— and the process allows for how that is done; it has to be done 

in a way that he can confirm that in fact the defendant has been 

notified — and if the defendant fails to appear without giving 

any justification for the failure to appear, Mr. Speaker, then the 

judge can in fact act upon the evidence before him and make a 

judgment. 

 

This is a new provision, but it is clearly there to help make the 

process expeditious and to deal with it, Mr. Speaker. I would 

have to say that in the small claims court process there is also 

some balance to that. If as a result, let‟s give an example: 

somebody ended up in the hospital, couldn‟t notify, there is a 

process to set aside a judgment. Then an appeal that can be 

made and a judgment set aside in that case, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The second major change now mandates that the document that 

begins a claim, the summons, be delivered personally or by 

registered mail to ensure the party knows they are involved in 



December 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3935 

the claim. Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is just an additional step to 

ensure that the respondent understands that he is in fact 

involved in a claim and somebody is making a claim against 

him. It now requires personal service or registered mail, and 

what it does is expands registered mail. As we all know in this 

Assembly, if you receive registered mail, you have to sign for it 

and acknowledge that in fact you have received that document. 

 

So rather than just, in the past, personal service, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, which required the hiring of a sheriff or an individual 

to deliver that and to assure that it was delivered personally, Mr. 

Speaker — often a lawyer or somebody working in the 

employment of a law firm or the courthouse, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, or a commissionaire hired by them — in this case you 

can in fact deliver by registered mail as long as the registered 

mail is received and signed by the individual who in fact should 

receive that summons. 

 

But again as it may seem like a relatively small or simple 

process, Mr. Speaker, but it allows for the delivery of 

summonses perhaps for as low as, you know, 3 to $5, compared 

to hiring somebody to do extensive research and maybe 

spending three to four hours and maybe many attempts before 

actually delivering that summons. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, again it streamlines the process and makes it 

more affordable and makes it more user-friendly and makes the 

system more readily used and more accessible to the average 

citizen, which is what the people‟s court or a small claims court 

is all about. It does however provide a higher degree of 

certainty that the person against whom the claim is being made 

is made aware of that claim because they actually have to sign 

it. 

 

The third change will allow a judge to consider evidence that 

would not strictly speaking be considered legal evidence. And 

this is just to clarify, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what has in many 

people‟s minds been the practice for some time in the small 

claims court because you‟re not using . . . Many people both 

appear for themselves as a plaintiff and defend themselves as 

the defendant or respondent, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The use of 

lawyers is not as common as you would see in criminal courts, 

Mr. Speaker.  

 

And in order to make it more user-friendly, the strict adherence 

to the laws of evidence that say it has to be done in such a 

manner are relaxed to allow for the introduction of evidence in 

a more free-flowing, normal environment in a case conference, 

Mr. Speaker, without the strict legal requirements often 

required by the courts and under the rules of evidence. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that doesn‟t mean that they accept hearsay 

or they accept evidence that isn‟t relevant or evidence that is in 

fact not evidence, but it does just relax the rules in order that the 

ordinary citizen can in fact represent themselves with relative 

ease versus having to hire expensive representation from a 

lawyer. And, Mr. Speaker, that is again another amendment that 

makes the process more simplistic and user-friendly for those 

who may seek to use the small claims court process in order to 

seek resolution to a dispute between themselves and another 

individual. 

 

Mr. Speaker, because individuals are often not represented by 

lawyers, they do not have the legal knowledge and the legal 

terminology that a lawyer would have. The allowance of this 

consideration and expansion of what is viewed as evidence just 

makes it easier for the individual to bring forward the 

information, as long as it‟s germane to the case. It allows the 

judge to hear the information in the words of the other plaintiff 

or the respondent. And the judge simply in this case, because 

it‟s a case management conference, can ask questions of 

clarification to make sure that he‟s getting the information he 

needs to have in order to really understand what occurred from 

both parties — both the respondent and the plaintiff. 

 

It‟s a process which has long been used to settle what are called 

financial disputes between people, claims between friends and 

neighbours in some cases that result in difficulties. But it‟s a 

process that over the years has become more and more 

cumbersome in some ways. And these amendments are taking it 

back to more of the stance where ordinary people in fact can use 

this process without the assistance of the legal system or 

without the assistance of a lawyer. 

 

The fourth change refers to the setting aside of default 

judgement, and there a party would now be able to get a 

judgment in the absence of the other party. Now, Mr. Speaker, 

this is another change that is a check and balance in the system 

to ensure again that this particular piece of legislation is 

reflective of what‟s the common sense approach to applying 

justice to the settlement, Mr. Speaker, and to ensure that in fact 

it can be set aside if a judgment has been made that has been 

incorrect. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is however a 90-day limit on the ability to 

set aside a judgment. Again that is a common sense approach, 

so that if you have a settlement, the settlement stands, it is not 

appealed and the judgment‟s set aside within 90 days. Mr. 

Speaker, I had spoke earlier about where you might have a 

situation where somebody wasn‟t able to appear because being 

in the hospital and not able to necessarily notify the court, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I‟m looking at these changes and the impact it 

would have on the small claims court system. It is an 

improvement. It does in fact allow for some enhancement to the 

flexibility of the system to allow for people to gain both access 

to the system, to seek a judgment, to appear before the case 

conference and make their case without having to have that 

legal representation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, where the circumstances exist that you‟re seeking 

a summons, again from an individual through a third-party 

claim, there‟s a number of things that are considered by the 

judge in doing so. Is it being done without reasonable grounds? 

Does it disclose no triable issue? Or is it frivolous or vexatious 

or an abuse of the courts process? 

 

[15:45] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the court also has processes in place to ensure 

that the claims being brought before are real, that there is 

actually a dispute that is in fact possible to have a trial or make 

a judgment upon, and that there are reasonable grounds to 

believe that what is being suggested has occurred, Mr. Speaker. 

 



3936 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2009 

But they also, because these issues are financial in nature in 

most cases, Mr. Speaker, if not always, there‟s always the 

position of the judge before issuing a summons to look at it 

whether it‟s frivolous or vexatious and an abuse of the court‟s 

time and processes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Again these are important responsibilities of the court. The 

small claims court process, Mr. Speaker, should not be looked 

at without giving it the importance that it should have, without 

examining it in the spirit in which the law demands that it 

should be considered, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Our current process, whether it‟s the small claims court process, 

Court of Queen‟s Bench, are all important to establish a fair and 

reasonable society, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that the rights of 

individuals are upheld both in their commercial transactions as 

well as in their behaviour and, Mr. Speaker, in ensuring that we 

have an orderly society through the enforcement of our criminal 

code. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the small claims process is used largely on 

the commercial side to deal with disputes of a commercial 

nature between either two companies or two individuals. But, 

Mr. Speaker, there are times when it‟s between an individual 

and a corporation, or an individual and a company. Mr. 

Speaker, again the intent of the small claims process is not to 

put at a disadvantage an individual who could not afford a 

lawyer or legal defence, Mr. Speaker, in the case if they were 

dealing with a corporate entity. 

 

So all these things are taken into consideration by the small 

claims court process. And the considerations we have before us 

today help make that process be even more fair and 

user-friendly. And, Mr. Speaker, I say on the surface once 

again, that these are in fact processes that I think that we can 

support on principle. 

 

Of course we will continue to seek advice from stakeholders 

who are concerned about the outcomes of changes like these. 

We will talk to the Law Society, Mr. Speaker. We will talk to 

others who are involved in the court process and ask them if 

they believe these changes are, in fact, improvements to the 

current process. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that consultation will take some 

time. We just can‟t automatically assume that because a Bill 

comes forward that appropriate consultations have been done. 

So we will take some time and we will meet with the various 

stakeholders we think that are necessary to examine these 

changes to ensure that those stakeholders believe these are the 

appropriate changes. 

 

Like I said, on the surface we believe they‟re good changes. But 

we will take the opportunity to speak to those who deal with 

these processes on a more regular basis to ensure that they 

believe that these are improvements to the process, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, seeing that that will take some time and 

seeing as we‟re not in a position to move the Bill forward as a 

result, Mr. Speaker, I would move we now adjourn debate on 

Bill No. 114. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — The member from 

Regina Dewdney has moved adjournment of debate on Bill 114, 

The Small Claims Amendment Act, 2009. Is it the will of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 115 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 115 — The 

Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2)/Loi n
o
 2 de 

2009 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour du Banc de la 

Reine be now read a second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It‟s my 

pleasure this afternoon to rise and speak on The Queen’s Bench 

Amendment Act. And as a lawyer of many years, Queen‟s 

Bench Act is always an interesting Act to look at and see all of 

the different things that are included there. 

 

And I think the amendment Act, Bill 115 that we have here 

before the House this afternoon, provides some of the variety 

and the interesting things that show up in this particular 

legislation. In some ways, it‟s a bit of a catch-all Bill. It deals 

with a number of issues from many different places. 

 

And so Bill 115 makes a number of amendments to the Act, and 

they look like they‟re procedural or housekeeping changes. But 

there are some changes that actually have some fairly broad 

effects, and I would like to spend some time this afternoon 

going through what the changes are and provide my comments 

on this. I think that most of them are probably required at this 

time, but questions will arise, and so I will make some of my 

comments. 

 

Now the first area that‟s dealt with in the legislation is basically 

a provision that is of much interest to historians and to the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan because it relates to 

when did the laws take effect in this province. And basically 

what happens in every jurisdiction in Canada, and there are 

different dates for this to happen, depending on which province 

you‟re in, but in Saskatchewan the date that we actually can say 

that we received English statute law has been set as July 15, 

1870. 

 

Now that‟s a bit of a curious date for the province of 

Saskatchewan, given that our province was created in 

September of 1905. So what is the significance of July 15, 

1870? Well basically that‟s the date set out in The North-West 

Territories Act which was a statute of Canada, statute from our 

federal parliament in 1886. And it was basically the date when 

Rupert‟s Land, which is a huge tract of land, was transferred. 

Rupert‟s Land was transferred from the Hudson‟s Bay 

Company of Canada to the Government of Canada. 

 

And I think many people know that the original company of 

Hudson‟s Bay was set up in 1670. And so for 200 years, the 



December 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3937 

charter that was given to the Hudson‟s Bay Company had many 

of the rules about the territory on which we are now located, in 

other words the territory which drains into where the rivers and 

waters drain into the Hudson Bay. 

 

So basically then in 1870 there was a transfer of this land to the 

federal government from the Hudson‟s Bay Company. At the 

same time, the rule was set that the existing statute law of 

England on that day was therefore the law that was passed into 

or is in effect in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now it seems like a bit of a strange concept, but what it really 

relates to — and you don‟t see it show up as an issue very often 

— but it relates to, sometimes in Saskatchewan or in the 

Northwest Territories from 1870 to 1905, there aren‟t statutes 

that actually deal with specific problems that arise, whether 

they be contract law or domestic law or family law, state law, 

some of these things. And so lawyers have this tool available to 

them to go and see what the statute law of England was on July 

15th, 1870 and to see if there‟s any law that we inherited at that 

time that would actually solve the problem that we‟re dealing 

with. It doesn‟t happen that often, but it is something that can 

provide a remedy in very, very interesting situations. 

 

And that‟s one of the true benefits of our legal system, is that 

it‟s based on precedent and previous solutions to problems. And 

then with the assistance of lawyers and judges and others, we 

take these older concepts and re-adapt them for whatever the 

specific problem you‟re trying to solve in the 21st century. 

 

So what this particular amendment will do in The Queen’s 

Bench Act is basically include this provision in The Queen’s 

Bench Act so that we can get rid of a previous Act the law has 

declared an Act, and also make it much more accessible to 

everyone as it relates to this particular use. And there aren‟t that 

many places that still have copies of the old legislation that 

would confirm this, and so this is a way of cleaning up the 

statute books and making it simpler for everyone. 

 

So it‟s an important historical step. It‟s important to recognize 

the heritage law that we brought into Saskatchewan with this 

particular system. And it also is part of the history of our 

province. It begs the question in some sense though of what 

happens with traditional law and traditional solutions that were 

available in this territory that we live in, this land that‟s covered 

by treaty.  

 

And it‟s possible that in future generations we may develop 

some method whereby we can incorporate all of the rich 

solutions that come from some other systems of law to 

complement what we have here. I‟m not sure it‟s possible that 

those things would show up in The Queen’s Bench Act as 

another amendment or we may do it in some other fashion, but 

it is a recognition that the law has the ability to change and 

adjust and deal with existing or new problems. 

 

Now another section of this legislation, section 4, is basically 

clarifying some issues that the Law Reform Commission of 

Saskatchewan identified a few years ago when they did a report 

on The Trustee Act. And effectively there are orders that a court 

will make around an order for sale of land or where there‟s an 

order for specific performance of a contract concerning land, 

and some of these provisions were in the old trustee Act. It was 

suggested by the Law Reform Commission that they should be 

moved out of that place and put into The Queen’s Bench Act. 

And what is being done here is effectively taking up that 

suggestion from the Law Reform Commission. 

 

And once again, this shows the value of the Law Reform 

Commission and the kind of work that they can do. It‟s not 

necessarily a large organization, but it has some very capable 

people that work there and identify problems within our laws in 

Saskatchewan, and on a very organized basis over the years, 

review the law in particular areas and then provide advice. 

 

And I‟m pleased to see that the Ministry of Justice has taken 

this opportunity to take the advice from the Law Reform 

Commission and their 2002 report on The Trustee Act, which 

allows for a more organized way of setting out the provisions 

for vesting orders on a judgment order for sale of land or where 

there‟s a judgment for specific performance of a contract 

concerning land. 

 

[16:00] 

 

Now the next section of the Bill, and as you can tell, they kind 

of move all over the place, but the next section of the Bill 

relates to conveyancing issues and it‟s a continuation of some 

of the points that I was just making. And so it‟s including these 

specific orders around specific performance, around land 

contracts. 

 

Now the next section, which is section 6, this is an interesting 

one, and I think it‟s probably important to talk a little bit about 

this. Basically this section reads this way. It says, “The cause of 

action for breach of promise to marry, arising under the 

common law, is abolished.” It‟s not that often that we take 

concepts from the common law which have developed over 

many centuries and then effectively abolish them. 

 

And in this, in the comments that the minister made about this 

when he brought the Bill forward, he indicated that there‟s a 

probable reason to believe that this kind of an action may be 

unconstitutional and that it doesn‟t reflect current views. 

 

I think I understand what he‟s saying. He didn‟t spend a lot of 

time explaining it, but one of the issues that comes up under this 

particular legislation relates to the fact that promises to marry 

were often arranged by families under the common law 

whereby it wasn‟t just a relationship between a man and a 

woman. It was a relationship between their families and also 

their assets. And there were situations where damages could 

happen to a party or parties where a marriage did not go ahead. 

 

And so traditionally, there was a remedy whereby if one family 

or person . . . and it eventually, I think, got back to the two 

individuals involved where for example a large engagement 

ring was purchased by one person for another, and then the 

marriage was called off. The person who had purchased that 

large engagement ring might have some damages related to the 

price of the ring in the sense that it was arguably a used ring 

when he tried to return it to the merchant that had sold it to him. 

And therefore there would be some remedy in providing cash to 

that person from the woman or from her family. 

 

Now this is not necessarily a concept that has been used very 



3938 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2009 

often. But there have been cases where this particular remedy 

has been available, and it can relate to things as ordinary — I 

guess it‟s maybe not ordinary, or extraordinary maybe is the 

right word — as all of the expenses involved in setting up the 

wedding, arranging for the church or other facility for the 

wedding, all of the banquet costs, and all of the other costs that 

are related to a very large wedding. And so the question is 

whether there is some other place where a remedy might be 

available in a situation where a marriage is called off, and I 

don‟t know if we have an explanation for that or some other 

place where this could be dealt with. 

 

Now the minister seemed to say that this doesn‟t reflect current 

views, and I think I once again I understand what he‟s getting 

at. But there are situations where much expense is incurred, and 

what remedies are available for these people? So this may be 

something that we will have to further examine as we move 

forward with this and also as we ask some questions in 

committees. I don‟t think we have some of the larger contract 

issues involving families and their interrelationship. I don‟t 

think we have in Saskatchewan quite the same situation as we 

might have had a number of centuries ago in England, but there 

still are some questions that arise in this area. 

 

Now it may be that this change actually relates not to the breach 

of promise to marry, but it might just relate to breach of 

promise. And this government may actually not want to have 

those words anywhere in the common law or the statute law of 

Saskatchewan given the kinds of breaches of promises that 

we‟ve heard the last few weeks around Saskatchewan. 

 

And I don‟t know if I need to go through and enumerate a 

number of these, but I think it‟s clear that many of the things 

that were set out by the Premier are not going to happen, and 

what we‟ve been hearing is some fairly feeble explanations of 

why various promises are going to be breached. So it may be 

that this particular legislation is here to abolish any kind of 

action for breach of promise. If it‟s simply that, it‟s not breach 

of promise to marry. So it‟s interesting and it‟s possible. 

 

Now the next provision goes in completely another way, and 

it‟s quite an interesting one as well. And the explanation for this 

provision which relates to a totally new concept which is 

allowing for the enforcement of monetary penalties and cost 

awards made by Agreement on Internal Trade panels in the 

same way as judgments of the Court of Queen‟s Bench. 

 

Now effectively what this does is reference the Agreement on 

Internal Trade which is effectively the Free Trade Agreement or 

trade agreement between the provinces of Canada and other 

similar ones, so they‟re what we call domestic trade 

agreements. And basically these agreements have included in 

them various types of penalties or costs that can be awarded by 

a panel which is effectively like a court or like a group of 

experts who provide a judgment. And so this will allow for the 

enforcement of these kinds of decisions and effectively give 

these orders similar powers as a judgment of the Court of 

Queen‟s Bench. 

 

Now this is something that is being done, as I understand it, by 

agreement of all of the provinces across the country, but it does 

raise or add another element in how our trade is managed or 

dealt with, and it adds some penalties and cost awards for 

breaches of these agreements which we do not have in our 

system at this time. 

 

Now we know in Saskatchewan that we are the province that 

trades the most of our goods of any province in Canada, and so 

any time that there appears in legislation something which may 

cause some difficulty with trade, we need to examine it quite 

closely. And so I think that as we move forward in looking at 

this particular piece of legislation, we need to understand what 

it is that is being placed here and understand what kind of effect 

it may have on some of our businesses, on how we actually 

govern, what effect does it have on Crown corporations. 

 

And so basically one of the clear clauses in this particular 

section 7 of The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, which is the 

Bill we‟re talking about here, says that an award against the 

Crown, so the section 89.2: “If an award is made against the 

Crown, the person entitled to the award may file a certified 

copy of that award with the court if the Domestic Trade 

Agreement permits the award to be enforced in the same 

manner as an order against the Crown made by the court.” 

 

So what we‟re saying here is we‟re going to give the ability to a 

commercial enterprise or an individual or a co-operative or 

whatever to get an award against Government of Saskatchewan 

or one of its agencies and have it registered as a court order in 

the court, based on a domestic trade agreement and the terms of 

that domestic trade agreement. So effectively what it does is it 

adds an extra jurisdictional extraterritorial power to these 

domestic trade agreements, and it could have financial 

consequences for businesses and people within our province. 

 

When we end up with these kinds of things coming before the 

legislature, we need to make sure we totally understand what 

we‟re doing, and we need to understand what are the longer 

term consequences. 

 

I recall that some of the discussion that took place around the 

Free Trade Agreement discussion during the ‟80s was then 

moved forward into the ‟90s around what were some of the 

enforcement procedures and what kinds of things did they 

affect. And it took many, many hours and sometimes years of 

negotiation and review to make sure that some of the original 

intentions were kept as we move forward with some of the 

enforcement processes around the Free Trade Agreement. 

 

And as we know, there have been a number of situations where 

those processes have not turned out the way we in Canada 

thought and have actually caused further consternation both for 

businesses and for governments. So we want to make sure that 

this particular part of The Queen’s Bench Act which relates to 

the enforcement of awards made pursuant to a domestic trade 

agreement does not have some hidden problems in it that are 

going to create extra issues for the businesses and people that 

we have in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now I know that the Minister of Justice has laid out that these 

are coming forward from some national discussions, but I know 

from experience that sometimes the solutions which look like 

they‟re national in scope have particular problems in particular 

regions. And so that will be one thing that we will need to look 

at. I think a good example of that was clearly some of the gun 

control legislation. Might have made sense in some of the big 



December 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3939 

cities, but it didn‟t make sense in many parts of the country, and 

it‟s continued to cause a lot of difficulties for everybody. 

 

So the vested trade agreement enforcement provisions which 

allow for awards made by a panel, not by judges, but made by a 

panel to be enforced as if they were judgments of the Court of 

Queen‟s Bench, this can be a positive thing in some ways, but 

we need to be very thorough in how we examine this and what 

we do as we look at this going forward. And so I would say this 

is another area where we will have more comments from some 

of the members as we move forward. But also as we get into 

committee, I think there‟ll be a lot of questions to make sure 

that, on the record, we have a clear picture of what the 

government‟s intention is when it brings forward this particular 

part of The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2009. 

 

[16:15] 

 

So basically working our way through the Act, we‟re getting to 

a little farther down in this particular process. But practically 

another change that‟s made in the legislation relates to the 

regulatory power, and this basically will allow for the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council, the cabinet, to put in place 

regulations as to some of the procedures around enforcement of 

awards made under domestic trade agreements. That‟s one layer 

removed from the legislature. 

 

It may be that, before this Bill is passed, we will need to see the 

draft regulations as it relates to this so that we can understand 

the full effect that it will have on businesses and on people in 

Saskatchewan. The last thing that we need now is anything 

that‟s going to add further complications for our businesses that 

trade or operate across the country. And let‟s talk about that 

before the law comes into effect rather than trying to sort things 

out later. 

 

Now I think the other provisions of this legislation relate to 

some of the items that I‟ve already discussed. And so I‟m in a 

position where I think these things will not end up causing any 

difficulty. 

 

So basically we have legislation then that has made . . . In this 

sort of grab-all Act, The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2009 

(No. 2), there are amendments in areas basically eliminating the 

cause of action for a breach of promise to marry. Another one 

is, we‟re looking at setting out the rules of how you enforce 

orders made by a panel under the Agreement on Internal Trade. 

But it doesn‟t just apply to the Agreement on Internal Trade. It 

applies to all domestic trade agreements. 

 

And one of the factors there that I haven‟t talked about but I 

think we may need to explore as we move forward in questions 

is, does this in any way apply to the discussion that we had on 

the TILMA [Trade, Investment and Labour Mobility 

Agreement] process or the rather mysterious Western Economic 

Partnership Agreement which we haven‟t heard about at all 

even though there was information to say it was going to be 

signed before the end of the year? 

 

And so if in fact this legislation has something to do with those 

particular agreements, then we need to more fully explore that 

as well. So here I‟m now trying to make sure that some of these 

important issues are highlighted and so that we can actually go 

forward and make sure that we will have on the record, both 

here in our comments at this stage but also especially in 

committee when we ask questions, we can have it clearly on the 

record, what is the intention of the government? 

 

It is quite interesting to note and listen to the speeches made by 

the various ministers on Bills, but especially, you know, 

listening and then going over and reading Hansard on Bill 115, 

that sometimes the explanations are quite short and don‟t 

necessarily set out all the policy reasons that are there. That was 

especially noteworthy today, little earlier today, when we had 

some fairly major processes being described in the 

environmental legislation. And we had very, very short, not 

very informative speeches about those Bills. 

 

I know from experience that the comments of the ministers are 

very crucial as judges try to interpret the laws that we pass in 

this legislature later. And so therefore it‟s important that we get 

clear statements when the Bills are introduced and that we get 

clear answers as we go into committee about the Bills so that on 

the record the policy is there which will explain the rationale for 

what happens. So in this particular Bill, we will look forward to 

the comments from ministers and officials when we get to the 

committee stage, but we‟ll also look forward to other comments 

from some of my fellow members on this side of the House 

because I know others are interested to discuss these as well. 

But at this point I will ask that debate be adjourned. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 115, The Queen’s 

Bench Amendment Act, 2009. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 117 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Heppner that Bill No. 117 — The 

Hunting, Fishing and Trapping Heritage Act be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

It‟s a pleasure to join in the debate today on Bill No. 117. I 

should state right off that I‟m a kid that was born and raised in 

north central Regina, and in terms of my connection to trapping 

or hunting and fishing, it‟s not something I grew up with 

walking out the back door. 

 

But I have to say my father, who‟s tied into a century farm out 

Montmartre way, as a young boy, as a man growing up out in 

that neck of the woods, he was an avid hunter, fisher, and 

trapper and certainly did his best to pass that along to his kids. 

And in terms of the hunting, fishing, and trapping, my older 

brother, Ian, had a wider range of exposure to the hunting side 

of things. But in terms of the trapping, I have to say that one of 

the memories that stands out for me from my childhood, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, is the winter that we, my younger brother Neil 



3940 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2009 

and I, accompanied my father out to the homestead and haunted 

the old trapline that he used to run as a young man. 

 

As kids growing up, of course we had paper routes and we 

collected bottles. That‟s how we made our money. But my 

father of course, his source of income as a young man growing 

up was his trapline. And they had some winters that were good 

for the muskrat, the weasel, and a few others, but that was how 

he made his money as a kid growing up in addition to the work 

they do on the farm. But I was about 10 or 11, Mr. Speaker, and 

my brother a year younger, and we got to spend a week out on 

the big slough and on different points on the farm and got to see 

what it was like to follow my dad around on the trapline. And in 

terms of, you know, setting up for muskrat in the muskrat 

lodges, the land that my father was raised on is particularly wet 

land, Mr. Deputy Speaker. When McCalls had initially settled 

the homestead quarter in the 1880s, they‟d let it go in the latter 

part of that decade because, as our ancestors at the time said, it 

was mostly good for growing ducks. 

 

But of course wetland is good for muskrats. It‟s good for the 

ducks. And when the patterns changed in terms of weather, at 

least for the time being, they were able to re-establish that 

homestead as part of the broader efforts by the McCall brothers 

at that time and re-establish the homestead in 1907. And that 

land has been in the McCall possession since, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

And it doesn‟t take too long, when you get out there tramping 

around, to realize what possibilities it held in terms of duck 

hunting and in terms of trapping. And although I‟ve never had 

the pleasure of going out with my dad and he‟s maybe a bit 

beyond that now in terms of his abilities, but in terms of getting 

out to hunt the deer into the big bush at the back of the property, 

there was certainly a lot of that, a lot of hunting, fishing, and 

trapping that was very much part of my dad‟s upbringing and 

was part of the lessons that he imparted to us McCall kids, and 

the importance of it not just to the province but of course to the 

McCall family. 

 

So we were, as members in the opposition benches, we were 

very interested to see this Act coming forward because this is a 

tremendous part of the heritage of this province. And in terms 

of the whereases that set up the reasoning for the Bill being 

brought forward, certainly there‟s a lot to be agreed with there 

and in terms of the role that hunting, fishing, and trapping 

played in the very establishment of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

In this Assembly of course, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the mace as 

we see it right now rests on a beaver pillow. And that beaver 

pillow is significant of what brought the Europeans out to 

Saskatchewan, primarily in the North initially, Mr. Speaker, 

was following the fur trade. And the interplay between 

Europeans and the people that were pushing the settlement 

west, the interplay between them and the First Nations, the 

original inhabitants of this territory, of course that meeting of 

peoples produced the Métis people. And you don‟t have to look 

too far back into the history of this province or into the history 

of this territory to realize the significance of hunting, trapping, 

and fishing to what even brings us here as a province and as a 

people standing in this legislature today. It‟s important. 

 

Again there are different aspects to this, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

You know, it‟s important to have these days that recognize what 

is our heritage as a Saskatchewan people, the things that have 

shaped and informed our history. And so from that perspective, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we think that it is quite good to bring 

forward an Act that recognizes the heritage of hunting, fishing, 

and trapping in Saskatchewan. In the last whereas, it says, “ . . . 

it is desirable to observe a day to celebrate hunting, fishing and 

trapping as an integral part of Saskatchewan‟s heritage.” And 

that‟s exactly right, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Of course we look at the environment in which this Act is being 

brought forward overall. We recognize that in terms of trapping 

it doesn‟t have the economic impact that it once did, perhaps, 

you know, 200, 300 years ago when this territory was first 

being opened in conjunction with the fur trade. We recognize 

that, but today it is still very important. In Canada as a whole, 

there are 80,000 people who work in the industry related to 

trapping. It‟s worth $800 million to the Canadian economy. 

And in Saskatchewan, as of perusing the statistics on the 

Department of the Environment‟s website, there are currently 

about 3,000 registered trappers, and they contribute about 2 to 

$3 million to the provincial economy each year. 

 

So it‟s not just part of our heritage, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but 

something like trapping is very much part of the day-to-day 

economic life of this province and in certain quarters in this 

province. And, you know, I get to talk to my colleague from 

Cumberland, my colleague from Athabasca, and there are 

people that make their livelihoods to this very day on the 

trapline. And some of those traplines have been in families for 

decades and generations, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

[16:30] 

 

In terms of hunting and fishing, of course that‟s an activity that 

is more widely dispersed throughout the province. Hunters and 

anglers, I believe, have spent about $1.5 billion in 

Saskatchewan on an annual basis. In 2005 there were 70,000 

people that hunted in the province. And in terms of the tourism 

take for the province, the hunters at that time accounted for 

about $107.5 million of the monies spent by tourism or related 

to the tourism industry, which is 8 per cent of the industry‟s 

take overall. 

 

And that economic activity has resulted in more than 1,000 

jobs. You know, and again you think of the more than 200 

outfitters that are dispersed through the province and the fact 

that hunting, fishing and trapping, but particularly hunting and 

angling, are part of their day-to-day reality and their day-to-day 

bread and butter, the fact that they‟re bringing people to the 

province. They‟re bringing people to opportunities to hunt the 

white-tail, to hunt moose, to hunt the black bear or the ducks, 

the geese, the pheasants that are hunted. 

 

I know my colleague, the member from Rosemont, is an avid 

hunter and fisher. And certainly he‟s, I think, he‟s got his 

seasonal take for pheasant this year, Mr. Speaker. I think he was 

down in the member from Cannington‟s neck of the woods 

doing a little pheasant hunting just this past weekend. 

 

And I know that in his case, as is the case with many families, 

that‟s an activity that was handed down from his parents and 



December 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3941 

from his grandparents and from their great grandparents. And 

again I think that chain of, that transmission of knowledge and 

learning and appreciation for the rich, natural bounty that we 

have in this province, the appreciation that people have for this 

tremendously diverse environment that we have in 

Saskatchewan and the way that people are able to interact with 

that through hunting and fishing, I think of the way that that‟s 

worked in his family. I think of the way it‟s worked in my 

family. 

 

And you know, that to me is a very real embodiment of what 

heritage is all about. It‟s about those things that are important to 

us as a people. It‟s about those things that, again, have shaped 

our history and our economy. And hunting and fishing, I mean 

that certainly shaped the settlement patterns in this province. 

You think about where we stand, here on the shores of the 

mighty Wascana, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Of course, through the Great Plains once is where the buffalo 

roamed, and in some quarters the buffalo are roaming once 

again. Certainly down in the member from Cypress Hills, in his 

territory, the way that the buffalo have been reintroduced and 

are making a comeback in the grasslands, it‟s a way that . . . It‟s 

not just about our history or our heritage, but the way that we 

should strive as a society to put out safeguards to nurture these 

things, to really, if they are important to us, make those 

decisions and investments to bring these things back. 

 

So that the buffalo herds are roaming once again in the 

grasslands at least, we think is a good thing. Or the fact that the 

buffalo, in terms of the herds that are in existence in the P.A. 

National Park again, these are daily reminders. This is a daily 

reality that connects us to our heritage. 

 

And as the fur trade was one of the main reasons that the 

waterways like the Churchill, one of the storied historic fur 

trade routes in this province, the way that that influenced the 

bringing of people into this province and the bringing of people 

together in terms of the First Nations, the Métis, and the 

settlers, you don‟t have to go too far out of places like 

Deschambault or in through Missinipe or into Ile-a-la-Crosse 

territory to recognize that that heritage is not just in the past but 

it‟s again part of our living reality. 

 

But if you don‟t pay attention to conservation, if you don‟t pay 

attention to the way these hunting practices, these trapping 

practices, the fishing, if you don‟t . . . There are improvements 

that are always made. 

 

And you always have to pay attention to the conservation 

aspect, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I think that people that hunt 

and fish and trap, in many ways they are on the front lines of 

conservation. They are the people that recognize the fluctuation 

in terms of animal populations and the way that this affects the 

ability of people to hunt and fish. You know, if the animals are 

gone and if the fish are gone, you of course cannot hunt or fish. 

 

And so in a very interesting symbiotic way, wildlife 

management is something that hunters and fishers and trappers 

in this province were miles ahead of the general population in 

terms of their interest in preserving natural habitat, in terms of 

the proper management of wildlife and the way that we need to 

govern these things as a province through our laws and through 

our budgets. 

 

In terms of the Bill, I‟d be remiss if I didn‟t recognize that I was 

glad to see that clause no. 3, the non-derogation of Aboriginal 

rights, was included. Of course this is a fairly standard 

non-derogation clause that is included in different pieces of 

legislation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but it was good to see that it 

states: 

 

Nothing in this Act abrogates or derogates from any 

existing Aboriginal and treaty rights to hunt, fish or trap of 

the Aboriginal peoples of Canada that are recognized and 

affirmed by section 35 of the Constitution Act, 1982. 

 

So in terms of that non-derogation of Aboriginal rights, we‟re 

glad to see that in the Bill. 

 

We would have been happier . . . We were happy to see the 

different stakeholders that came forward to mark the 

introduction of this legislation into the House, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, but we couldn‟t help but notice that in the people that 

were introduced in terms of, you know . . . The first hunters and 

fishers and trappers in Saskatchewan, or in the territory that 

comprises Saskatchewan, they were of course First Nations. 

And then when the Europeans came, of course the Métis people 

grew and took force, and certainly in terms of different parts of 

this province that the Red River wagons used to move the Métis 

across this territory, in some places where those tracks are still 

dug into the clay of this prairie. They of course were very 

important to this. 

 

And when we speak of the heritage of hunting, fishing, and 

trapping, that heritage is not just for Aboriginal people, not just 

for the First Nations and Métis in this territory, but the way that 

that heritage should bring us all together into some kind of 

understanding of the roles that we‟ve played historically and of 

the ways that we should be able to move forward collectively as 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

So again when the Bill was introduced, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

looked to the galleries and again I was quite happy to see the 

representatives from the different stakeholder groups. But I 

couldn‟t help but think that it was more than a little strange that 

there weren‟t First Nations in the gallery, that there weren‟t 

Métis in the gallery. 

 

And you know, we‟re about to celebrate 2010 as the Year of the 

Métis and the role that the Métis played in terms of the history 

of this province. And you think of somebody like Gabriel 

Dumont who grew to prominence in the Métis settlements in 

Saskatchewan, very much due to his prowess as a hunter and as 

the leader of the buffalo hunt and the role that Dumont played 

in that vital undertaking of the Métis people. 

 

Or you think of the great First Nations leaders, particularly 

around the time of the signing of the treaties. You think of 

someone like Poundmaker or Big Bear, or you know, to get into 

the woodlands a bit further, the Ahtahkakoop or Mistawasis or 

Piapot, the different First Nations leaders that in terms of 

hunting and fishing being their livelihood, the whole basis of 

their economy, and the fact of the disappearance or the 

overhunting, the hunting to extinction of the buffalo, and the 

way that settlement hastened that extinction, Mr. Speaker. And, 



3942 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2009 

you know, the terrible hunting practices of certain unscrupulous 

operators, the wolvers and the buffalo skinners. 

 

You think about the way that they had their lives impacted and 

the disappearance of the buffalo and that being the foundation 

of their whole way of life. And you think about the bravery and 

the vision and the foresight of somebody like Ahtahkakoop that 

said, the buffalo are gone, so education will be our new buffalo. 

And the foresight that leaders like Ahtahkakoop had in terms of 

recognizing the hard, hard challenges of their day, but 

recognizing that something like education would provide for the 

people in a way that the buffalo used to. But the fact that they 

had to come to terms, come to amends in terms of signing 

treaties and in terms of provisions in those treaties around 

education and moving the wherewithal or the well-being of the 

people forward. 

 

So again it would have been very good to see the First Nations 

and the Métis represented in the gallery as this Bill was 

introduced, because who is more integral to the heritage of 

hunting, fishing, and trapping in the province of Saskatchewan 

than the Métis and the First Nations. 

 

I know for yourself, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you know, I think the 

last time I was out in your riding, we spent some time together 

in Kawacatoose where again, there were people that were 

pursuing education in terms of getting those tools to succeed in 

a modern economy. 

 

I know that you have an understanding of someone like 

Kawacatoose — or Poor Man as he was called at the time, le 

maigre — and those treaty signatories that again were 

transitioning their people as best they knew how from a hunting 

economy based on the buffalo into this new world of an 

agricultural-based economy, an industrial-based economy, and 

the challenge that we have to this day, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 

terms of making sure that the benefits of this broader economy 

are shared equitably and fairly across this province. 

 

So in terms of a heritage day to represent or to celebrate the 

integral role that hunting, fishing, and trapping have played in 

the foundation of Saskatchewan and the settlement and the very 

lifeways of a people, we think it‟s appropriate to have a Bill that 

celebrates this. But as the celebrations, or as this marking out of 

an important day and of an important lifeway, as that continues, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we look with great interest to see if the 

celebration is joined by all the people who should be joining in 

the celebration. 

 

And again, who better to join in that celebration than the 

original hunters, fishers, and trappers — the First Nations. Who 

better to join in that celebration than a people that very much 

owe their existence as a people to the interaction between the 

European population and the First Nations as it related to 

hunting, fishing, and trapping? 

 

So again it‟s good to participate in this debate. To go back into 

my childhood again a bit, Mr. Speaker, if I can bring some of 

these points forward, certainly one of my father‟s favourite 

books growing up was North to Cree Lake, ironically about 

prairie boys that fled the Great Depression and the dust bowl of 

the ‟30s and made their way north, moving through P.A. up to 

Big River — and Big River, of course, which was much in the 

discussion here today, Mr. Deputy Speaker — and then used 

Big River as a jumping-off point to go north to Cree Lake, as 

the book is titled. 

 

[16:45] 

 

And certainly that was a book that my father handed to me at a 

very young age. And in terms of the tremendous quality of life, 

the hard work that these trappers had in terms of always 

working to make sure that you‟ve put away enough game for 

the winter, and the hard work that‟s involved in establishing and 

maintaining a trapline. It‟s a book that I very much enjoyed 

reading and is one of my favourite books now, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

And in terms of again literature that provides a window into 

what is the heritage, the history of this province, into the 

different life experiences that people have had throughout this 

province, the vast diversity of this province, I think a book like 

North to Cree Lake is one of those important books in terms of 

the history of this province, in terms of the heritage of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I think about the stories that different of my colleagues have 

been able to impart to me, having the opportunity to be up north 

with our colleague from Athabasca, who‟s of course based out 

of Ile-a-la-Crosse. And the ability to go out fishing for an 

afternoon there, Mr. Deputy Speaker and, you know, the beauty 

of the natural environment and the bounty of the fish that were 

available. We caught a fair amount of jack, but we certainly got 

a couple of pickerel to boot. And then taking the catch back in, 

the skill and dispatch with which the people we were with were 

able to fillet those fish right up, and just the fact that this has 

been part of the lifeways for generations in a community like 

Ile-a-la-Crosse. 

 

Or the opportunity I had this summer to spend some time with 

the Woodland Cree at a gathering at Grandmother‟s Bay just 

north of La Ronge, Mr. Speaker, north of Missinipe. And for 

the Woodland Cree of course — Lac La Ronge Indian bands, 

Montreal Lake Cree Nation, and Peter Ballantyne Cree Nation 

— again these are three First Nations where hunting, fishing, 

and trapping is not just about heritage. It‟s about a day-to-day 

reality. 

 

But they see that heritage as a way to teach young people skills, 

to teach them self-reliance, to teach them pride, and to pass 

along those cultural lifeways, but to teach them, you know, very 

fundamental things about what it is to be alive on these prairies, 

on the northlands. Mr. Deputy Speaker, you‟ll forgive me. And 

it was tremendous to see the kohkoms and mushoms going out 

with the mothers and the fathers and the little kids, and to see 

three, sometimes four generations in a family out there fishing, 

and then the tremendous work that was done afterwards to, 

again, to process that day‟s catch and then the tremendous fish 

fry that ensued thereafter. And of course there‟s nothing quite 

as tasty as a shore fish fry after a great day out on the Churchill 

and in that system. And that certainly stands out as a 

tremendous memory for me, Mr. Speaker, and for me serves as 

a great reminder of the heritage of fishing, hunting, and 

trapping in this province. 

 

When I think about the work, I think about our colleague Joan 



December 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3943 

Beatty — who is no longer in this place of course, Mr. Speaker, 

but is again based out at Deschambault or has returned home to 

Deschambault — and the work that her family had done and her 

father had done in terms of setting up co-operatives in that part 

of the province, but the fact that through it all ran this lifeline, 

this lifeway of hunting, fishing, and trapping. 

 

And you know Joan, her ability to get out on the moose hunt in 

the fall and do her part in terms of, you know, not just bagging 

a moose but getting that moose all trimmed up and cleaned and 

then the processing of the moose, the mooswa, you know again, 

you have a hard time in thinking of some things that couldn‟t be 

more symbolic or typical of the heritage of this province. And 

the way that the Beatty family approached the moose hunt and 

the pride that is taken in the trapline by families like the 

Beattys, again you couldn‟t think of anything that‟s more 

directly connected to the past but also shows the way forward 

for the future. 

 

And in a lot of these . . . you know, you spend much time in 

northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. You hear very clearly 

from the elders there the hope that they hold out for these 

activities in hunting and fishing and trapping for teaching young 

people the pride and the culture, and that‟s the bush craft, the 

wisdom that you need to have if you‟re going to run a 

successful trapline or if you‟re simply going to get enough to 

eat for that winter, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I think about the 

good work of things like the Trappers Association up north and 

the way that, like primary producers anywhere, they‟ve got 

challenges in terms of price of fur, the environmental 

conditions. 

 

But the fact that they‟ve persisted with pride and the fact that 

organizations like that hold out that hope to transmit that 

understanding, that knowledge, that wisdom on to the next 

generation, and that they rightly view it as part of something 

that should be a source of pride, that should be a way for young 

people to become adults, to take on that maturity, to develop as 

human beings. And again to have that appreciation for mother 

nature and our rich, natural environment, but at the same time to 

know what it takes, the tremendous level of skill that is 

involved in if you‟re going to be a successful hunter or trapper, 

what you have to know in terms of the patterns of the animals 

involved or the fish. 

 

If you‟re going to catch fish, Mr. Speaker, you‟ve got to know 

where the fish are. And the way that that understanding and that 

vital connection to nature and to the animals and the fish — let 

alone to the winged beasts, the birds that are hunted — again 

very quickly you find out if that‟s going to be part of your 

livelihood, you have to pay attention to conservation. You have 

to pay attention to the best practices in terms of making sure 

that that resource is not just there for you, but that it carries on 

for generation to generation. So as these elders in these 

communities want to pass along that knowledge to their 

children and their children‟s children, so there is as well an 

understanding that they need to manage and to steward the 

resource — the animals, the fish, the birds — if their children 

are going to have the opportunity to have that as part of their 

livelihood as well. 

 

So again you think about the way that hunting, fishing, and 

trapping is part of the lifeways of many of our northern 

communities. You think about the way that it impacts right 

across this province. We‟re a province of a million people, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

And certainly my colleague from Regina Rosemont, as I was 

saying earlier, he‟s an avid hunter and fisher. And he‟s a lot 

better with a filleting knife than I am, Mr. Speaker. I‟m not 

ashamed to admit that. If it was up to me, we‟d probably be 

eating more fingers than fillets if I was left alone to my own 

devices to take the day‟s catch and turn it into the fillets ready 

for the frying pan, but not just a great hunter, fisher, outdoors 

person, but also a good teacher too, in terms of passing along 

some of those skills that I missed in terms of my learning 

around the bushcraft and being able to fillet a fish. 

 

I haven‟t been able to return the favour in terms of showing him 

some of the finer points of what it takes to skin a muskrat and to 

stretch the hide, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and to take that down to 

the — in our case — to Isman Hide and Fur or what was Isman 

Hide and Fur here in town, and to get our price for the catch. 

But perhaps, perhaps that day will come. Or maybe we can 

settle off on just maybe some pheasant hunting. He can show 

me the finer points of that, and that can be our particular 

contribution to the heritage of hunting, fishing, trapping, in this 

province. 

 

So again I want to . . . I‟m coming close to the end of the clock 

here, Mr. Speaker, but I want to state again, this is not just 

important to our heritage, but hunting, fishing, and trapping 

offers a great opportunity for First Nations, for Métis people, 

for non-First Nations to go forward and to develop a greater 

appreciation of the rich bounty in mother nature in this 

province, to develop a more direct connection to the natural life 

of this province. 

 

And again in Saskatchewan we have such a diversity in the 

environment from the prairies and the grasslands to the 

woodlands and parkland to the North, Mr. Speaker. You know, 

again coming from the South, the great scarcity of water that we 

have in many parts of this province in the South, when you go 

to the North of course the thousands of lakes that we are so 

blessed with in this province and their importance in terms of 

that, you know, not just to the heritage of this province and the 

different fur trading activity up and down a place like the 

Churchill River and the fact that, you know, Stanley Mission 

and Cumberland and all of these different settlements were the 

first sort of European settlements in this province and their 

importance to our history. 

 

But it‟s not just about our heritage, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It‟s 

about how we not just celebrate these things but how we 

steward them to take them forward so that these opportunities 

are not there just for us, but they‟re there for our children and 

our children‟s children and their children‟s children. And again 

so it‟s not . . . It‟s good to have a day to celebrate the heritage. 

But if we‟re not taking the appropriate steps around wildlife 

management and the stewarding of the natural habitat, if we‟re 

not paying attention to that, Mr. Speaker, then we‟re not doing 

right by those generations to come. It would be a poor state of 

affairs indeed if we were to tell our grandchildren that, you 

know, there isn‟t anything left for you because we took it all. 

 

So in terms of the conservation that something like this or the 



3944 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2009 

attention and the importance of conservation that an Act like 

this suggests, we‟ll be looking very closely at the rest of the 

balance sheet here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in terms of the actions 

of this government and how that either balances out with the 

celebration presented in The Hunting, Fishing and Trapping 

Heritage Act. We‟ll be looking to see how it balances out in 

terms of The Wildlife Act, The Fisheries Act, the migratory 

birds convention, how it plays out in terms of bringing First 

Nations, Métis, and the rest of the people in Saskatchewan 

together in terms of moving this forward together. 

 

We‟ll be looking for the ways in which that heritage is brought 

to bear not just on one day every year, but how we can use that 

rich heritage to perhaps, in places — like I think of Sandy Bay 

— in places like Sandy Bay to impart that wisdom and that 

knowledge and that opportunity for development and human 

potential, to use that heritage to bring those things along and to 

pass wisdom from one generation to the next and, in the 

process, make that next generation richer and fuller and more 

capable of reaching their potential as human beings on this 

planet. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it‟s been a pleasure to participate in 

this debate. Again we‟re glad to see a day coming forward in 

terms of the celebrating the heritage, but we look forward to or 

we look very closely at the actions that are taken not just to 

celebrate the heritage, but to secure the heritage for generations 

going forward. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The time of adjournment having been 

reached, this House now stands adjourned until 10 a.m. 

tomorrow morning. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3913 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3913 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3913 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3913 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3914 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3914 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3914 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3914 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3914 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3914 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3915 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3915 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3915 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3915 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3915 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3932 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3915 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3915 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3915 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3916 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3916 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3916 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3916 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3916 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3916 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Support for the Regina & District Food Bank 

  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3917 

 Remembering Victims of Violence 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3917 

 Celebrating the Last Post Fund’s Centennial 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3917 

 Education Funding 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3917 

 100th Anniversary of the Cadet Instructor Cadre 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3918 

 Birds of a Feather 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3918 

 Movember, A Great Success 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3918 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Provincial Finances 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3919 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3919 

 Big River Saw Mill 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3920 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3921 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3921 

 Participation in Elections 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3922 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3922 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 129 — The Enforcement of Money Judgments Act 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3924 

 Bill No. 130 — The Enforcement of Money Judgments Consequential Amendments Act, 2009 

 Loi de 2009 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Enforcement of Money Judgments Act 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3924 

 Bill No. 131 — The Conservation Easements Amendment Act, 2009 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3924 

  



 

 Bill No. 132 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection (Land Designation) Amendment Act, 2009 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3924 

 Bill No. 133 — The Tobacco Control Amendment Act, 2009 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3924 

 Bill No. 134 — The Opticians Act 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3925 

 Bill No. 135 — The Prescription Drugs Amendment Act, 2009 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3925 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on House Services 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3925 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3925 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 126 — The Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases Act 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3925 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3926 

 Bill No. 121 — The Environmental Management and Protection Act, 2009 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3927 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3928 

 Bill No. 122 — The Environmental Assessment Amendment Act, 2009 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3929 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3930 

 Bill No. 123 — The Forest Resources Management Amendment Act, 2009 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3930 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3931 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 114 — The Small Claims Amendment Act, 2009 

 Loi de 2009 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur les petites créances 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3933 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3934 

 Bill No. 115 — The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2) 

 Loi no 2 de 2009 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3936 

 Bill No. 117 — The Hunting, Fishing and Trapping Heritage Act 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3939 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium Development 

Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

 Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

Government House Leader 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. James Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Capital Commission 


