




















































Hansard: October 27, 2009


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 4A  TUESDAY, OCTOBER 27, 2009, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3223 

 October 27, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟d like to 

introduce representatives from the livestock industry seated in 

the west gallery. 

 

If they‟d wave when I call their name, first I‟d like to introduce 

Jack and Kim Hextall from Grenfell. Jack is the president of the 

Sask Cattlemen‟s Association. Also I‟d like to introduce Ryan 

Beierbach — he‟s from Whitewood and director of the 

Saskatchewan Stock Growers Association — and Chad 

MacPherson, general manager of the Stock Growers. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to introduce representatives from the 

Canadian Cattle Identification Agency. We have Danielle 

Oberle and Amber Havens who are here for the voluntary 

traceability announcement this morning. I appreciate them 

coming today and welcome them to their legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty‟s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s my pleasure to join with 

the minister in welcoming the Cattlemen‟s Association and 

stock growers here to the building. And, Mr. Speaker, I know 

that the traceability issue is a big concern not only here but in 

many parts of Canada, many parts of the world that import meat 

products from other countries. I know a lot of hard work has 

gone into this by the stock growers and the associations 

involved, and I want to congratulate them for their hard work. 

And we‟ll be raising other issues around cattle, beef production, 

pork production with the minister later. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you in your 

gallery are members of the HIV/AIDS [human 

immunodeficiency virus/acquired immune deficiency 

syndrome] and hepatitis committee and the Hemophilia Society 

of Saskatchewan. From Regina is Ann and Dick Wood. Ann is 

the past president of — if you just wave at us — the 

Hemophilia Saskatchewan, and both are members of the 

Saskatchewan bleeding disorder community. Along with them 

are Elaine Zech who is the vice-president of Hemophilia 

Saskatchewan; A.J. Zech is Elaine‟s son and is a board 

member; Irene Cook; and from Perdue is Celena and Daryn 

Moody — they‟re board members — with their three beautiful 

children, Rylee, Kierra, and Ayden. And Faye Katzman is also 

from Saskatoon, the past-president of the Hemophilia 

Saskatchewan, member of the Canadian Hemophilia Society 

HIV/hepatitis committee. 

 

A number of the MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] 

attended a special ceremony out in front dedicating a tree in 

memorial to the tragedy of some years ago with the tainted 

blood. And I ask all members to join me in welcoming them to 

their Legislative Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟d like to join with my 

colleague from Saskatoon Northwest and, on behalf of the 

official opposition, welcome everyone here today from the 

Hemophilia Society, especially Faye — very nice to see you 

again — nice to see all of you here and such a wonderful 

occasion of the tree planting which I think I have a couple of 

words to say about later. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a pleasure to 

introduce to you and through you to all the members of the 

Legislative Assembly a group of students from Regina Public 

Schools Adult Campus seated in your gallery. 

 

They‟re accompanied by their teacher, Ryan Wood a.k.a. [also 

known as] Woody. It‟s good to see them here. They‟re regular 

visitors to the legislature, Mr. Speaker, and they‟re certainly 

representative of a very innovative approach to education that 

the Public School Board has undertaken, and it‟s grown by 

leaps and bounds over the last number of years. I know that my 

colleague, the member from Rosemont, takes a great deal of 

pride in having been one of the lead educators that helped get 

the ball rolling there with the adult campus. 

 

So please, Mr. Speaker, join me in welcoming these individuals 

to their legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to all members of the legislature, I‟d like to introduce a 

guest seated in the east gallery, Mr. Speaker — JR. I don‟t 

know JR that well, but he‟s best friends with my brother-in-law, 

Matt Johnson, who happens to be the nephew to the member 

from Lakeview here in front of me. And JR is a Saskatoon 

native but is currently living in Humboldt working for the 

United Church. So I welcome JR to the Assembly here. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present petitions in support of wage equity for CBO 

[community-based organization] workers. And we know, Mr. 

Speaker, that research demonstrates that CBO workers are paid 

on average 8 to $10 per hour less than employees performing 

work of equal value in government departments. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, I‟d like to read the prayer: 

 



3224 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2009 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

development and implementation of a multi-year funding 

plan to ensure that CBO workers achieve wage equity 

with employees who perform work of equal value in 

government departments. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And these folks come from Moosomin and Balcarres. Thank 

you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

in support of a long-term care facility in La Ronge. The prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately invest in the planning and 

construction of a new long-term care beds in La Ronge. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by the good people of La Ronge and area. I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition in support of fairness for Saskatchewan 

students. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately expand the graduate 

retention program to include master‟s and Ph.D. students. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — I rise today to present a petition, as I have on 

every day of the House in the first spring session and so far this 

session, on behalf of rural residents of Saskatchewan who 

question why the Sask Party government is leaving them behind 

with respect to providing safe and affordable water and who yet 

have not heard of any sign of a commitment of assistance from 

this government. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to financially assist the town of Duck 

Lake residents for the good of their health and safety, due 

to the exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency, and that this government fulfill its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

And the petitioners are the good residents of Duck Lake, I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition in support the maintaining the quality of health care 

services. Mr. Speaker, we all understand that it‟s important for 

the government to realize the utilization and full value of range 

of professional skills offered by health care providers as 

promoted to address retention and recruitment issues by 

ensuring safe staffing levels. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to commit to maintaining quality health 

care services and job security for all public health care 

providers. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petition is signed by residents from Abbey, Wymark, and 

Swift Current. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m pleased today to 

rise and present a petition in support of affordable housing in 

The Battlefords. Mr. Speaker, it is signed by residents of North 

Battleford, many of whom have faced rent increases of 40 per 

cent with no alternative housing opportunities. The prayer 

reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to call upon the 

Government of Saskatchewan to develop an affordable 

housing program that will result in a greater number of 

quality and affordable rental units to be made available to 

a greater number of people throughout The Battlefords 

and that will implement a process of rent review or rent 

control to better protect tenants in a non-competitive 

housing environment. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents as it relates to 

the unprecedented mismanagement of their finances, Mr. 

Speaker. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to start managing our 

provincial finances responsibly and prudently to ensure 

that it does not continue its trend of massive budgetary 

shortfalls, runaway and unsustainable spending, equity 

stripping from our Crowns, and irresponsible revenue 

setting. 

 



October 27, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3225 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And these petitions are signed, Mr. Speaker, by good folks in 

Moose Jaw, Arborfield, and Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu‟Appelle Valley. 

 

Health Care Providers’ Week 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased that the 

ministers of Health and Advanced Education, Employment and 

Labour have proclaimed October 25th to November 1st as 

Health Care Providers‟ Week. This proclamation recognizes the 

thousands of men and women that have provided critical 

services to patients across Saskatchewan. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I‟ll invite the member to start over. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased 

that the ministers of Health and Advanced Education, 

Employment and Labour have proclaimed October 25th to 

November 1st as Health Care Providers‟ Week. This 

proclamation recognizes the thousands of men and women that 

provide critical services to patients across Saskatchewan. Mr. 

Speaker, the men and women that we are celebrating this week 

are the foundation that build a solid health care system. Day in 

and day out, these men and women go to work, tend to the sick, 

the vulnerable, and the wounded. They mend the bodies and 

save the lives of neighbours, friends, and families. 

 

As Legislative Secretary to the Minister of Health, I‟ve had the 

opportunity to meet hundreds of dedicated health care 

providers. I believe that it takes a special kind of person to work 

in health care facilities — a person full of kindness, patience, 

and compassion. I hope this week everyone will realize how 

fortunate we are to have health care providers that take pride in 

their work and care so much for their fellow citizens. Thank 

you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I‟d just like to say I think it‟s certainly 

inappropriate and unparliamentarian to become so vocally 

involved that it‟s very difficult to hear statements by members, 

which side of the House. And certainly our guests will have 

difficulty. I ask members to appreciate the fact that members‟ 

statements are an opportunity to speak about something in the 

constituency or something you‟ve achieved. 

 

I recognize the member from Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Commemorating the Commission of Inquiry 

on the Blood System in Canada 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today marks the 16th 

anniversary of the appointment of Justice Horace Krever to 

head the Commission of Inquiry on the Blood System in 

Canada. Hemophilia Saskatchewan commemorated the 

occasion today by dedicating a tree of life on the grounds of the 

Legislative Building. 

This act of remembrance acknowledges Hemophilia 

Saskatchewan‟s profound loss and grief and reflects their 

ongoing commitment to the security and safety of the Canadian 

blood system. The tree of life is dedicated to those who died as 

a result of tainted blood, but it also recognizes the courage of 

those who live with the medical, emotional, and financial 

consequences. A memorial plaque was presented to Canada 

Blood Services in recognition of the advances made to protect 

the blood supply and make Canada‟s blood system one of the 

safest in the world. 

 

Congratulations to Faye Katzman and all of Hemophilia 

Saskatchewan for their continued vigilance on behalf of people 

living with bleeding disorders. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Heavy Oil Recovery Project 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like all 

members to join with me today in congratulating Petrobank 

Energy and Resources Ltd. for an exciting, innovative project 

announced this morning in Saskatoon. 

 

It comes as no secret that this province has an abundance of oil, 

much of it heavy oil. Saskatchewan has an estimated 3.4 billion 

cubic meters of heavy oil in place in west central region of our 

province. Today Petrobank introduced the province‟s newest 

conventional heavy oil project, Petrobank‟s Kerrobert THAI. 

THAI stands for toe to heel air injection project. This project 

has the potential to significantly grow the proportion of our 

heavy oil that can be recovered. This is not only good for oil 

producers but good for the province as well. The past two years 

has seen tremendous growth in our oil industry as companies 

respond to develop our untapped natural resources in 

Saskatchewan‟s new and attractive investment climate. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The fact that the THAI process is being spearheaded right here 

in Saskatchewan near Kerrobert shows that it‟s possible to 

pioneer and build a new technology sought across the globe 

right here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join me in 

congratulating Petrobank as they invest in our province and our 

future. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Fighting Poverty 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Last week 

was Poverty Awareness Week in Saskatoon. The theme was 

season of change, and the action, a call for a comprehensive 

strategy to eliminate poverty in Saskatchewan. 

 

The week was launched on Saturday, October 17, with nearly 

200 people in attendance at the Station 20 site to mark the 

United Nations‟ Day to Eradicate Poverty. It continued with 

several events including a community supper, lectures, writing 



3226 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2009 

workshops, and an arts evening. It culminated last Friday 

evening with over 100 people silently joining hands across the 

Broadway bridge to show solidarity for those living in poverty, 

acknowledging poverty affects us all on both sides of the river. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that freedom from poverty is an 

enshrined human right and that all citizens are entitled to social 

and economic security. We know Saskatchewan‟s income gap 

between the rich and the poor continue to grow, and now 1 in 5 

children in Saskatchewan live in deepening poverty. We also 

know that when governments reduce spending often social 

programs are cut first. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many times and in many ways communities have 

tackled poverty, but we know it is a struggle that we cannot turn 

away from. Mahatma Gandhi has said that poverty is the worst 

form of violence and I agree. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to 

join me in congratulating the Saskatoon Anti-Poverty Coalition 

for their continuing leadership fighting poverty in Saskatoon 

and throughout Saskatchewan. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Batoche. 

 

Duck Lake 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

member from Regina Walsh Acres is on a hypocritical crusade 

for the people of Duck Lake. She keeps asking what about 

Duck Lake? Well I‟m here to set the record straight. This is 

what our government has done for Duck Lake. 

 

Mr. Speaker, 66,000 for municipal economic enhancement 

program; 94,000 in operating grants; 375,000 for a new roof on 

the interpretive centre; 455.5 thousand to force similar 

contribution out of the federal Building Canada fund for water 

reservoir expansion and treatment plant upgrade; and 13.5 

million for a new school — that‟s our record on Duck Lake, 

Mr. Speaker, 15 million. 

 

What have the members opposite done for Duck Lake? I‟ll tell 

you: lip service, lip service. And in the terms of genuine pursuit 

of positive outcomes for the people of Duck Lake — precious, 

stinking little, Mr. Speaker. But — hey — it‟s becoming clear 

that‟s not what they care about. They‟d rather be hypocrites and 

play old-fashioned . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. I find that a little disturbing. We 

should have the respect, whether we agree or disagree with 

individuals, of not drawing individuals into . . . even statements. 

The member‟s time has elapsed. 

 

I recognize the member from Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Achievement in Business Excellence Awards 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Approximately 700 

people from across the province attended the 26th annual 

ABEX [Achievement in Business Excellence] Awards which 

occurred last Saturday, October 24th, in Saskatoon. I was 

pleased to attend this event recognizing the achievements of the 

province‟s business community. 

I‟m proud to say that this year 10 of the 15 awards handed out 

last Saturday went to companies based in my home community 

of Saskatoon. Two awards went to North Ridge Development 

Corporation which won Business of the Year as well as the 

award for customer service. Started as a part-time business 

venture more than 25 years ago, North Ridge has grown to 

become the province‟s largest residential development and 

construction company. 

 

In addition to North Ridge, 13 other companies and individuals 

were recognized with ABEX Awards. The Aboriginal Business 

Award went to Saskatoon-based Aboriginal Consulting 

Services which delivers awareness training, strategic planning 

for doing business with Aboriginal communities, and also 

publishes the Eagle Feather News. I‟m proud to recognize the 

achievements of President John Lagimodiere as a member of 

my constituency. 

 

Other Saskatoon winners include Ghost Transportation 

Services, Saskatoon Motor Products, Point2 Technologies, 

Pic-Man Tattoo, Team Drilling, TinyEYE Therapy Services, 

and Bio-Extraction Inc. Mr. Speaker, I ask all MLAs to 

recognize these individuals and companies who represent 

excellence in their field. Please join me in congratulating all the 

winners of the 26th annual ABEX Awards. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

The Spirit of Thanksgiving 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s my pleasure to 

rise in the House today as the bearer of good news. Since we 

didn‟t get the pleasure of celebrating Thanksgiving together this 

year, I would like to bring the spirit of Thanksgiving to all of 

you today. What better way to relish and give thanks for all the 

good news stories about Saskatchewan? And since the members 

across the way rarely appreciate the mashed potatoes and gravy, 

allow me to serve you a helping to really savour. 

 

Your main course: the giving-natured people of Saskatchewan. 

We are very thankful for them. We are thankful for residents 

like Leslie and Irene Dube who donated the largest individual 

gift ever to a Western Canadian pediatric hospital — $6.5 

million. We are thankful for the Friendship Inn, Souls Harbour 

Rescue Mission, and all the volunteers who helped serve hot 

and fresh Thanksgiving meals to the less fortunate. We are 

thankful for the huge pile of toys collected and donated for the 

Regina Motorcycle Association‟s annual toy run and from 

Roughrider fans. 

 

Living in Saskatchewan, you really can have your turkey and 

eat it too. Once you learn to truly appreciate all the fantastic, 

flavourful stories about Saskatchewan people, we know you‟ll 

be begging for seconds. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Staffing in Health Care Facilities 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 



October 27, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3227 

Premier. Mr. Premier, yesterday in the Assembly your Minister 

of Health admitted that he had ignored 1,300 separate occasions 

where, when getting the information that 1,300 times levels 

were unsafe in our hospitals, nursing homes, and labs under 

your own definition. 

 

To the Premier, and through you, Mr. Speaker: how do you 

support a minister who 1,300 times, when presented with the 

hard evidence, failed to protect the safety of the people of this 

province? How do you defend that minister? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, on a daily basis staffing 

levels will go up and go down in all of our health care facilities, 

whether they‟re acute care facilities, whether they‟re long-term 

care facilities, whether it‟s home care, Mr. Speaker. People are 

on vacation for some weeks. Some people may be sick and not 

attending work, or people may be on bereavement leave, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

There are various reasons why the staffing levels will fluctuate 

in all of our health care facilities, Mr. Speaker. But there is a 

process in place. There is a process in place for any person that 

is a health care provider that feels that staffing levels are unsafe 

to go to their union representative which then deal with 

management through management of the regional health 

authority, Mr. Speaker. That is in place. 

 

Now the 1,300 were cases that the health region would have 

been very aware of. And, Mr. Speaker, there are four former 

health ministers over on that side. And if a person was missing 

from work for a half a day or a day, I‟m sure that they weren‟t 

checking into each and every one of those cases, just as I 

haven‟t, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — My question again is to the Premier who, 

I believe, along with the minister fails to protect the people of 

the province as it relates to health care and numbers of workers 

needed to maintain the safety in our hospitals and nursing 

homes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my level to the Premier is this: how can the people 

of Saskatchewan trust you and this Minister of Health in the 

event of a pandemic — if it were to happen later this year or 

early next year — given the fact that 1,300 times, given written 

evidence of unsafe levels of care in our hospitals and nursing 

homes, this Premier fails to protect the people of this province? 

How are you going to do it if there is a pandemic later this 

year? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, on a daily basis the 

levels of staffing will fluctuate. But one thing that we‟ve done, 

Mr. Speaker, in the two years that we have been in this House 

. . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Minister of 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, what we haven‟t done as 

a government on this side of the House is turn our backs on the 

staffing levels within the hospitals throughout Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know the member has been gone for many, 

many years. But what he should realize is today there are 570 

more full-time equivalent nurses working in Saskatchewan than 

all the years that those members were in government, Mr. 

Speaker. We‟ve done more in two years on the staffing levels 

than they demolished in 16. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

H1N1 Pandemic Planning 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Despite the minister‟s 

loud rhetoric, we still don‟t have health care facilities that are 

sufficiently staffed for the possibility of the H1N1 pandemic. 

Today we hear again from another group of health providers 

that are saying “government inaction on H1N1 endangers 

lives.” 

 

The government has allowed the health regions to manage with 

unacceptably low . . . the low numbers of health professionals 

in place is demonstrated yesterday by the 1,300 written 

documented cases. Adequate numbers of respiratory therapists 

are needed to care for individuals who may become severely ill 

enough to be put on a ventilator due to H1N1‟s negative impact 

on lungs. 

 

To the minister, Mr. Speaker: what is he doing to immediately 

ensure that there are a sufficient number of respiratory 

therapists on staff in each health region to adequately prepare 

for this pandemic and adequately serve the needs of the 

Saskatchewan people? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m extremely proud of 

the health care providers that we have in our province. I‟m 

extremely proud of the Ministry of Health and the staff that we 

have within the Ministry of Health that have worked diligently 

since April. When the first case of H1N1 was found in the 

province in April, they had been working many, many . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Minister of 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — They‟ve been working long hours, 

Mr. Speaker. And I would say that we here in Saskatchewan are 

positioned as good if not better than anywhere else in Canada. 

Mr. Speaker, when we look at some of the situations that 

happened in other provinces yesterday — in Alberta and BC — 

with extremely long waits because they grouped health care 

providers with some of the high-risk groups trying to get them 

vaccinated, there were some issues in other provinces. 

 



3228 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2009 

That wasn‟t the case here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. It‟s 

been a very orderly immunization so far. We expect it to 

continue on. But it‟s only because of the hard work of our 

health care professionals that that‟s happening. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, in September I pressured the 

minister to enhance the HealthLine program and put in place a 

dedicated hotline number to answer questions related to H1N1. 

Today a caller into the Sask HealthLine was put on hold for 

almost 30 minutes until a nurse answered the phone — a 

30-minute wait and the H1N1 pandemic is only just begun. 

When finally answered, the caller was directed to the 

Saskatchewan HealthLine website and the fightflu.ca website 

which has “enough information that you can spend days looking 

through it.” Most people don‟t have days to look through 

information. 

 

To the minister: is a 30-minute wait acceptable? When is the 

minister going to get ahead of this and assure people have 

access to timely, accurate, and useful information? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the health care 

professionals around our province are equipped and are ready to 

serve the people of Saskatchewan. Whether it‟s dealing with 

disease prevention, with washing hands correctly and sneeze 

technique to immunization, Mr. Speaker, they‟re there to serve 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

What doesn‟t help is when you have opposition members that 

are trying to play politics with a pandemic, who have done 

nothing but fearmonger in this House and outside this House, 

Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, that doesn‟t help anyone but trying 

to help their own political purposes. It‟s a shame. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — I do not think playing politics is what‟s 

happening here. If we‟re trying to share and get accurate 

information for the people of Saskatchewan who are phoning 

and emailing and contacting us in person saying, we don‟t 

understand. We‟re confused. We don‟t know what to do. What 

is actually causing fear is confusion, and that minister has done 

nothing to alleviate the confusion of the public. Nothing. 

Nothing. 

 

[14:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, he sends, the minister sends out news releases 

outlining his immunization plans. On the other hand, the 

Saskatchewan HealthLine is directing people to the 

Saskatchewan HealthLine online website which is accessed 

through the Saskatchewan government website. And on this 

website, listen, under the H1N1 prevention you will read, 

“There is no . . . [vaccination] to protect against H1N1 flu.”  

 

Mr. Speaker, no wonder everyone‟s confused. On the one hand, 

people are being told by the minister he has vaccination plans, 

and on the other hand they‟re being told there is no vaccination 

to protect against H1N1. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: how does this situation reassure 

the people of Saskatchewan that he‟s on top of this serious 

issue? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s been proven and it‟s 

been polled on, Mr. Speaker, that people throughout the 

province of Saskatchewan are very confident with the plans that 

we have got in place. Mr. Speaker, I would say that there is one 

confusing person, one confused person and it would be the 

member opposite, the Health critic. She is very confused, Mr. 

Speaker, and I can understand why. When we hold a briefing 

for all MLAs, including the opposition, to try and clear up some 

of the confusion she‟s suffering from, she doesn‟t attend, Mr. 

Speaker. That‟s where the confusion comes from, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Our plan is very obvious. We‟ve got it laid out as far as the 

immunization plan, as far as the prevention plan. And, Mr. 

Speaker, health regions across the province are waiting to see if 

there is a huge increase. And if there‟s a huge severity, they‟ll 

be there to treat the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, the Ministry of Corrections, Public 

Safety and Policing is responsible for the 911 program and 

emergency preparedness. Police officers and firefighters are on 

the front lines day to day protecting Saskatchewan people. 

 

To the Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing: 

what is his plan to get police officers and firefighters the H1N1 

vaccination so they can continue to ensure the safety of 

Saskatchewan people? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the 

Ministry of Health as the lead agency for government planning 

in this area, Mr. Speaker, have ensured that there are pandemic 

plans for all Crown corporations, all agencies, Mr. Speaker, as 

well as the Ministry of Health. Those are located on the 

government‟s website, Mr. Speaker, so that anyone in those 

areas will certainly know. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‟ve got a rollout plan for the immunization. We 

are in good position. We‟re doing our health care professionals 

this week. We‟re going into high-risk groups next week, Mr. 

Speaker. And we‟re quite confident that by November 30th the 

rest of the population will be immunized. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, what I can say is, I‟m very proud of not only 

the federal government, but our government who said, at one 

point, that the immunization would start sometime into 

November. We‟ve under-promised and over-delivered, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 



October 27, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3229 

Employment Issues 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of 

Advanced Ed, I don‟t always like his answers, but he does 

know when to stand up, I will give him that credit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last Friday the people in Saskatchewan and indeed 

our province as a whole and the workers, received some 

troubling news, Mr. Speaker. In one day, Mr. Speaker, there 

were 1,100 layoffs here in Saskatchewan: 800 in the potash 

industry and 300 at Case New Holland in Saskatoon, Mr. 

Speaker. With this one day of a huge amount of layoffs, 

combined with the other troubling aspects that we‟ve seen in 

the economy, Mr. Speaker, with an increase in unemployment 

year over year, my question to the minister: when will the 

minister and the government stop the empty cheerleading, admit 

that there‟s a real problem affecting real people? Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for 

the opportunity to speak to something that‟s vitally important 

for all of us. We know we‟re not immune from what‟s going on 

around us, and Mr. Speaker, obviously it‟s with great empathy 

and understanding that we are working with Case New Holland. 

In fact I just spoke with the general manager yesterday, as did 

some of the officials within the ministry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that‟s one of the reasons we established the rapid 

response team. It‟s one of the reasons that we put in place, Mr. 

Speaker, a mechanism to ensure that more than 1,000 people 

are being assisted right now, Mr. Speaker. But the news, Mr. 

Speaker — whether we‟re talking about Saskatoon where there 

are 7,700 new jobs created year over year or 800 month over 

month — continues to be, Mr. Speaker, it continues to be 

indicative of Saskatchewan‟s strong performance as it‟s relative 

to the rest of Canada. And that is, Mr. Speaker, today we see 

that 5.3 per cent fewer EI [employment insurance] beneficiaries 

month over month — August to July, Mr. Speaker, that‟s 730 

fewer people receiving EI than in July. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know we‟re not immune from what‟s going on 

around us, but we continue to see progress, Mr. Speaker, and 

continue to be one of the brightest lights across the country. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the EI numbers that the member 

refers to do not include the most recent layoffs that we‟ve seen 

throughout the province, and also it does not speak to the issue 

of how many individuals are falling off and ending their 

benefits, Mr. Speaker. 

 

With the one thousand eleven hundred layoffs that we‟ve seen, 

Mr. Speaker, we‟ve also seen the troubling statistic of 10,000 

full-time job losses in one month, Mr. Speaker. And we see in 

Saskatchewan here, and the minister made reference to it, where 

they may be working with many of these individuals who are 

laid off, but the reality that these workers often face is part-time 

employment. And we‟ve seen a huge surge in part-time 

employment, and that makes it more difficult for these laid-off 

workers to make ends meet. 

 

My question to the minister: we know the minister‟s very fond 

of part-time employment. He‟s been serving as the part-time 

Minister of Labour now for almost two years. My question to 

the minister: is part-time employment his plan for the entire 

workforce? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, certainly we‟re not immune 

from what‟s going on around us. We know that there was a 

reduction year over year of some jobs. But I‟d like to speak 

specifically, Mr. Speaker, as the member opposite raised it 

specifically, that month over month Saskatchewan has seen an 

increase of 6,800 full-time jobs, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what that means is that the 4.6 per cent 

unemployment, the lowest in Canada, ranks among the most 

competitive. It allows us to see that employment has been down 

in BC [British Columbia] where 43,000 people have been laid 

off, in Alberta where more than 39,000 have been laid off, and 

in Manitoba where more than 2,000 people have been laid off. 

 

We know we‟re not immune from what‟s going on around us, 

Mr. Speaker. There‟s more to do, but that‟s one of the reasons 

that we‟re working through our rapid response teams to ensure 

that we‟re helping the people of this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we know that the members 

opposite have proven they‟re very good at spin. They‟re very 

good at cheerleading. But, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t think they‟re all 

that good at understanding the reality facing Saskatchewan 

workers. 

 

Over the weekend, Mr. Speaker, I spoke to a welder who is 

working at Case New Holland and was unsure of his situation 

Monday when he shows up for work, what was going to face 

him, Mr. Speaker. 

 

If we look at the statistics, Mr. Speaker — 10,000 full-time job 

losses over one month; last Friday alone, 1,100 layoffs 

throughout Saskatchewan; new claims in the province, Mr. 

Speaker, up by 8.9 per cent and a year-over-year increase of 47 

per cent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The members opposite . . . Mr. Speaker, my question to the 

minister: when will he admit that there is a real problem in 

Saskatchewan affecting real workers and it requires real action? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once 

again our rapid response teams, we‟ve been working with Case 

New Holland. That contact began last week; it continues 

through this week. The layoffs are going to begin in November 

and go through to March. 

 



3230 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2009 

Mr. Speaker, we are taking steps to ensure that we are helping 

people. But what we won‟t do, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to 

layoffs, what we won‟t do is follow the insensitive example set 

by the Leader of the Official Opposition a few years ago. I 

quote from The StarPhoenix of June 28, 1996 where he said, 

and I quote, Mr. Speaker, “There‟s no sense „whining and 

snivelling‟ about the loss of 86 jobs at the AECL research office 

in Saskatoon, says Economic Development Minister Dwain 

Lingenfelter.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‟re sensitive to what‟s going on around us. 

We‟re not immune from what‟s going on around us, Mr. 

Speaker. We‟re going to continue to work on behalf of the 

people of this province, Mr. Speaker. But we are not going to be 

insensitive to their needs, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Availability of Affordable Housing 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. CMHC‟s 

[Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation] last report 

indicated vacancy rates in this province are still unacceptably 

tight. The overall rates in Regina, North Battleford, and Moose 

Jaw are less than 1 per cent, and the rate in Saskatoon is less 

than 2 per cent. And it‟s even harder for families with children 

looking for rental accommodation. 

 

Last spring there were just 17 three-bedroom apartments 

available in all of Saskatchewan, out of nearly 1,300 units. 

There were only nine available in Saskatoon, only two in 

Regina, and just one in Prince Albert. 

 

To the minister: where is this government‟s commitment to 

affordable housing for families with children? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I enjoy 

the opportunity to again say what we have done with 

affordability within our province. Very shortly after the 

election, we struck a task force that came forward with a 

number of recommendations. We have now acted on 24 of 

those 36 recommendations, unlike the previous government that 

had a task force. That document was never made public, and 

they acted on absolutely zero of what was in their task force 

document. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we understood the biggest emergency was 

affordability. We addressed that by indexing the shelter rates 

and the rental supplements, and we revisit them every six 

months. And that is unprecedented within our country. 

 

We also recognized that availability is an issue, and that is why 

we have built over 500 units within our province. We currently 

have 500 more under construction, and in development over 

600 units, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, this minister loves to go through 

the list, loves to look in the rear-view mirror. But that‟s cold 

comfort for some of the news that we heard . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

Mr. Forbes: — And they can laugh. They can laugh over there. 

They can laugh. If they read The StarPhoenix last week, this is 

what they were talking about — women and children trying to 

escape family violence in Saskatoon. Many women fleeing 

violence could not even find shelter. And they laugh over there. 

They laugh. 

 

Last year the YWCA [Young Women‟s Christian Association] 

shelter in Saskatoon turned away 3,300 women and children — 

3,300 women and children. They could not find shelter. This is 

more than three times the number of people they were able to 

accommodate. Now this has grown, more than doubled since 

2008, and has increased by over 500 per cent since 2007. 

 

Now I‟m sure the minister would like to review her list as she 

always does, but that won‟t help her here because this has 

happened under her watch. Her watch. 

 

Now to the minister: how much . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I‟d ask the member to place his 

question. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — How much longer will women and children 

fleeing family violence have to wait before there will be enough 

safe shelter spaces available for them in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m very proud to say 

within that member‟s own city, we have over $30 million 

committed to more housing, affordable housing, which is 

largely for women and children. It‟s for families. And a lot of 

our policies take families into consideration as the priority 

because of the children involved. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he can talk about us looking back, but 

unfortunately what happened in the previous government is 

why we‟re in this situation. They refused to recognize that the 

province was growing and as such had absolutely no housing 

strategy whatsoever. So they were only building a few units per 

year and were not addressing the rising population. So we have 

had to accelerate in the building of housing within our province, 

and that‟s what we‟re doing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Before I recognize the member, just 

another reminder that we seem to be getting away from 

directing the questions through the Chair and also personally 

directing questions directly at other members. I ask members to 

direct their questions through the Chair. I recognize the member 



October 27, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3231 

from Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 

have to say again that this minister seems to be attached to that 

rear-view mirror. She doesn‟t talk about the 2,500 units we did 

under HomeFirst or our five-year plan, that they have not 

started a new comprehensive, new housing strategy here in this 

province. We have to talk about these 3,300 women and 

children that have been turned away. She needs to really focus 

on that and get her action together. 

 

Now the problem is though, what happens for these families 

who are trying to re-establish themselves after such a traumatic 

experience? Will there be shelter for them? What is this 

minister doing today to make sure the women who are finding 

themselves in a traumatic experience have time to heal and get 

their lives together? What is the government plan? 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I‟d 

like to review what we‟ve done. And we have over 1,000 units 

in various stages of development within our province which 

will address some of the issues with availability of housing. We 

increased emergency shelter rates which allowed the emergency 

shelter organizations to be more financially viable and many of 

them have expanded or are expanding the emergency shelters. 

 

It was this government, not the previous government, that put 

an additional $1.1 million into sexual assault centres and 

agencies. A lot of those are transition houses, Mr. Speaker, so it 

was this government that increased the funding to the transition 

houses a great deal. 

 

Another sector that looks after different issues that has to do 

with domestic violence is our community-based organizations. 

That member likes to talk about community-based 

organizations, but doesn‟t want to mention when they only gave 

them 1 per cent funding. Mr. Speaker, we did not find that 

acceptable, and we have significantly increased funding for the 

CBOs in this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We know, 

and this is the truth of the matter, that the YWCA, the 

turn-away rate has increased nearly 500 per cent since 2007 — 

not in the past, since 2007. She needs to come to terms with 

that. 

 

Here‟s a quote from someone, Stacey Kesten, who works with 

the YWCA here in Regina. This is what she has to say about the 

situation: 

 

It‟s probably the biggest challenge we face. Instead of 

having this time for the women to be a time of healing 

and a time of addressing the trauma that has happened, 

they‟re spending their days desperately trying to find 

housing. 

To the minister: these women and their children are at risk 

because of their lack of access to affordable housing. When will 

this government provide more affordable housing suitable for 

these families? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m going to remind the 

member that we‟re investing over $30 million in Saskatoon for 

affordable housing. Much of that will be for families. However, 

Mr. Speaker, for the YWCA, I understand that they are stressed, 

and we appreciate the work that they‟re doing. 

 

The expansion in Saskatoon is going to be with the Salvation 

Army. They had some difficulties in securing their first location 

that they were looking at, and they now are very assured that 

they will be able to relocate at another area and expand the 

emergency beds available. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it‟s not that these women are totally turned 

away. There are other facilities that we have available for them, 

but we do understand fully that the YWCA is doing a great job, 

and they have been maximizing their space. We have other 

spaces available, and we are working with the Social Services 

office in Saskatoon to address this very important issue. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Response to H1N1 Flu Threat 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Before the Minister of 

Health has the opportunity to speak, I just ask members to give 

the Minister of Health that opportunity without interference. I 

recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I rise today to provide an update to my colleagues on 

both sides of the Assembly as to the actions undertaken to fight 

the pandemic H1N1 virus. The H1N1 was first identified in 

Saskatchewan in April of 2009, and we have been aggressively 

revising our pandemic plan since. These plans have now 

incorporated H1N1-specific information based on what our 

experts have learned since April. 

 

First I would like to direct all members of the Assembly to the 

Government of Saskatchewan‟s home page where there is a 

prominent item on pandemic plans. Click on that and you will 

find a sophisticated, meticulous, and detailed plan to fight the 

pandemic flu across government systems. You can also find out 

about our plan to provide personal protection equipment to 

front-line health care workers and manage health care facilities 

in the event of a surge in H1N1 cases. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are working hard to prevent such a surge and 

vaccine is a key strategy. The federal government has 

authorized the H1N1 vaccine, and this week it is being given to 



3232 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2009 

the health care workers across this province. 

 

Next week the vaccine will be offered to high-risk groups who 

will benefit mostly from the earliest access to vaccine, from the 

early access to vaccine. Among them are people with 

underlying medical conditions such as heart and lung disease, 

diabetes and obesity; pregnant women; people living in remote 

and isolated communities; First Nation and Métis population; 

and children from six months to five years of age. Individual 

health regions have the flexibility to target special risk groups 

within the range that I‟ve mentioned. 

 

It is important that the people watch for information about the 

vaccination clinics in their area. By mid-November we expect 

to be able to open up the H1N1 flu clinics to the general public. 

And let me emphasize, Mr. Speaker, for my colleagues and for 

everyone who is listening to this, we want all Saskatchewan 

residents to get a H1N1 flu vaccine. It is safe. It is effective, and 

it is the best way to fight the flu, this flu. 

 

While this flu is mild to moderate for most people, we have 

seen some people who have had serious illness. Now that the 

vaccine is here, we have the biggest vaccination campaign in 

Saskatchewan‟s history, with the ultimate goal of preventing 

more serious disease or further death due to the H1N1 flu virus. 

 

I will be getting a vaccine shot when it is made available, Mr. 

Speaker, as will my family. I urge all members on both sides of 

the Assembly to get the vaccine themselves and encourage all 

constituents to do the same. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And thank you to the 

minister for providing me a copy of his statement, which I‟m 

sure he would like to have a do-over after question period. 

 

It‟s interesting that he talks about his plan providing protective 

equipment. And obviously what we heard yesterday was there‟s 

not enough staff and there‟s unsafe staffing situations, so all the 

masks in the world aren‟t going to help if we don‟t have enough 

staff. So we really should be listening to the people that called 

for more respiratory therapists, more staffing on all our units, in 

all our facilities. We should be listening. 

 

And I still think the minister has got to go and look at the 

website because asking people to go to the website and have 

them told on the website that there is no, there is no vaccine to 

protect against H1N1. It says on the website: Saskatchewan 

Health, the little prairie lily, is all on the website. And telling 

people to go to the website isn‟t the most useful thing for many 

people. Isolated and remote areas, not everyone‟s got, you 

know, can go to a website or go to their nearest clinic. There 

has to be better communication. 

 

And what we‟re seeing now, we still have many people 

confused. And that is what causes the most fear, is confusion. It 

isn‟t talking about real questions from real people, real 

concerns. That is not what‟s causing fear and confusion. What‟s 

causing fear and confusion is the lack of clear information from 

the minister, and changing day to day does not help. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if there‟s only 36 per cent of people in 

Saskatchewan going to get the vaccine, it isn‟t going to be an 

effective program. You need to have over 60 per cent take the 

vaccine to make sure the pandemic doesn‟t spread. So the 

minister has to do a better job. 

 

And regardless of what the plans are, you need to make sure 

that people understand what‟s happening and that they don‟t 

just take your word for it that there‟s no problem with it. But it 

has to be well-informed people with good, accurate, timely 

information that they can use. And we should not dismiss their 

questions as fear mongering. When they ask me, I will ask the 

minister. And I don‟t think it‟s fear mongering; I think it‟s 

asking for clear information to protect the safety of people in 

Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 97 — The Agri-Food Amendment Act, 2009 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I move that Bill No. 97, The Agri-Food Amendment 

Act, 2009 be now introduced and read the first time. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The Minister of Agriculture has 

moved first reading of Bill No. 97, The Agri-Food Amendment 

Act, 2009. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 98 — The Municipal Financing Corporation 

Amendment Act, 2009 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

Bill No. 98, The Municipal Financing Corporation Amendment 

Act, 2009 be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved that Bill 

No. 98, The Municipal Financing Corporation Amendment Act, 

2009 be now read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



October 27, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3233 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? I 

recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 99 — The Emergency 911 System 

Amendment Act, 2009 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — I move that Bill No. 99, The 

Emergency 911 System Amendment Act, 2009 be now 

introduced and read for the first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Corrections, 

Public Safety and Policing has moved that Bill No. 99, The 

Emergency 911 System Amendment Act, 2009 be now read the 

first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the Minister Responsible for Corrections. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Bill No. 100 — The Doukhobors of Canada C.C.U.B. 

Trust Fund Amendment Act, 2009 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 100, 

The Doukhobors of Canada C.C.U.B. Trust Fund Amendment 

Act, 2009 be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport has moved that Bill No. 100 . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The Minister of Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport has moved that Bill No. 100, The 

Doukhobors of Canada C.C.U.B. Trust Fund Amendment Act, 

2009 be now read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the Minister Responsible for Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by the Hon. Mr. McMorris, seconded 

by Ms. Ross, and the proposed amendment to the main motion 

moved by Mr. Lingenfelter.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Weyburn. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m pleased to 

rise again and conclude my comments from the last evening, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Start over. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — No, Mr. Speaker, I will not be starting 

over from the beginning as some members have urged. 

 

Mr. Speaker, towards, if I recall, towards the end of last night, I 

was talking about an event that I was pleased to take part in, in 

Weyburn, Mr. Speaker, just a couple of weeks ago. And that 

was the unveiling or the grand opening of three new group 

homes that opened in Weyburn, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This was an event that certainly had special meaning for myself 

and my wife that took part in it, Mr. Speaker. We have a niece 

who is autistic and she is about, I think, 18 years old. And she 

was one of the people that were going to be living in the new 

homes. So, Mr. Speaker, it was a great event. We got to see 

where Kalandra will live, going forward, Mr. Speaker, and my 

thanks to the Minister for Social Services for this great 

announcement for our community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s part of a four-year, nearly $77 million 

initiative to eliminate the wait-lists for specialized residential 

and day program services for people with intellectual 

disabilities, Mr. Speaker, and it‟s one that I think is welcome to 

not only our community, Mr. Speaker, where 11 new spaces 

have been created . . . And they‟re great, Mr. Speaker. We were 

able to tour with Delaine Barber, a board member of the 

Weyburn group home, Mr. Speaker, and Bernice Erickson, the 

executive director of the group homes who has worked so hard, 

Mr. Speaker, to provide quality places to live for our more 

vulnerable citizens, Mr. Speaker. 



3234 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2009 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I won‟t speak for very much longer, but I do 

want to talk about a couple of initiatives in the Throne Speech 

that relate to the ministry that I have the responsibility for, Mr. 

Speaker, at this time. 

 

[14:30] 

 

First of all, Mr. Speaker, I do want to, I want to mention very 

briefly one that isn‟t in the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, but I 

think is a very positive development for frankly the majority of 

Saskatchewan residents, Mr. Speaker. That was the new lottery 

agreement that we were able to sign late last week with our 

partners in the lottery system, Sask Sport, SaskCulture, and the 

Parks and Recreation Association, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It‟s a five-year agreement, Mr. Speaker. It provides a stable 

level of funding, reliant upon lottery sales, Mr. Speaker, so we 

have to keep that in mind in terms of what that will mean for 

these agencies, but it‟s I believe the first time in the 35-year 

history of our lottery system where it‟s a lengthy agreement. It‟s 

a five-year agreement, Mr. Speaker, and I think, you know, 

certainly I‟m very appreciative to our partners in those sectors 

who were very patient. 

 

The old agreement expired, Mr. Speaker, I believe, at the end of 

March, and we were waiting to sign a new agreement because 

we were waiting for the Provincial Auditor to make some 

recommendations, and we wanted to take those into account, 

but also the changing in ministers‟ responsibilities, a new 

minister coming into the portfolio. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it was, you know, certainly a summer of 

negotiations between our ministry and the folks that administer 

the lottery funds and we have a great agreement, Mr. Speaker. I 

think it‟s going to be a very good agreement. Twelve thousand 

organizations across this province will benefit. 

 

Many of these, Mr. Speaker — in fact I think all of them are — 

they‟re non-profit or not-for-profit organizations where people 

are working 40 and 50 hours a week and then volunteering on 

the side to make these organizations run, everything from minor 

hockey and football and cultural organizations to a number of 

another whole list of organizations, Mr. Speaker. And some 

600,000 people are directly affected by this funding, so 

certainly I was very pleased to be able to sign that agreement 

last week, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In terms of the Throne Speech, the Throne Speech does speak 

to the government‟s commitment to add 1,000 more electrified 

campsites, Mr. Speaker. And I want to say that the parks system 

has been very busy over this summer as it was last year, Mr. 

Speaker. I think last year, 2008, when we total up the numbers, 

was a record year, Mr. Speaker, for our provincial parks. And it 

looks like we‟ll be about 6 per cent higher in 2009, Mr. 

Speaker. We‟re putting the final calculations on the numbers, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And as my seatmate, as my seatmate notes beside me that in 

spite of a not . . . Mr. Speaker, it wasn‟t a very good summer for 

camping. I know earlier this summer, my wife and I took our 

tent out to Cypress Hills, Mr. Speaker, over Canada Day in fact. 

We had a great event out there with the member from Cypress 

Hills. So we took our tent and stayed a couple nights and it . . . 

well it wasn‟t very good weather. There was a bit of rain, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But certainly throughout the parks that I was able to travel to — 

I think we were able to make it to 9 or 10 different provincial 

parks across the system this summer — and most of them, if not 

all of them, were at capacity for most of the summer, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So we‟re on track to add more electrified sites. Certainly that‟s 

where the demand seems to be. Certainly not from campers like 

my wife and I who still camp in a tent, but certainly when you 

look at the bigger RVs [recreational vehicles] that there are, Mr. 

Speaker, in our system, certainly we have new dynamics in 

terms of what campers are looking for. And so we‟re addressing 

those, and by the beginning of next camp season we‟ll be at 

roughly 600 new electrified campsites, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to also mention that I‟m very excited to be able to build 

on the work of the Minister for Government Services, my 

predecessor, in bringing forward the first new cultural policy 

that our province has seen in the last 30 years, Mr. Speaker. 

This provides us with an excellent opportunity to work with the 

important sectors, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I had a couple of events that I want to mention. I believe it was 

on Saturday we had the SaskCulture AGM [annual general 

meeting] here in Regina. I was able to speak at that. And then 

later, my wife and I — I‟m fortunate that she‟s able to travel 

quite frequently with me, Mr. Speaker — and so we made our 

way to Swift Current for the OSAC [Organization of 

Saskatchewan Arts Councils] annual meeting out there and their 

showcase that they had in Swift Current. And I‟m looking 

forward to building relationships with those stakeholders as we 

move forward with our cultural policy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There‟s a lot of work that‟s been done by the ministry and by 

my predecessor in terms of consulting with the stakeholders. 

Last year a discussion paper was put out of reviewing the last 

30 years of cultural policy in the province and also a round of 

consultations and community dialogues, Mr. Speaker. And 

we‟ve also launched a couple of new programs, pilot programs, 

that will help to inform what the overall policy will be, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

One of those was the Building Pride program which 24 

communities and organizations across the province this summer 

were able to access support from the government to celebrate 

noteworthy anniversaries. I believe a number of them were 

community events, 100th anniversaries of communities, Mr. 

Speaker, because one thing that we have been finding is that the 

2005 centennial year of the province, there was a lot of hype 

and fanfare and communities that were celebrating the 

province‟s centennial, and also communities‟ centennials at the 

same time. But after ‟05, Mr. Speaker, there was really a 

drop-off in terms of celebrating our province by the previous 

administration, Mr. Speaker, and so this has been a program 

that we are moving forward. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I do want to comment on the province‟s 

presence at the Olympics as has been outlined in the Throne 

Speech, Mr. Speaker. I think this is going to be an exciting 

opportunity for our province to showcase not only our 



October 27, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3235 

wonderful entertainers that we have in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. We‟re making sure, we‟re working with the 

Saskatchewan Arts Board to field applications from not only 

performers in terms of the conventional sense of bands and 

musicians, Mr. Speaker, but a number of dance organizations, 

cultural organizations that want to showcase at the pavilion, Mr. 

Speaker. And that‟s certainly something that we‟re looking 

forward to taking part in, Mr. Speaker, as are other . . . as far as 

I know at this point, Mr. Speaker, every other province will 

have a presence when it comes time to the Olympics. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I note that at 2:30 on Sunday afternoon the 

Premier of Quebec unveiled the province of Quebec‟s . . . la 

Maison du Québec, I believe it was called, Mr. Speaker. My 

French is a little bit rusty; it‟s been a while. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I think, as we‟re seeing, our province was 

certainly in the lead role in terms of outlining the province‟s 

presence at the Olympics and how we will be celebrating the 

Olympics within our province. Last spring, this past spring, my 

predecessor, the member from Wascana Plains, unveiled that. 

 

And as we‟re finally seeing as we get closer . . . I think we‟re 

within about 100 days of the Olympics. The Olympic torch was 

lit late last week in Greece, Mr. Speaker, so we‟re getting quite 

close to the Olympics, and I think, as members and the public 

will see, that all other provinces will start to unveil their plans 

for the Olympics, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And certainly I think, you know, I‟m very confident. We have a 

good team working on the Olympics, Mr. Speaker. We‟re 

working with Sask Sport to manage our pavilion. Don Clark is 

managing that operation and he‟s very well respected, Mr. 

Speaker. Joan McCusker is helping out to bring attention and 

bring the celebration communities on board. We‟re going to 

have nine communities across the province that will see the 

torch actually spend some time in Saskatchewan communities. 

 

And certainly the excitement for the Olympics is building, Mr. 

Speaker. And I think with the team that we have managing the 

pavilion and the activities within the province, Mr. Speaker, I 

think the people of Saskatchewan will be very proud of the 

show that we put on in Vancouver come the winter Olympics 

early next year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I wrap up my remarks, Mr. Speaker, I 

know I‟m a little probably past what I‟ve been allotted, but I do 

want to just close, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I want to . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . I appreciate the encouragement but I 

don‟t need any. But I thank the members who are helping. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, are frankly with this government and they‟re moving 

forward with this government. Mr. Speaker, the people of 

Saskatchewan are getting a taste of what it‟s like to lead the 

nation, what it‟s like to grow this province by thousands of 

people, Mr. Speaker, in a given year. And I think they like the 

idea of what it‟s like moving forward. 

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, I think the people of this province 

remember what it‟s like to move backwards under the previous 

administration. They know what it‟s like to lose thousands of 

people, Mr. Speaker, every year. They know what it‟s like to 

trail the rest of Canada in economic growth. They remember 

what it‟s like to lose money, Mr. Speaker, on risky NDP [New 

Democratic Party] ventures, Mr. Speaker, and there‟s a long list 

of those to go through, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in closing I want to say that I‟m proud to support 

the Throne Speech and the motion moved by the Minister of 

Health. And I‟m certainly proud to be a member of this caucus, 

of this party, of this government, Mr. Speaker, and I‟m proud to 

be a member of the member for Swift Current, the Premier‟s 

team, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‟re going to work hard over the next two years 

before the next election rolls around. We‟re going to continue 

to, I think, work to do things that we‟re doing well, Mr. 

Speaker, and we‟ll continue to move the province forward 

despite all the doom and gloom that we hear from members 

opposite, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are 

seeing a clear choice even this far out from the next election. 

People see the government moving forward, putting people‟s 

priorities first: debt reduction, Mr. Speaker, tax reduction, better 

highways, better schools and hospitals and, Mr. Speaker, a 

determination to deal with the most pressing issues that people 

in Saskatchewan face — health care and in particular the 

wait-list, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on the other hand, they see doom and gloom, a 

group of men and women who for whatever reason are banking 

on a recession, are hoping on a recession, Mr. Speaker, and I 

can‟t fathom that, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, I‟m proud to 

be a member of this Premier‟s team. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it reminds me, late last night members would 

know that I quoted from David Gergen‟s book, Eyewitness to 

Power, and I would recommend it to anybody that‟s interested 

in it. It‟s a great book. I‟ve perused it a number of times, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And it reminds me of something else that Gergen wrote, Mr. 

Speaker, in quoting somebody else, Mr. Speaker. And I would 

like to quote this, Mr. Speaker. He said, Gergen wrote, and I 

quote: 

 

If you have integrity, nothing else matters. If you don‟t 

have integrity, nothing else matters. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think that that sentiment leaves the people 

of Saskatchewan in good stead with this Premier, the member 

from Swift Current, for many years to come. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it‟s my 

pleasure to rise today on behalf of the residents of Regina 

Walsh Acres in opposition to the Wall government‟s Throne 

Speech delivered on Wednesday, October 22nd and 

concurrently to stand in favour of the New Democrat amended 

motion asserting the Wall government no longer enjoys the 

support of the Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan. 

 



3236 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2009 

I would like to take a moment, Mr. Speaker, to offer my 

congratulations to the new Leader of the Opposition, the 

member from Regina Douglas Park, and the newly elected New 

Democrat MLA, the member from Saskatoon Riversdale. I look 

forward to working with the Leader of the Opposition and the 

member from Saskatoon Riversdale in standing up for working 

families left behind by the Sask Party government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟d also like to take this moment to convey my 

sincere appreciation for the support of my husband, Jeffrey, and 

my daughter, Morgan, and to acknowledge the efforts of the 

many dedicated New Democrat members of Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

It is the membership of our great party that sustains our shared 

vision of creating these conditions where every Saskatchewan 

citizen has the means and opportunity to be at their best. New 

Democrat members‟ unwavering belief in the power of people 

working together to achieve a more fair and equitable 

Saskatchewan distinguishes the New Democratic Party from all 

others. 

 

Accordingly, it is only fitting to acknowledge the dedication of 

our party members. I would also like to mention some 

individuals in my life that are an amazing support system for 

me. To Sherry, Lynn, Nathan, Roxy, Knud, Gabe, Shelley, 

Rick, Dominique, and many others, thank you so much for your 

dedication and support as it is truly appreciated by both me and 

my family. 

 

[14:45] 

 

Together New Democrats will continue, as we always have 

done, to advocate for a more caring and fair Saskatchewan. Mr. 

Speaker, the people of our great province know that the 

prosperity we have enjoyed over the past number of years has 

sadly dwindled. Despite the Wall government‟s hollow 

assurances and empty . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Speakers in the past have ruled about 

references to individuals and about referring to individuals as 

specific government. It‟s the provincial government or 

whatever. I ask the member to be aware of that. Thank you. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The prosperity that we 

have enjoyed over the past number of years has dwindled. 

Despite the government‟s hollow assurances and empty actions, 

Saskatchewan is in the grips of a recession. 

 

We have arrived only at a point in time where jobs are being 

lost on a daily basis, where economic activity has significantly 

slowed, and where our youngest citizens are finding it too 

difficult to go to school, pay the bills, and making a living in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Retail sales, for instance, are down by 4 per cent. 

Manufacturing sales are down 5.4 million year after year. 

There‟s a 21.7 per cent decrease in international exports year 

over year. It‟s the largest decline in the country for new vehicle 

sales. Housing starts are down by more than half; mineral 

production and oil drilling — down; land sale activity — 

plummeting. 

 

With all the major economic figures down under this 

government, jobs are also following — 700 fewer jobs year 

over year; 3,700 full-time jobs lost year over year; 4,700 people 

laid off already this current year. 

 

Indeed those residents of Regina Walsh Acres who once 

worked at the Sears call centre on Broad Street will know that 

this government has no plan to keep people working in 

Saskatchewan. Over 240 jobs lost and no response team sent 

from the Minister for Advanced Education, Employment and 

Labour. These are jobs that are lost forever as they are 

permanently outsourced to the Philippines. 

 

From August to September of this year, 10,000 full-time jobs 

were lost. Record-setting unemployment with 12,000 people 

turning to employment insurance and young people are also 

struggling to find employment. 

 

Year over year, there‟s been a decline in 6,000 jobs for youth. 

From July 2008 to July 2009, Saskatchewan witnessed an 

increase of more than double — 142.4 per cent to be precise — 

in youth under the age of 25 receiving employment insurance. 

That‟s more than double the amount of young people receiving 

EI than last year, illustrating just how challenging it is for our 

young people to make ends meet. 

 

Youth unemployment is up 8.5 per cent, which is an increase 

from 2008 with an already disappointing 7.3 per cent youth 

unemployment rate. Full-time jobs are disappearing and layoff 

notices are being announced on a now regular basis. Record 

numbers of our young people are turning to employment 

insurance for help and with no help from this government. 

 

No wonder there‟s a 62.7 per cent increase in personal 

bankruptcies in this province. Just think about that for one 

moment. The number of personal bankruptcies in this province 

has more than doubled under this government. Instead of taking 

action to help working families, this government turns around 

and makes life more expensive in Saskatchewan. 

 

Between June 2008 and June 2009, Saskatchewan suffered the 

highest jump in the cost of living with increased prices for 

power, rent, and prescription drugs. The same is true for the 

previous months of July, August, and September. Under this 

right wing government, Saskatchewan is the only province in 

the country to have inflation this year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, everywhere you look, every major economic 

statistic you read, Saskatchewan‟s economy is slowing. Just the 

amount of jobs alone that are being lost are evidence that 

Saskatchewan is in the grips of a recession. People can tell you 

Saskatchewan is suffering and that this government not only sits 

by as working families struggle; they actually make life more 

expensive. 

 

Saskatchewan is suffering the highest jump in the cost of living 

in the country, and no relief is in sight. With the recession 

contributing to lagging employment and a right wing 

government imposing increases in the cost of living for working 

families and failing to help keep people working, Saskatchewan 

people are second-guessing this government‟s ability to govern 

the province in less prosperous times. 

 



October 27, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3237 

The province‟s finances are in a mess and, as a result of this 

conservative-style accounting that gambles on shaky economic 

forecasts and revenue assumptions, the rainy day fund once 

self-described by the Premier as the rock on which to build 

Saskatchewan‟s future is now but a former shadow of itself and 

this government is depleting all but $800 million of the once 

$2.3-billion-plus fund. 

 

Further still, painful cuts are on the horizon as these right 

wingers seek to make up for their historic $1.3 billion potash 

gaffe. It is within this context of fiscal incompetence, 

government arrogance, and a right wing tendency to make life 

more expensive for working families in Saskatchewan that this 

government announces a Throne Speech that fails to deal with 

the important issues facing Saskatchewan people. 

 

Fifteen pages, Mr. Speaker, 15 pages of self-cheerleading, 

reminiscing about the past, and glossing over their broken 

promise on climate change, but not any mention, not one single 

mention about working families in this province. Not one 

mention of how this government plans to help working families 

cope with the rising cost of living and the lagging employment 

— not one. No help for families struggling to make ends meet. 

No plan to provide any training or opportunities to 

Saskatchewan‟s record number of unemployed. No plan on 

affordable housing. No plan to aid the growing numbers of 

Saskatchewan people who have lost the self-dignity and 

benefits that come with full-time, quality employment. 

 

This government presents a 15-page speech that offers no relief 

for working families, no vision for Saskatchewan‟s future, and 

no recognition of the importance working people play in this 

economy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Students, unable to afford the rising cost of tuition since this 

government cancelled the tuition freeze, see no relief in sight 

from this government‟s Throne Speech. Rather than making 

tuition affordable for students now when they need it most, this 

government only offers an enhancement in student loans. They 

promise debt instead of affordable post-secondary education. 

What a relief that is to the students who are currently attending 

school and want to get into these educational institutions. 

 

This government also continues in its blind indifference to the 

needs of graduate and Ph.D. [Doctor of Philosophy] students, 

refusing to include them in the graduate retention program 

despite the fact that this is what‟s being asked for from the 

students themselves through the numerous petitions that my 

honourable member on this side of the House has been issuing 

on a daily basis. 

 

Renters see no relief in sight from this government‟s Throne 

Speech. No plan to ensure Saskatchewan renters can count on 

having an affordable place to live. Seniors see no relief in sight 

from this government‟s Throne Speech to help them afford the 

rising cost in prescription drugs. And as Saskatchewan people 

see no relief in sight from this government‟s Throne Speech to 

keep the cost of our utilities down, rather this government plays 

political games instead of being upfront and sincere about their 

true plans for meeting Saskatchewan‟s energy needs. 

 

This government‟s third Throne Speech, this last Throne 

Speech, completes the story of the first: a government with 

wearing credibility as the list of broken promises grows; details 

of their incompetence and their ideological predilection to 

retrench their rights, benefits; and ability of working people to 

enjoy a decent quality of life have now become very visible and 

very clear. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, does this surprise any of us? It shouldn‟t 

really. And why shouldn‟t we be surprised? Because the 

Premier of this government, Mr. Speaker, is disingenuous. Now 

in case anyone doesn‟t know what the word disingenuous 

means, I‟m going to make sure that this government can hear 

the definition of disingenuous because clearly they are very 

interested in what this word is. So the dictionary meaning, Mr. 

Speaker, of disingenuous is not straightforward or candid; 

insincere or calculating. 

 

Now quite frankly I would have to say too, Mr. Speaker, that 

this Premier of this government exemplifies all of those 

adjectives that described disingenuous. So disingenuous, for 

instance, is a Premier who hides his past. When one looks at his 

biography on the website, one can see that there‟s a number of 

things missing from his biography on the website. 

 

An Hon. Member: — What‟s missing? 

 

Ms. Morin: — Well for instance, there is nothing about the fact 

that he served as a ministerial assistant for the Devine Tories 

who left this province in financial ruins. There‟s nothing about 

that, nothing. Apparently he‟s not proud of the fact that he 

served with the Devine Tories, or he‟s not proud of the fact that 

they left the province in financial ruins because there‟s nothing 

available in his biography on the website. 

 

Do you know what else is missing? There is nothing, absolutely 

nothing, about the fact that he worked for the Mulroney 

government. Who did what? Who did what? Who left the 

country with a financial mess. Now there seems to be a bit of a 

pattern. He works for the Devine Tories . . .  

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — There appears to be a lot of people anxious to 

get into the debate. If members have something that they want 

to discuss with members across the floor, if they would go 

behind the bar or just outside of the Chamber for a few 

moments, that would be appreciated so that we could hear the 

member from Regina Walsh Acres make her comments in her 

speech opportunity. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, just 

because I was trying to make a point here — and I don‟t know 

how many people actually heard that point because of the level 

of volume in the room — I guess I‟m going to repeat that point 

that I was making. So as I said, there was nothing in the 

biography about the fact that he served with the Devine Tories 

who left this province in financial ruins. There was nothing 

about the fact that he served with the Mulroney government 

who left the country in a financial mess. 

 

Now there is clearly an establishment of a pattern here, which is 

that wherever he decides to serve, with whatever conservative 

government he decides to serve, the country or the province are 

left with a financial mess thereafter. And I‟m sincerely hoping, 



3238 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2009 

sincerely hoping that that history doesn‟t repeat itself. However, 

as we‟ve already seen, with a 1.3 budget miscalculation on the 

potash revenues for this province, we‟re now seeing that history 

seems to be repeating itself. So let‟s talk about something else. 

 

So disingenuous is also a Premier who pontificates about 

virtuosity at every opportunity and yet, away from the eyes of 

the public, is caught mimicking and thereby insulting people 

who speak English as a second language, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I took great offence to what I saw in that 

video. I took great offence to it. Why? Because my parents were 

German immigrants, and my parents spoke with a very thick 

accent, Mr. Speaker. And the entire German community that I 

am very involved with and represent, they all speak English or 

most of them speak English with a very thick accent. And so the 

insult that that presented to anyone who has come here as an 

immigrant from other countries to help build this province is 

absolutely unacceptable. Unacceptable, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What else did this Premier do? Well, disingenuous is a Premier 

who, as well as mimicking the people who come here as 

immigrants who have accents, is making disparaging and 

degrading remarks about a woman in a position of leadership, 

Mr. Speaker. Now who was that woman, we ask. That woman 

was someone that I have a great amount of admiration for, so 

yet again I was quite offended because that woman is none 

other than Dr. Lynda Haverstock who was the revered 

Lieutenant Governor of this province, who at that time was the 

first female leader of a political party in Saskatchewan. And 

that‟s how much respect that Premier had for that woman in that 

position. 

 

And I‟m wondering, Mr. Speaker. One can see the barrage of 

comments that comes across the House, from not just the 

member in a video that was released but also from the other 

members, as to what respect level they have for women, what 

respect level they have for the women on this side of the House. 

What respect level they have for the women who came to the 

legislature yesterday to talk to this government about their 

concerns, about their rights to free collective bargaining, who 

were then told that they were not going to gain entry to this 

building. 

 

That‟s the respect that this government has for the women in 

this province apparently, Mr. Speaker. Shameful. They locked 

them out until many hours . . . [inaudible] . . . a time of 

negotiations, they finally realized what the mistake was in terms 

of locking these women out from the legislature. It was 

shameful. 

 

[15:00] 

 

Now when we look back at that video and we look back at the 

remarks that this disingenuous Premier made at that time, we 

think to ourselves, you know, well how old was this video? 

Well let‟s be clear on this. The Premier was not an 18-year-old 

boy making these remarks. Because when we‟re 18, Mr. 

Speaker, we all make mistakes and say things that we shouldn‟t 

say, but that‟s unfortunately that growing phase that we all go 

through. And I‟m sure we all have things that we regret having 

said at 18. 

 

No, he was not 18 years old. He was a young man who was in a 

position of significant authority and influence at the time. So 

being in a position of authority, not to mention influence, to be 

making those remarks then allows that culture to fester amongst 

the other people that he was working with. And we see the same 

happening today, Mr. Speaker. It hasn‟t changed. He may have 

apologized; he may present himself differently in public; but I 

wonder, Mr. Speaker, exactly what goes on behind closed doors 

because that is the type of behaviour that we‟ve seen from this 

disingenuous Premier. 

 

Now disingenuous is a Premier who, quote, talks about being of 

benefit to be part of a government that lost its way. So he talks 

about that it being a benefit to be part of a government that lost 

its way when confronted with the evidence that he had signed a 

requisition for liquor. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we‟re not talking about a few bottles here. 

As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, when one looks at these 

requisition orders, one can see that this is not something that 

simply would have slipped by, you know, without anyone truly 

knowing. 

 

Now if I look at this one requisition order, for instance, it says, 

please have delivered to our minister, Hon. John Gerich at room 

348, Legislative Building, the following. Attention Mr. Brad 

Wall. That was when Mr. Brad Wall at the time, who is 

currently the Premier, was serving as a ministerial assistant to 

the Hon. John Gerich at the time. So there is a number of bottles 

of alcohol. 

 

But you know, the requisition I found most interesting is the 

one that‟s fairly significant in size. And I can see how you 

might be able to miss three bottles of rum and, you know, two 

bottles of light rum and three bottles of vodka and etc. But, Mr. 

Speaker, what I don‟t understand is how does someone not see 

— miss, overlook; I‟m not sure — a large beer tub, 150 beer 

cups, 100 wine cups, 200 spirit cups. But best of all, 59 pounds 

of ice — 59 pounds of ice. That‟s not something that I‟m not 

going to notice going by me in the hallway or into the office. 

 

So, you know, Mr. Speaker . . . And they‟re laughing. They‟re 

laughing. Why? Because that sense of entitlement hasn‟t 

changed one bit, not one bit. It is the same today as it was then. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when one looks, for instance, at the Provincial 

Auditor‟s report from 1992, the Provincial Auditor‟s report 

from 1992 says . . . Because I was wondering. I mean, you 

know, I mean the Premier, the current Premier says that, you 

know what? It was convention at the time. It was convention. It 

was something that was done, you know . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — It‟s okay to steal. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Exactly. So you know the Provincial Auditor‟s 

report from 1992 says this: 

 

The Liquor Board does not have policies that authorize 

ministers and officials to take liquor for their own use. 

Accordingly, there was a loss to the Crown . . . of $19,285. 

 

That was directly taken out of the Provincial Auditor‟s report 

from 1992 that there was no mechanism for authorization for 



October 27, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3239 

them to use this liquor at the taxpayers‟ expense. When the 

current Premier was the leader of the opposition, former 

Finance minister, Andrew Thomson posed this question in the 

House: 

 

My question is, at what point did that member go to the 

press with this clearly not authorized expenditure? When 

did he put out the press release? When did he go to the 

press? Did he put out a press release? 

 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, we haven‟t heard any such thing. 

No press release — nothing. Nothing. Just, you know what, it 

was a benefit to be part of a government that lost its way. That‟s 

what the current Premier had to say about when he was 

confronted with this. 

 

So the fact that Brad Wall was the executive assistant that was 

actually responsible for the ordering, collection of the alcohol, 

and that he was not only aware that the activity was taking 

place, that he may also be the person responsible for making it 

happen, that‟s a question that we now have to ask, Mr. Speaker, 

because we don‟t have all the information from that situation 

because unfortunately he didn‟t come clean on that. 

 

So as I said, there was over $19,000 worth of liquor that was 

supplied to cabinet ministers‟ offices during the Devine 

government. That should not have been done, according to what 

the Provincial Auditor said and according to the mechanisms 

under the Liquor Board. So disingenuous, Mr. Speaker, is also a 

Premier that knows the people of Saskatchewan would be 

paying for the consumption of these products and not offering a 

full and clear explanation. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Or paying for it. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Or paying for it. Disingenuous, Mr. Speaker, is 

a Premier who creates laws and doesn‟t believe that he is 

beholden to them. We‟ve already had an example of the 

Premier‟s own situation where he had admitted to breaking one 

of the laws of Saskatchewan, and then when asked about it, 

laughed it off, Mr. Speaker. Laughed it off. It‟s not a big deal. 

You know, it didn‟t hurt anybody at the time. Well so it‟s 

somebody who is driving drunk and doesn‟t hurt anybody at the 

time. Should they be laughing that off, Mr. Speaker, because 

they didn‟t hurt anybody at the time? 

 

It‟s not a laughing matter, Mr. Speaker. Each and every one of 

us that is elected to this Assembly knows that we are held to a 

very high standard. And each and every one of us are 

responsible to fulfill that standard — that‟s what we‟re held to. 

 

Disingenuous is also a Premier who claims to be a successful 

business person and yet oversaw the demise of a business that 

was handed to him, Mr. Speaker. He was given a golden 

parachute and managed to run that into the ground as well, Mr. 

Speaker. So the Premier was handed this business on a platter. 

It had, you know, all sorts of hopeful projections. 

 

So let‟s review. Someone takes over an operation that should be 

a surefire money-maker. They set a budget based on numbers 

that turn out to be wildly overinflated. The revenues come in 

way under budget. So does this sound familiar to anybody? 

Definitely. Can you say potash over projection? And now the 

revenues are under budget. This is what we‟re seeing. We‟re 

seeing history repeating itself. This is a description of 

disingenuous, and this Premier, Mr. Speaker, is disingenuous. 

 

The minute we get out of record revenues, Brad Wall‟s 

government — sorry — the current government messes up the 

budget. Now the Saskatchewan people are paying the price for 

his fiscal incompetence. So, Mr. Speaker, this is a Premier who 

is a cheerleader and not a leader. He can‟t run a business, and 

he certainly can‟t seem to run a government. What‟s he got left 

other than the media spin and the pompoms, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker, responding to the previous, government Throne 

Speech, I noted that the Sask Party spends more time 

trumpeting the wearing catchphrases about growth and selling 

the province, and too little time actually ensuring that people 

can actually afford to heat their homes, purchase their groceries, 

or pay their rent. Now this Wall government Throne Speech 

continues, sorry, now this government‟s Throne Speech 

continues the same ideological indifference to the needs of 

struggling, working families. This Premier, he is the man in the 

mirror, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, responding to the previous, Wall government 

Throne Speech, I said the Saskatchewan Crown sector and its 

capacity to provide affordable goods and services to the people 

of the province were cast into serious doubt by this Sask Party 

government. Since then privatization by the back door at 

SaskTel, selling off profitable Crown entities, and crafting a 

new policy on Crown competition have done just that, Mr. 

Speaker. They‟ve done exactly that. Now this government‟s 

Throne Speech takes aim at the future of SaskPower with Sask 

Party political games and spin about future power generation in 

this province. This Premier, Mr. Speaker, is a man in the mirror. 

 

Mr. Speaker, responding to the previous, government‟s Throne 

Speech, the previous, government‟s Throne Speech, I cautioned 

that the future of our publicly owned and funded medicare was 

jeopardized with the intention of the Sask Party to pursue a 

so-called patient-first review, which then and now is nothing 

short of a right wing bone picking of a sacred program that the 

entire country enjoys . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — I find it very interesting, especially when the 

member is trying to speak and the members around her are 

making it very difficult. It‟s difficult for the Chair to hear. And 

then when we get all the members, it‟s very difficult. 

 

I ask members to give the respect to allow the member . . . 

whether or not you disagree with what the members are saying, 

that members have a right to express their opinions on different 

matters. So I recognize the member from Regina Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Now this 

government‟s Throne Speech seeks to exploit the real need to 

reduce surgical wait times, a promise already broken by this 

government, as an excuse to bring in more private, for-profit 

care. This Premier, Mr. Speaker, is a man in the mirror. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I criticized the previous, government‟s Throne 

Speech for pushing ahead with legislation to take away the hard 



3240 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2009 

fought rights of union workers with Bills 5 and 6. Since that 

time, this government passed this unnecessary legislation and 

continues their self-described war on labour with Bill 80, an 

attack on the trade and construction workers of this province. 

 

Tellingly, this government‟s Throne Speech fails to even 

recognize the importance of working people in the economy — 

not one mention of working people in the Throne Speech, Mr. 

Speaker. One can look through all 15 pages and not one 

mention, not one word about the working men and women of 

this province and their representative unions — not one word, 

Mr. Speaker. This Premier is the man in the mirror. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I criticized the past, government‟s Throne Speech 

for its narrow vision on the environment. Cutting funds to 

tackle climate change, closing offices designed to coordinate 

action on climate change, and breaking their own election 

promise — yes, Mr. Speaker, they broke their own election 

promise that was in their platform to reduce carbon emissions 

— are the actions that clearly demonstrate that these right 

wingers simply don‟t take climate change seriously, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

This Wall government has also been busy working in the back 

rooms to sell off Saskatchewan‟s future. This Premier and his 

cabal of cheerleaders told us that nuclear power was a good idea 

for Saskatchewan and that they think the private company 

Bruce Power should build two nuclear reactors. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, this is very interesting because we 

haven‟t seen anything from this government as to what 

happened with Bruce Power. We haven‟t seen any agreements 

that have potentially been signed, and we haven‟t seen any 

documents, any MOUs [memorandum of understanding], any 

paperwork that‟s been exchanged. We don‟t know if there was 

any money involved. We know nothing so far. Why? Because 

they haven‟t come clean on their discussions with Bruce Power 

and inviting them to come to this province to build nuclear 

reactors in this province. 

 

And why do we think that there might have been an agreement 

signed, Mr. Speaker? Why? Simply because of a number of 

things that took place. First of all, that they were there from the 

very beginning with their pompoms, cheerleading on the whole 

notion and then wanting to ram it down the throats of 

Saskatchewan people. Then having the biased nuclear study that 

was done in this province. Then having a chaos-ridden UDP 

[Uranium Development Partnership] consultation process that 

didn‟t truly examine what the Saskatchewan people of this 

province were looking for in terms of all the energy options, all 

the information about the Bruce Power deal, all the costings, 

and all of the needs that would be required for this province, not 

to mention any notion of demand-side management or 

conservation. That‟s what people were looking for in the 

Uranium Development Partnership consultations that took place 

with Dan Perrins, but unfortunately Saskatchewan people didn‟t 

see that. 

 

[15:15] 

 

But what did Saskatchewan people get? Saskatchewan people 

got a visit from an ex-Sask Party MLA who visited their homes 

on behalf of Bruce Power to try and secure land for Bruce 

Power. That‟s what Saskatchewan people got. So if we think 

that there‟s something nefarious going on with the discussions 

that took place with Bruce Power, Mr. Speaker, you‟ll have to 

excuse us because it smells nefarious. It seems nefarious. It 

looks to be nefarious, so guess what? My mom always told me 

that if it‟s got all those factors, it probably is nefarious, Mr. 

Speaker. Walks like a duck, quacks like a duck — it probably is 

a duck. 

 

So this government wasted over $3 million and more than a 

year actively peddling nuclear power, and this government is 

now reticent on its plan for nuclear after the report on its own 

sham consultations told the Premier something he obviously 

didn‟t want to hear and wasn‟t looking forward to hearing. The 

report released by Dan Perrins in early September of this year 

— only about a month ago, Mr. Speaker — told the Premier to 

stop being the foolhardy salesman and start acting like a 

premier. 

 

People want to know all the details, all the facts, all the plans, 

before any decision is made to let Bruce Power build nuclear 

reactors in this province, Mr. Speaker, questions like who is 

going to pay for the construction? Who is going to pay for the 

decommissioning? Where is the nuclear waste going to go? 

How many taxpayer dollars did the Premier, acting as the 

foolhardy salesman, already commit to Bruce Power? The 

Premier should come clean on this, Mr. Speaker. The Premier 

should come clean. Will the government even legitimately 

study the alternatives to high-cost nuclear, like wind, solar, 

geothermal, and others? 

 

And finally, why is the Premier not upfront about his plans for 

nuclear power in this province? Why is he not being upfront? 

What is he hiding, Mr. Speaker? We want to know. The 

Saskatchewan public wants to know. And it‟s only fair that 

Saskatchewan people know because it‟s their taxpayer dollars 

that are being used and committed here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In the meantime, before even the release of the report on the 

sham public consultations for nuclear power generation, Mr. 

Premier — the salesman — comes up with a new idea to build 

an isotope reactor in Saskatoon, no consultation again, no 

dedication of releasing the plans to the public. No legislative 

committee or unbiased, independent panel of experts to 

examine the proposal — just the Premier, the salesman, with his 

in-a-rush attitude and the dwindling wallet of the taxpayer 

money. Unlike premiers, salesmen don‟t have to worry about 

obstacles like democratic scrutiny or public consultations. And 

just like his edited biography, this Premier authors a different 

version of reality when his plan flounders. 

 

In this Throne Speech, this government dubiously claims it is 

considering all the options — not just nuclear power — for 

power generation in Saskatchewan. In fact this Premier even 

suggests that wind power, after nearly two years of ignoring the 

most promising renewable energy power resources, may finally 

be part of the so-called power generation strategy. Now they‟re 

coming forward with that. Why? Because they‟re getting 

slaughtered on the idea of having a nuclear power plant or two 

plants in this province, and now they‟re finally seeing that the 

people of this province want to have the most cost-effective, 

sustainable, safe, affordable energy sources for the province 

going forward. The people of this province want to secure the 



October 27, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3241 

future of this province and not just throw it away at some 

cheerleading exercise that the Premier wants to promote. 

 

However the mention of wind power — no matter how 

disingenuous — is largely declarative as the Sask Party 

hijacked committee of the legislature looking at energy options 

desperately tries to buy time and press for the nuclear-stricken 

Premier. That‟s what we still think, Mr. Speaker. You see, Mr. 

Speaker, when you‟re a salesman and a report tells you that 

there‟s no appetite and there may not even be a market for your 

idea, your product, one can expect a foolhardy salesman just to 

change the pitch. After all the time that this Premier, the 

salesman, wasted on nuclear and millions of dollars he gave to 

friends of the industry to tell him that he had a good idea to sell 

. . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — How much did he give to Bruce Power? 

 

Ms. Morin: — Well we‟re not sure how much he gave to Bruce 

Power because he hasn‟t come clean on that yet . . . [inaudible] 

. . . So this foolhardy salesman decided to change the pitch for 

nuclear. This Premier is still the salesman. High-cost nuclear 

power delivered by the private company, Bruce Power, is still 

the product. 

 

We just have in this Throne Speech a new sales pitch of wait 

and see, wait and see. We heard the Minister of Energy and 

Resources say themselves, the Dan Perrins report isn‟t saying 

that, you know, don‟t go forward with the Bruce Power project. 

No, the Minister of Energy and Resources himself is saying it‟s 

a yellow light. And his interpretation of that yellow light is, it‟s 

a slowdown; proceed with caution. Proceed with caution is 

what he‟s saying. Unfortunately under the highway traffic Act, 

it means be prepared to stop. That message didn‟t seem to get 

through to the Minister of Energy and Resources and the 

Premier of this government. 

 

In this Throne Speech, we‟re also told that Saskatchewan have a 

so-called unique and practical carbon emissions plan to make 

up for this government‟s broken election promise. This 

government also talks about more efficiency for environmental 

regulation. Mr. Speaker, every time right wingers talk about 

efficiency, cuts usually follow — broken promise to reduce 

carbon emissions, new sales pitch for nuclear power, and cuts to 

environmental regulation. 

 

This Premier is the man in the mirror. Perhaps he should just 

drop the salesman act and call the whole thing off, Mr. Speaker. 

That‟s what he should do. He should just call the whole thing 

off. Mr. Speaker, let‟s face it. All 15 pages of this government‟s 

Throne Speech spend more time looking back than moving 

forward. And in looking back, the details, the broken promises, 

responsibility for mistakes, and the consequences of right wing 

policy are left out of this government‟s Throne Speech. 

 

This Premier doesn‟t want to talk about their conservative-style 

accounting gaffe. It‟s the system‟s fault. So we‟ve already heard 

the Premier admit that he makes phone calls to his Finance 

minister and simply shuffles over $600 million on a whim on a 

Saturday, but when this government makes a $1.3 billion 

miscalculation on potash revenues, it‟s the system‟s fault, Mr. 

Speaker. Not something that has been in practice for a long time 

under many previous budgets to have balanced budgets 

delivered in this Legislative Assembly — no, this time it‟s the 

system‟s fault, despite the fact that the system has served this 

province very well in delivering balanced budgets in the past. 

But under this government, it‟s the system‟s fault. 

 

This Premier doesn‟t want to talk about the growing public 

frustration over this government‟s push for nuclear power, so 

they entertain wind power for now and keep silent on nuclear 

power. 

 

This Premier doesn‟t want to talk about why Saskatchewan has 

the highest inflation rate in all of Canada because that involves 

revealing their own government‟s right wing, you‟re on your 

own philosophy. That‟s it — you‟re on your own. 

 

For all of this government‟s effort to maintain the smug mantle 

of dedication to keep Saskatchewan moving forward, people 

know that Saskatchewan has seen better days. Working families 

need more than empty and pompous cheerleading. They deserve 

a responsible, accountable government willing to take the 

priorities of making ends meet seriously. This government, Mr. 

Speaker, has proven that they are just not up to the task. 

 

Mr. Speaker, New Democrats share with working families their 

collective frustration about the damage wrought by the Wall . . . 

by this government‟s woeful fiscal . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I ask the member not to use personal names 

of individuals and on a number of occasions it has been used. I 

ask the member to refrain. I recognize the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — My apologies, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, New 

Democrats share with working families their collective 

frustration about the damage wrought by this government‟s 

woeful fiscal mismanagement, blind arrogance, and indifference 

to people‟s priorities. Indeed one just has to look at the 

Premier‟s $7.2 million vanity project for the Olympic pavilion 

which will only be used for two weeks instead of providing 

needed financial relief for struggling working families. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the residents of Regina Walsh Acres, 

I stand opposed to this government‟s Throne Speech and stand 

in favour of the motion moved by the Leader of the Opposition 

asserting that this government has lost the support of the 

Assembly and the people of this province. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m glad to finally 

be able to stand up and speak to the Speech from the Throne. 

 

I would like to welcome the new members, first off, of Regina 

Douglas Park and Saskatoon Riversdale. I know in talking to 

the member from Regina Rosemont, he‟s very happy with his 

seatmate. And I know that the member from Regina Douglas 

Park has been in this building before, and he kind of knows the 

ins and outs of it. However I have to say that to the new 

member from Saskatoon Riversdale, as you will find out, it‟s a 

lot of work and it takes a lot of time away from your family. So 

I thank you for having the courage to come forward and be a 

part of this wonderful Assembly. 



3242 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2009 

I also want to thank the people of Carrot River Valley for 

electing me and for putting me in this great House to bring their 

concerns in front of this government, to bring their concerns, 

and hopefully that we can make a difference. Fact is, I shouldn‟t 

say hopefully. I know that we are making a difference. The 

people are actually pretty happy back at home. They‟ve got a 

government now that is actually listening to them. 

 

I would also like to say thank you to my family. As everybody 

knows, this is tough on the family. I‟m from way up in the 

northeast, so consequently it‟s a long old hike to get back and 

forth up there. And actually, you know, I guess my wife 

sometimes does like it a little bit better when I‟m gone for a 

while. But the odd time actually, she may actually miss me. 

 

And the reason I got into this was, like all members, we want to 

make a difference. We want to make a difference for our 

communities and for our families. And I think this is what is 

happening. We‟re seeing more employment opportunities for 

our children within Saskatchewan. And that is the reason, that is 

the reason, Mr. Speaker, that I actually decided to get into 

government because I said Saskatchewan has so many, so many 

opportunities that are being bypassed by the NDP. Somebody 

has to get out there and try and make a difference. Somebody 

has to get out there and try and make a difference to move this 

province forward. So again, thank you very much to my family 

for letting me do this. 

 

I also want to say thank you to my CAs [constituency assistant]. 

Now if you noticed, when I say CAs, it‟s plural. Quite a few 

people here know that our long-time constituency assistant 

Shelley Meyer had a baby this summer. And she had a baby boy 

that is very, very healthy, by the name of Jaxson. And we‟re 

very happy for her and very proud to have a future 

Saskatchewan Party voter coming along. Now it‟s going to take 

a little while. 

 

Shelley is now on maternity leave, so we have actually three 

part-time CAs within my office, all very able people. We have 

Charlene Enns, Cindy Warner and LeeAnne Merrett. And as 

everybody knows, you can‟t do much without your CAs. The 

CAs, they really do a good job of running that office. And 

especially when we‟re down here in Regina, in the House, it‟s 

very important to have good CAs, and we have great ones up 

there. So I really appreciate them, and I want it to be on the 

Hansard to say thank you to all of them. 

 

I would like to talk about our constituency of Carrot River 

Valley for a bit here. Carrot River Valley, as many of you 

people know, I‟ve always got up here and I‟ve said it‟s the 

greatest constituency in all of Saskatchewan. Now I‟ve run into 

a little problem with that. It seems that I‟ve got about 58 other 

members — or 57 other members — that have a disagreement 

with that. And so I won‟t say it‟s the greatest, but it is awfully, 

awfully good because what I want to do is . . . Some of the 

other members want to relieve me of some of my body fluids if 

I keep on saying we‟re the greatest. This is something that I 

believe. I believe in northeastern Saskatchewan, and I believe in 

Carrot River Valley. 

 

[15:30] 

 

We had our caucus retreat up in Nipawin this year, which is in 

the Carrot River Valley. And it was nice to see all the members 

come up there, especially the ones from down south who don‟t 

know what trees are, and it was great to have them up there and 

visit our fair communities. Everybody knows that Nipawin is 

well known for some of the best tourism area and some of the 

best golf courses in all of Saskatchewan, and some of the 

biggest fish of course, Mr. Speaker. We have the Tobin Lake is 

well known for being as one of the greatest places to fish, and 

not just Saskatchewan or Canada, but all of North America. 

There are tournaments going up there, and we have people 

coming up to Nipawin from all corners of North America to go 

fishing. Honestly there‟s fish up there that . . . I can‟t put my 

arms out far enough. But they‟re big. 

 

We have a lot of things going on in Carrot River Valley 

constituency. We have a new long-term care facility that will be 

going up in Tisdale — something that our government is 

putting forward — 1 of 13 long-term facilities in rural 

Saskatchewan. Also there‟s talk of a new motor hotel going up, 

or it‟s actually in the planning stages for Tisdale. 

 

And when we go over to Carrot River, we have . . . The lumber 

industry has not been kind to us. But we have C & C Wood 

Products looking at reopening the facility in both Carrot River 

and Hudson Bay. So this is great news for that also. And there‟s 

also a strong possibility of a new motor hotel being put up in 

Carrot River. So the northeast, the northeast is moving along. 

 

Hudson Bay was hit hard by the downturn in the forestry, but 

when you take the possibility of C & C starting up their 

plywood plant there . . . We have another initiative going over 

at Hudson Bay, and that is a peat moss bog being started up. 

Now peat moss is brought into Carrot River into their plant, and 

the bog was running out over there. So they came to our 

government and wanting help on building a road into the peat 

moss bog. 

 

This is another initiative that our government along with the 

federal government took, to go and build this road into this bog. 

Hopefully the environmental study will be done quite quickly. 

They plan on doing the tendering for the road this spring, and 

we will get that going. Actually and the peat moss is talking 

about doubling the size of their plant in Carrot River. So, like I 

said, things are going good. 

 

The agriculture end, we had great crops this year. But 

unfortunately, unfortunately we‟re the same as everybody else. 

This bad weather has kind of put us at a bit of a loss. But we 

have about 75 to 80 per cent of the harvest is done in Carrot 

River Valley, so we‟re thankful for that. And we‟re thankful for 

all the things that we have up there. 

 

You know, there‟s been a lot of good things happening along 

with the taxes and the roads and the bridges and the culverts. 

This part of Saskatchewan, this part of Saskatchewan is moving 

forward, and it‟s in contrast, it‟s in contrast to what it used to be 

like under the previous administration. 

 

Now the previous administration has a terrible habit of always 

being back there. They keep talking — as we just heard the last 

speaker, Mr. Speaker — talking about back in the ‟80s, back in 

the ‟70s, back in the ‟90s. You want to know something, Mr. 

Speaker? Disco is dead. Disco is dead. This government on this 



October 27, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3243 

side of the House, we‟re going to dance with the stars. We‟re 

moving forward. We‟re new. 

 

Speaking of various different things that have been happening 

in Carrot River Valley, this government, this government is 

committed to rebuilding the roads that the previous 

administration left in absolutely deplorable shape, you know. 

And I give a lot of credit to our ministers from Rosetown and 

Cypress Hills for what they‟ve done — $40.9 million, $40.9 

million into our roads, culverts, and bridges since the 

Saskatchewan Party was elected in Carrot River Valley alone. 

 

You know, I thought everybody would be happy. I thought 

everybody would be happy. But you want to know something? I 

actually got an email from a person who‟s complaining about 

getting tar on his new truck. And he wondered if the 

government would pay to clean this tar off. I had to turn to my 

CA and say, how do I answer this diplomatically? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I did answer. I did answer the email by 

saying I had the same problem because I was coming back from 

Hudson Bay this spring, and I got tar on my vehicle because 

they were fixing the road. I got tar on my vehicle. And I took 

WD-40, and I sprayed it on the vehicle and I wiped it off. So I 

explained to this person this is how you clean the tar off. 

 

Now I did actually put on to the rest of that email that, you 

know, our government, our government is committed to fixing 

the roads in this province that were left in deplorable shape by 

the previous administration, and he was going to find road 

construction all over the province this summer — this was last 

summer when I was writing this. What I really wanted to say, 

but it wasn‟t very diplomatic, what I really wanted to say, I‟m 

sorry because under the NDP administration you never would 

have had to worry about getting tar on your vehicle because 

they never fixed any roads. 

 

Now a lot of our Throne Speech, a lot of our Throne Speech 

was on health and we just heard here, a while ago, the Leader of 

the Opposition talking about health. And let‟s go back and, you 

know, take a look at the record of health under the NDP 

administration. They were afraid, afraid to set any goals. We 

came up and set a goal. We said, we‟re going to have 800 new 

nurses in four years. And they kind of chuckled at that because, 

you see, they didn‟t ever want to set that goal because they were 

never going to get it. 

 

Now our latest numbers are actually . . . Some of the people 

have been talking about the numbers but our latest numbers, 

we‟re up to just about 80 per cent. People have been saying 70 

per cent. We‟re actually just about to 80 per cent. And this is 

only two years, not quite two years into our mandate. 

 

You know, the NDP, they talk about how they have to 

reconnect with rural Saskatchewan. Now it‟s pretty hard to 

reconnect with rural Saskatchewan when on the health end, they 

were the ones that shut down 52 hospitals in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

You know, the people of Carrot River Valley are very happy 

that the Saskatchewan Party got in because, you know, we only 

had three hospitals left, in Nipawin, Tisdale, and Hudson Bay. 

They were probably the next ones that were going to be closed 

had the NDP got in next time. 

 

You know, there‟s some of the other things that you can take a 

look at on the health end of it, and we have a great Health 

minister. He‟s worked diligently, diligently to move forward to 

fix up a failing infrastructure. Now the NDP spent $2 million on 

a study that identified $1.2 billion in infrastructure repairs that 

were needed within the province. And what did they do? They 

did nothing. 

 

I often hear the member from North Battleford and he keeps on 

talking about the hospital there and how it needed to be 

replaced. Now we actually . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. If the members want to continue 

individual debate, they can do it outside the Chamber to allow 

the members who are recognized the opportunity to speak. 

Order. The member from Carrot River Valley. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Now the member 

from North Battleford, he I believe was Health minister at one 

time, and he talks now about how we should be going and 

replacing the hospital in North Battleford. Yet under his watch, 

under his watch nothing was ever done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you take a look at it, you know, we have 

130 new registered nurse education seats have been created. 

We‟re increasing it because our population is growing. We 

know that we have to move forward. We‟ve increased medical 

school enrolments, adding 40 new training seats and 60 

additional residency seats that will be there by 2011. Now 

these, these are initiatives. These are goals. 

 

We have 78 more physicians since December of 2008, 

including nine new physicians in rural communities. This is 

what we need. We don‟t need to be shutting those hospitals 

down in the rural constituencies; we need to be moving them 

forward. And we keep on hearing from the other side, well how 

many hospitals have you built? Well hey, we‟ve only been in 

here for a couple of years. The way things are growing in 

Saskatchewan, we‟re going to have to start building hospitals in 

rural Saskatchewan again — hospitals that the NDP shut down. 

 

You know, you go down to the wait times — another one; 

another goal. People sit back there and they say, it can‟t be 

done. We can‟t cut these wait times in four years. We can‟t cut 

that down to three months, taking it away from the 18 months 

that is there right now. I don‟t know if you‟ve noticed this, but 

when we set goals, guess what? We actually do them. 

 

You know, the NDP sat there and they tore apart rural 

Saskatchewan one hospital at a time. This government, with our 

absolutely fantastic Minister of Health, is moving, is moving 

this province forward. 

 

Another thing that is very helpful to rural Saskatchewan is our 

regional parks. Mr. Speaker, I sat on the regional park board of 

Pasquia Regional Park for a number of years. And under that 

administration, under that administration, they were breaking 

the parks. They were not giving them any money whatsoever. 

Our parks were going down. We were relying strictly on trying 



3244 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2009 

to raise money all on our own, trying to keep it open, and trying 

to build quality places for people of rural Saskatchewan to go. 

 

Now in Pasquia Regional Park alone, in Pasquia Regional Park 

alone, this government this year gave $75,000 to the Dickson 

Hardie Interpretive Centre. Now the interpretive centre, I‟ll 

have to explain that there was a crocodilian that was found right 

by the park. Now a crocodilian is a fossilized crocodile, and it 

was found there. And this is all housed within the Dickson 

Hardie Interpretive Centre. This was an old building. Actually it 

was bought from E.B. Campbell dam back in about 1965 or so, 

and it really needed to be worked on and updated. This 

government put their money where their mouth was. They said, 

we‟ll do that. 

 

And going back on the regional park and the . . . You know, this 

government, this government put in $1.015 million into our 

regional parks. That was in this past year and that was to 

improve these parks. And they‟re doing some matching dollars 

and it brings it up to $2 million. Now let‟s take this to the last 

year, the last year the NDP government, they put in the grand 

total of $75,000 into all of the regional parks. 

 

[15:45] 

 

We could continue on. We could continue on, Mr. Speaker, and 

talk about probably the best Agriculture minister this province 

has ever had. You know, he has gone out and done things, done 

things for the agriculture. The farmers are very happy and, you 

know, they would almost like to kiss him. I say almost. Take a 

look at what he has done, what he has done since we have come 

to power. 

 

The crop insurance program has been improved, you know, and 

look at what happened under the NDP. The crop insurance 

premiums increased and the coverage decreased. Under ours, 

it‟s the exact opposite. 

 

Wildlife damage is very important, is very important in our 

constituency because we do have a lot of wildlife damage. We 

increased it this year up to 100 per cent from the 80 per cent. 

 

Let‟s get down to another thing that we had, the largest — and 

this is critical for all the people in rural Saskatchewan — largest 

education property tax reduction in the province‟s history. This 

was critical to the farmers, to the farmers‟ well-being. Not just 

Carrot River Valley but the farmers all over Saskatchewan. This 

government listens. This government listens to our rural people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you know, we could look back . . . And also 

another thing. We look back, and we look back on how the 

NDP shut down all of the rural agriculture offices. And you 

know, where we are, we‟re actually putting more of them back 

in place plus, Mr. Speaker, we are moving our crop insurance 

back to Melville where people actually understand, and it‟ll be 

more economical for the farmers to be able to call in. 

 

We‟ve got some other things going along here and that is with 

SaskPower. Now we know that the previous administration 

basically ran SaskPower into the ground. And now they were 

never expecting the province to grow which the province is 

doing. They were never, ever expecting the province to grow. 

Now we have a shortage of power and they sit there and say . . . 

[inaudible] . . . how did that happen? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Didn‟t see that one coming. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Didn‟t see that one coming. You‟re right. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it leaves it up to us as a government to make these 

hard choices on how we are going to move ahead with our 

power, which way we are going to go. Then to top it all off, 

they criticize us for actually going out there and checking to see 

if maybe nuclear might be a possibility. I don‟t know if it is or 

not. But they criticize, they criticize. I would like to know how 

many things that they did with trying to figure out how to 

manufacture more power within this province. 

 

They did play some games though. They did play some games 

with the utility rates because if you go back and look at the 

statistics, every time there was an election, guess what? We had 

a zero per cent power increase — quite amazing, quite amazing. 

 

You know, and they talk about our economy. Okay. Here we 

sit, here we sit. We have some things like we have the lowest 

unemployment in all of Canada. We‟ve got the five best cities 

to do business in in all of Canada. We‟ve got the best economy 

in all of Canada, but they want to sit back and talk doom and 

gloom. 

 

Now I have to admit, yes, there were some mistakes made on 

the budget. My learned friend from Saskatoon Massey Place 

brought up some quotes that I‟d made in the budget speech last 

spring. 

 

He also said that I was a nice guy. I liked that part of it. I like 

that part of it. I just wish that he would let all my colleagues 

know that. Because I always thought I was a nice guy, Mr. 

Speaker, and sometimes some of the people on this side don‟t 

agree with me. 

 

But to go back and talk about, to go back and talk about this 

budget, I would like to know what they would have done 

different — what they would have done different. You know, I 

can remember them sitting there saying, we‟re sitting on a 

mountain of money; go out and spend more. Now they‟re sitting 

there: well why did you spend that money? We have a very, 

very intelligent, smart, articulate Finance minister who went 

over that from one end to the other. And you think it hasn‟t 

worried him? Definitely, it has. 

 

But I‟ll tell you one thing. I don‟t think they could have done 

anything that . . . Well fact is, I know they couldn‟t have done 

any better, Mr. Speaker. I know that we did far better on this 

side than what that side had ever done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my time is, I guess, running short. So we . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Okay. The member from Regina 

Northeast was talking about a bit of music yesterday, and he 

was talking about an older song. And of course, he is getting up 

there in age, and I‟m no spring chicken myself. But anyway, I 

got to thinking about what exactly, what that side of the 

Chamber is and how the next election is going to go, and 

reminds me of a song by Janis Joplin. It went, bye-bye my 

baby, bye-bye, which I thought was fitting for them. 

 



October 27, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3245 

Whereas on our side of the House, Mr. Speaker, we‟re more 

like Rodgers and Hammerstein with Oklahoma!. We‟re positive 

and we‟re smiling and we‟re ready to go to work and it‟s “Oh, 

what a beautiful mornin‟, oh, what a beautiful day.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I support this Throne Speech because, Mr. 

Speaker, our government has worked hard, has worked hard on 

this side of the House. And we are successful. And we are 

successful, but the only time, the only time successful comes 

ahead of work is in the dictionary, Mr. Speaker. The only time 

success comes ahead of work is in the dictionary. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I‟m incredibly happy with this Throne Speech. 

Fact is I‟m happier than a hog with a fresh pail of slop. I 

certainly support, support this Throne Speech, and I do not 

support the amendment. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s a privilege and a pleasure indeed to rise and 

participate in the debate in the address in reply to the Throne 

Speech. Mr. Speaker, there have been a number of speakers that 

have participated already in the debate, and there‟s been some 

interesting positions taken. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I begin my comments about the Throne 

Speech and some of the things that are so exciting to be part of, 

I too also want to thank my family, especially my spouse, my 

wife, Gail, who has been just a tremendous amount of support 

to me over, not only this year but throughout my political career 

as indicated in the Legislative Assembly. It‟s not always an 

easy task to be here when you‟re miles away from your family 

and your spouse, and I want to thank her for her encouragement 

and her support. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as well, we could not do our jobs well enough 

without support of others, and I want to recognize my 

constituency assistants. My main constituency assistant, my 

full-time assistant, of course is Bob Blahay back in my office in 

Canora who comes from the community of Preeceville and 

knows almost everyone, I think, in the Canora-Pelly 

constituency and has been very, very valuable to me to be able 

to pass on information that arrives at my office through phone 

calls and emails and people that stop in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to thank Carol Sleeva. Carol Sleeva 

works not only here in the Legislative Assembly as a part-time 

ministerial assistant, but also as a part-time constituency 

assistant back in Canora-Pelly. And without their help of 

course, it would not be as easy to communicate on matters that 

are brought forward by constituents of Canora-Pelly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to also, on behalf of the opposition, as 

many of the opposition members have already, is to 

congratulate the two members who have been recently elected, 

one for the first time. And I had the pleasure of meeting the 

member from Saskatoon Riversdale one day, a few days before 

session started. And I welcome her because I know it‟s also a 

time for change, and we have new members that join the 

Assembly on an ongoing basis. So I welcome her and wish her 

well in her career here in the Legislative Assembly. 

 

I also want to welcome back the member for Regina Douglas 

Park. And I say welcome back, Mr. Speaker, because I was 

elected in 1995, and I recall coming into this Assembly and 

seeing that member in the Assembly. He happened to be sitting 

in the chair that I now occupy. And at that time, you know, 

which seems like an awful long time ago because, as I said, 14 

years ago is long but . . . I listened with some interest to the 

comments made by the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy 

who said that before next election, which will occur on 

November the 7th, 2011, that that member representing now 

Regina Douglas Park will have been elected and served in parts 

of five decades, Mr. Speaker — five decades. 

 

You know, I think some of the members were kidding me about 

my age today. And I said, you know, there‟s a time I think 

when retirement comes quickly. And I wonder about the 

member from Regina Douglas Park. But, Mr. Speaker, I wish 

him well. I wish him well as Leader of the Opposition. I know 

he has a tough task because some of the members who have 

been trying to deliver their speeches of course have had to deal 

with maybe some of his interruptions as well, trying to convey 

their points of view. But that is not much different than what I 

was accustomed to back in 1995 to 2000. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟d also like to wish one person well. And this will 

probably come as a surprise to her because I‟m sure she‟s 

watching. There‟s a person in North Battleford, a resident of 

North Battleford who watches the debates in the Legislative 

Assembly on a continuous basis. And I know that Edna Pollock, 

who‟s well into her 90s, will be watching. And I wish her well 

as she continues to provide advice to not only myself, but I 

know other members as well in this Legislative Assembly. So 

best wishes to you, Edna. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to turn first of all to some of the 

tremendous accomplishments of this government in the 

Canora-Pelly constituency. Mr. Speaker, I know that the 

member from Walsh Acres spoke, I think, for probably 25 

minutes times two, so we‟ll try to adhere to the time of 25 

minutes, Mr. Speaker, but I know that there‟s a lot of terrific 

information that I want to put on the record. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some of the things that have occurred in 

Canora-Pelly are first of all to deal with municipal spending. 

And, Mr. Speaker, when I look at the summary of the projects 

that have been announced for towns, for villages, for rural 

municipalities in Canora-Pelly constituency, I‟m quite 

impressed, Mr. Speaker. I‟m impressed by the fact that the 

provincial contribution to these towns and villages and RMs 

[rural municipality] is totalling $5.604 million. Mr. Speaker, 

that‟s a tremendous amount of encouragement to these 

municipalities, to these communities to do a number of things. 

And I‟m just going to highlight a few of them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In the area of bridges and roads, Mr. Speaker, the towns of 

Kamsack, the town of Canora, the RM of Good Lake, and the 

RM of Preeceville have taken advantage of this funding to 

continue enhancement of bridges. Mr. Speaker, of great concern 

to many communities is of course water and sewer treatment. 

Mr. Speaker, the following communities are receiving 

assistance from the provincial government: Kamsack, 

Endeavour, Pelly, Preeceville, Springside, Norquay, and Hyas. 

 



3246 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2009 

Mr. Speaker, along with those accomplishments, we have 

moved in the area of providing assistance to recreational 

facilities. Whether they be roof improvements or siding or 

heating and lighting, these are improvements that many of the 

recreational facilities . . . because like school infrastructure, the 

infrastructure is aging, and it needs constant repair or upgrade. 

And, Mr. Speaker, the town of Kamsack, the town of 

Springside, and the village of Stenen is taking advantage of 

thousands of dollars worth of provincial assistance to work on 

these projects. 

 

[16:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, two RMs are taking advantage of building new 

maintenance shops — the RMs of Sliding Hills and RM of 

Clayton. Both of them are moving forward with maintenance 

shops. But one of the best additions, I think, is to the town of 

Sturgis, and the town of Sturgis has been lobbying and has been 

advocating that their community needs a brand new community 

hall. And, Mr. Speaker, that is the project that they have 

addressed, and that is the one that they‟re moving forward to. I 

know it‟s going to take tremendous support from the 

community because it‟s not a small project. And we as a 

provincial government have been able to assist to some degree. 

 

So I congratulate all of the communities for their efforts in 

moving the infrastructure improvements forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, highways, in the area of highways of course, 

Highway 16, which is a major highway from Saskatoon through 

to Yorkton and beyond, we‟re seeing an improvement to 

repaving near the community of Springside. Mr. Speaker, 

bridge repair is also needed because bridges have again been 

constructed decades and decades ago. And we‟re seeing the RM 

of Livingston and the RM of Hudson Bay take advantage of this 

and do some bridge repairs. Mr. Speaker, those are just a few of 

the things that I‟ve highlighted for improvement in 

Canora-Pelly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the other areas of need in Canora-Pelly is 

of course education. And I am pleased to report that the 

Norquay School has moved forward not only from a design 

stage, from a planning stage, through to its construction stage, 

Mr. Speaker. And in fact students have moved into the new 

classroom areas of Norquay School on Monday, September 

21st. It wasn‟t quite ready for the start of school at the end of 

August, but they‟ve now moved into it. Mr. Speaker, this is a 

tremendous addition to the community of Norquay. 

 

The total project was almost $3 million, 2.8 million, of which 

the ministry‟s share was 1.7. Good Spirit School Division of 

course is the school division responsible for education in the 

Norquay community, and they provided the rest. So 

congratulations to the board of education and all of the people 

in Norquay. Mr. Speaker, 733 square meters of new 

construction was added. It provided for much needed 

mechanical renovations as well. And we have now in Norquay 

three new classrooms, a science lab, and performing and visual 

arts rooms as well. So, Mr. Speaker, that official opening is 

going to take place in the not too distant future as we celebrate a 

tremendous achievement by the community of Norquay. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the greatest improvements that I have been 

part of in my ministry is in the area of child care. Child care is 

so important, Mr. Speaker, as I‟ve indicated in this Assembly 

before. As I‟ve travelled not only in the province of 

Saskatchewan, but even in travels outside of the country, I have 

heard from potential immigrants. As they look at Saskatchewan 

as a potential place for building a brand new home, they‟ve 

inquired about daycare, whether or not we have a daycare 

system that will provide their needs. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I know that the statistics will show that in 

relationship to the three other Western provinces, we have very 

poor numbers in terms of the number of spaces that are 

available. But, Mr. Speaker, we‟re making an effort to address 

that. And I think when I get into some of the discussions on the 

province-wide system you‟ll see why. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do want to point out that in the Canora-Pelly 

constituency, in the town of Canora, there is a new daycare that 

has now been operating just about two years. And it has 25 

spaces in it, and of course the government grant that was 

provided to that daycare totalled $75,000 to get those 25 spaces 

constructed and in place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a very recent announcement of course was the 

community of Kamsack. Kamsack has 33 spaces, and the 

government provided a $99,000 capital grant to Kamsack. But 

the most recent announcement, Mr. Speaker, as we are now 

looking at the current budget of over 1,000 spaces that will be 

allocated by the end of March 31st, the community of Pelly 

applied for a daycare centre and have been granted 33 spaces. 

And, Mr. Speaker, the capital allocation to them is $110,880. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are also additional dollars that are provided 

through what is called the environment grant and the start-up 

funding grant, and these are grants that are provided to the 

board that is operating that daycare to assist them in doing 

purchases of supplies, materials, and of course the actual hiring 

that will take place. So, Mr. Speaker, these are things that have 

been accomplished in three communities, and we now have a 

total of 91 child care spaces in the constituency of 

Canora-Pelly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the other exciting announcements by the 

minister responsible for providing care to disabled people was 

the expansion of the MacKenzie Society. As people in 

Canora-Pelly know, the MacKenzie Society Ventures operates a 

home in the community of Preeceville. It also operates assisted 

living areas, but one of the contributions that has been made by 

the government is to expand MacKenzie Society Ventures to 

allow for the provision of a group home in Canora. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this will be done by the fact that $175,000 in 

one-time capital funds are being given to the MacKenzie 

Society Ventures. Their annual operating grant will be about 

$473,000 and what this will do, Mr. Speaker, is probably create 

10 to 13 permanent, full- and part-time jobs for employees in 

Canora, and it will enhance the number of people receiving care 

— the number of those with intellectual disabilities receiving 

care — to a grand total of 25. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, now we will be able to have care provided to 

three people right in the town of Canora and they will no longer 

have to travel to Preeceville to receive that kind of care. So it‟s 



October 27, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3247 

a great accomplishment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about the provincial positions on a 

number of things, and one of them of course is education 

property tax. Mr. Speaker, we know from our discussions with 

many people that there was a need for change. There was a need 

to address the problem because, Mr. Speaker, we have had this 

problem before us for years. Mr. Speaker, I recall a tax revolt 

under the NDP where over 150 rural municipalities were 

staging tax revolts to say, we‟re not going to pay; we‟re not 

going to pay the increasing number of dollars needed to fund 

education. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, education is extremely important so this is, 

you know, this needed to be addressed as quickly as possible. 

Mr. Speaker, I do recall in fact in looking at some of the history 

material that the former, former, former leader of the NDP, 

Tommy Douglas, said that there needed to be a change, that the 

property owner could not be the person that is required to pay 

for education property tax. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, that was how we approached education 

funding. We wanted to ensure that there was a commitment, 

that there was indeed proper dollars provided to school boards, 

and we approached this from the point of view of setting some 

goals. 

 

We wanted to set some goals for pre-kindergarten to 12 

financing that would do three things, Mr. Speaker. Firstly, there 

had to be the achieving of a fair balance for education funding. 

As I‟ve indicated, the traditional split or some of the 

percentages that have existed in the past where taxpayers paid 

40 per cent of the cost of K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] 

education and the government, through the General Revenue 

Fund, paid 60 per cent, those percentages had changed. Those 

percentages had changed where in some school divisions there 

was a huge amount of dollars expected from the property 

owners and as a result people were unhappy with that. 

Saskatchewan was the province that relied on property owners 

to contribute tax dollars to the highest amount of any province 

in the Dominion of Canada. So we needed to get a balance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also wanted to ensure that the kindergarten to 

grade 12 system is properly funded. When we recognize the 

costs of education, Mr. Speaker, they have to be the real costs. 

And that is why in this budget the largest amount of dollars 

allocated in one single increase was $241 million. So, Mr. 

Speaker, boards of education have now a position where the 

dollars that we are provided adequately address the budgets that 

they have put forward. 

 

The third situation, Mr. Speaker, that we wanted to achieve, the 

third goal, was that there needed to be a reduction in the 

education portion of property tax. Now, Mr. Speaker, I think the 

information has been distributed to everyone in the province, 

and anyone who owns property has had the opportunity to be 

aware now that the mill rates that used to be set by school 

boards are no longer set by the boards of education. Those mill 

rates are now set by the province of education and they have 

been reduced, Mr. Speaker. They have been reduced 

significantly. 

 

But on the other side we‟ve also, as I indicated, contributed 

$241 million — additional dollars — to the pot of money that 

has been distributed to boards of education. So what this will 

do, Mr. Speaker, is that it will move the government‟s share of 

funding pre-K to 12 education up to 63 per cent of the total bill 

for this year, 2009-10. And because of the changes we‟re going 

to make, and we‟ve already announced those changes, it will 

move the share for 2010-11 up to 66 per cent. That‟s a 

significant amount, Mr. Speaker, of dollars that now will come 

from the General Revenue Fund and lessen that burden on 

property tax owners. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for this year the amount of savings from the 

property tax payer will be about $103 million, and with the 

reduction in mill rates proposed for January 1 of 2010 we will 

see a further reduction of $53 million. This means, Mr. Speaker, 

that $156 million less is being asked for from the property 

owner, a tremendous change from what was the past. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I remember going to a number of SARM 

[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] 

conventions, SARM conventions where the NDP, when they 

were in government, spoke about the need to address, the need 

to address education funding. And I recall the quotes from the 

minister of . . . then it was actually the leader, I‟m sorry, the 

leader of the NDP party who said that the status quo, status quo 

in 2003 was unacceptable, Mr. Speaker. Those were the 

comments made by Lorne Calvert, who said that it just was not 

acceptable. That was in 2003. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have another quote from the then leader, Lorne 

Calvert, and this is from March 3 of 2006. So three years has 

passed by since when Mr. Calvert said that the current system is 

just not acceptable. He said this, and I quote: 

 

“Three years ago, I very publicly stated that the level of 

education tax being taken from farmland was both unfair 

and too high — a problem that has been with us for 

decades.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, three years of NDP rule and three years of 

non-addressing of the problem. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, that is why, when we became government in 

2008, the Premier challenged not only myself as Minister of 

Education, but also the member for Rosetown who was my 

Legislative Secretary, to look at what is the alternative. What 

could an alternative be? Because the short term was a procedure 

of rebates, Mr. Speaker. And we have introduced a percentage 

of rebate on agricultural land, on commercial land, on 

residential land, but, Mr. Speaker, that‟s the short term because 

you have to be able to have a long-term plan in place. So what 

we did, Mr. Speaker, is we implemented a mill rate structure 

that is now set by the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

[16:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 2009, residential mill rates, as all property 

owners have seen, is 10.08. Now that‟s significant, Mr. 

Speaker, because the residential mill rate of 10.08 is the same in 

Estevan, Saskatchewan or Saskatoon, Saskatchewan or 

Shaunavon or Invermay, Saskatchewan. Residences have the 

same mill rate. 

 



3248 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2009 

And, Mr. Speaker, we also did the same thing in agriculture. 

We said that the mill rate for agricultural properties for this year 

will be 7.08 mills. And it‟s the same, Mr. Speaker, all across 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many people — those who owned residences, 

those who owned agricultural land — were very quick to take a 

look at their tax notice. Mr. Speaker, it‟s pretty easy. If you are 

a farmer who has a taxable assessment of $300,000, Mr. 

Speaker, that comes from again a fair value market assessment 

where a percentage of value is applied. And if that end result is 

$300,000 worth of taxable assessment, probably in the area of 

10 quarters of land, maybe up to 12 depending upon the 

assessed values. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, a very simple calculation is that many school 

divisions have had mill rates of 20, 21, 22 mills of taxation for 

education purposes. I‟m just going to suggest for simplicity‟s 

sake that if the mill rate was 20.08 mills and now we‟ve put in 

place a mill rate of 7.08 mills, Mr. Speaker, that‟s 13 mills of 

tax difference. And when you multiply that by a $300,000 

assessment . . . Mr. Speaker, there‟s farmers that know 

immediately, if they look back at their tax records of three and 

four years ago, that they have saved $3,900 as a result of the 

change of this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that same thing happens in residences. When you 

look at the mill rate of 10.08 and if you take a school board mill 

rate of an average mill rate of 20.08, that‟s a change of 10 mills. 

So if you had an assessed property where you were paying taxes 

of, I‟ll change that to a $200,000 home — which there are many 

in this province, Mr. Speaker — that owner saved $2,000 of 

taxes. So that is a tremendous accomplishment that has been 

done with taxation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk for a bit about child care because, 

Mr. Speaker, as I indicated in my comments about child care 

spaces in Canora-Pelly, this is a very important issue for our 

government. Mr. Speaker, in the 2009-10 budget, we allocated 

over $4 million for development of 1,000 new child care 

spaces. Now, Mr. Speaker, that‟s going to bring the total 

number of spaces by March 31st . . . And we‟re hoping that all 

of the spaces will be ready to go because there are some boards 

that are working on ensuring that their facilities are ready. But, 

Mr. Speaker, that will be the biggest single increase in one year 

in the province of Saskatchewan, and it‟ll move our total up to 

11,400 spaces. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since we became government — and it‟s not even 

two years, Mr. Speaker, since we were elected — that will bring 

the total of new child care spaces that we have paid for through 

grants up by 2,700 — 2,700 new spaces for child care in this 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is much more to do. As I indicated, the 

province of Saskatchewan doesn‟t rank very high when we 

compare it to our neighbours. But, Mr. Speaker, under the NDP, 

there was little movement. There was very little movement in 

terms of spaces. And if you looked back at the record of the 

NDP, you will see that, you know, it‟s not too many years ago 

where we were very, very small in terms of the number of 

training spaces. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the other things that we wanted to do for 

child care is to ensure that we have quality instructors. And that 

is why we have allocated $1.2 million into the area of early 

childhood educators. Because these are people that we‟re going 

to require in these child care . . . in these homes, in these 

facilities, to provide the adequate child care. And, Mr. Speaker, 

we‟ve also recognized that children come with exceptional 

needs, and in fact we have allocated $375,000 to children with 

exceptional needs. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there are many things that we want to 

accomplish with child care and, Mr. Speaker, one of those 

things — and I was very happy to have the Minister of Finance 

agree — that within this year, within the direction provided, not 

only last spring by the budget, but also by the Throne Speech 

now, that we‟re moving forward. That we‟re moving forward 

with those 1,000 child care spaces and that we‟re going to 

deliver spaces across the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think one of the areas that is something that the 

NDP probably was not proud of was the infrastructure position 

of schools in this province. Mr. Speaker, over 70 per cent of our 

schools in the province of Saskatchewan were built prior to 

1969, and we needed to address that. We needed to move 

forward because, Mr. Speaker, if you look at the budgets of the 

NDP throughout the latter part of the 2000s, the early part of the 

2000s, the latter part of the 1990s, you‟ll see budgets of 18 

million, 23 million, $37 million for capital infrastructure. Mr. 

Speaker, those numbers just were not sufficient. 

 

And what we were seeing in the province was a buildup, was a 

buildup of an infrastructure deficit. Mr. Speaker, the Ministry of 

Education has submissions from all boards of education. All 

boards of education submit major projects that they need to see 

addressed. Some need to be addressed immediately; some need 

to be addressed in the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we have done in the last, well not quite 24 

months, we‟ve allocated over $300 million to projects in the 

province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, there are basically two 

kinds of projects that school divisions put forward. They put 

forward smaller projects which are valued less than $800,000 

and then the major projects. Mr. Speaker, the total number of 

projects that we have put in place for this year are: 22 major 

projects have been announced over the last two years, and we 

have well over 150 block projects that have moved forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these projects affect every community in the 

province. They guarantee they affect every school division in 

the province. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, they‟re almost to the point now where we 

have to affect every school because there‟s a roof project. 

There‟s a window project. There‟s a replacement of a furnace 

required. There are so many projects, Mr. Speaker, that we need 

to deal with. We have some schools that are facing a problem 

with asbestos and need to be dealt with. We have roof repairs 

where we have leaks within the schools. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that we really are short of is, 

of course, major projects, the construction of brand new 

facilities. And, Mr. Speaker, that is why we have moved 

forward with 22 major projects. Mr. Speaker, the 22 major 



October 27, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3249 

projects that we have allocated in the course of this year cover 

many, many communities. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I had the pleasure yesterday of being in 

Duck Lake. Duck Lake, I know from the comments made by 

the member from Batoche today about the growth in Duck 

Lake, was very well received yesterday when in fact, Mr. 

Speaker, we did the sod-turning of the new Stobart community 

school. 

 

And this will be a K to 12 school, Mr. Speaker, because they 

currently have two schools — a K to 6 elementary school and a 

7 to 12 high school. Both facilities, Mr. Speaker, are years, 

they‟re decades and decades old. And they needed replacement. 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have committed to that, and we‟re moving 

forward to that with that project. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are so many projects, but I do want to 

mention them, Mr. Speaker. And I‟m going to put them on the 

record because there are many projects that are at various stages 

of either planning, design, or in the construction stage. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I want to highlight five of those projects that now are 

actually in the tender and construction stage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they are the Porcupine Plain School in the North 

East School Division; Oxbow School in the southeast corner 

school division; St. Anne School in the Prince Albert Catholic 

School Division; Maple Creek Composite school in the 

Chinook School Division; and of course Turnor Lake in the 

Northern Lights School Division — all of these projects are 

already in the construction stage. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we have a number of projects that are in the 

design stage and are being worked on by boards of education. 

Mr. Speaker, those are projects like the Saskatoon Public‟s 

project at Nutana, the E.D. Feehan project in Greater Saskatoon 

Catholic. Scott Collegiate here in Regina is in the design stage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also have at the Balcarres School in Prairie 

Valley. We have the Humboldt Collegiate Institute, the new 

high school being built in Humboldt, which is a joint project, 

Mr. Speaker — because it‟s not only the Greater Saskatoon 

Catholic School Division that‟s involved there, but it‟s also the 

Horizon School Division — because that school will serve the 

needs of not only public school students but Catholic school 

students as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have the Douglas Park elementary school 

being designed right now by Regina Public. We have Hafford 

Central that‟s doing a major project in the Living Sky School 

Division. We have Arcola elementary, Mr. Speaker, that‟s 

doing a project within Regina. The Elrose Composite School in 

Sun West, Mr. Speaker. St. Mary elementary school in Greater 

Saskatoon Catholic is being designed, Mr. Speaker, is being 

designed. And we will be moving forward because we have 

allocated the dollars, Mr. Speaker. A tremendous project, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s interesting how the members opposite don‟t 

appreciate the fact that a brand new school is being built, Mr. 

Speaker, a school that will have 4900 square metres of space, 

Mr. Speaker — a great school for the community of Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I indicated in the spring, as I indicated in the 

spring to the member afterwards, you know . . . Mr. Speaker, I 

do want . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . The member talks, I 

hear the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow talking about 

smaller, Mr. School . . . Mr. Speaker. I apologize for that, Mr. 

Speaker.  

 

I think this is a very important issue, Mr. Speaker, so I do want 

to indicate that the core of that school, the core of that school 

has been built for 375 students, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

currently enrolments in St. Mary‟s are still in the 200‟s. So 

we‟re hopeful. We‟re hopeful that we‟re going to see growth 

and that we‟re going to have 375 students there for core. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I indicated, the school is being built for 4900 

square metres. And, Mr. Speaker, the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow, having been a former minister of Education, I think 

would understand what the words relocatable classrooms mean, 

Mr. Speaker. Because you know, if we are fortunate, if we are 

fortunate, the Greater Saskatoon Catholic attracts a number of 

students to that school and the enrolment grows from 300 — 

which is the amount of space that has been built for — we‟re 

going to add some classrooms, Mr. Speaker. I hope in four 

years time, I hope in four years time or five years time, we‟re 

going to be able to add five or six classrooms. 

 

Because you know what it‟ll do, Mr. Speaker? If there are six 

classrooms that are added to that school because another 60 

students arrived. And by the way, core is 375, so that‟s still 

below that number — 75 square metres per relocatable 

classroom, six relocatable classrooms — that means 450 square 

metres. Mr. Speaker, we‟re building the school now with 4900 

square metres, and if we add 450 it will be bigger than the 

school that the board of education wanted a year ago, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there‟s been a tremendous amount that has been 

done in the city of Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, there‟s been a 

tremendous amount that has been done in the city of Saskatoon. 

One of the members opposite — I think the member for 

Saskatoon Massey, I believe — was talking about the fact that 

there‟s been cuts made to Saskatoon; this has been taken away 

and this has been taken away. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to share the education infrastructure of the 

three school divisions in Saskatoon: Saskatoon Public, Greater 

Saskatoon Catholic, and the Conseil scolaire. Mr. Speaker, 

we‟re moving forward with 29 block projects in the city of 

Saskatoon. We‟re moving forward with seven major projects in 

the city of Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, these seven major projects 

have a value in excess of $37.5 million. 

 

[16:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‟re also moving forward with child care 

projects. We‟re moving forward with 11 ELCC [early learning 

and child care] projects in the city of Saskatoon, and we‟re 

going to be providing capital funding there of $1.1 million. So, 

Mr. Speaker, let‟s just do a little math review for the members 

opposite because they have trouble grasping these numbers, 

because during their time in government, Mr. Speaker, they did 

very little. As I said, $18 million worth of capital money spread 

out over the entire province really meant you didn‟t do anything 



3250 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2009 

for the city of Saskatoon. And that was evident because, Mr. 

Speaker, the projects that we were working on in the fall of 

2007 when we became government were the projects that they 

had announced in 2003, Mr. Speaker. They had done nothing in 

‟04, ‟05, ‟06, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, now in only the city of Saskatoon, since we 

have become government, we are moving forward with 47 

projects in Saskatoon totalling $50 million, Mr. Speaker, of 

which our share is $33.6 million. So I found it passing strange, 

Mr. Speaker, that that member would stand up and suggest that 

money has been taken away from Saskatoon, when in fact we 

have moved forward with $50 million worth of construction. 

Mr. Speaker, that is a whole lot different than the NDP when 

they were in government and what they used to do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the list of infrastructure is extensive. Mr. Speaker, 

as I indicated we allocated two projects this spring when the 

budget was announced. We allocated approval in principle to a 

brand new school at Wascana community here in Regina 

Public. And of course, the Monseigneur de Laval in the Conseil 

scolaire fransaskois here in the city of Regina. So those two 

projects again are in the approval in principle design. And we 

have set aside $26.8 million as the ministry‟s share for those 

two projects. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the priority list, when we 

look at all of the projects that have been submitted — and, Mr. 

Speaker, this list is public information, it‟s on the website — 

there are dozens and dozens and dozens of projects. Mr. 

Speaker, the School Boards Association is suggesting that the 

deficit left by the NDP for us to deal with is probably $1.5 

billion, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, I know there are many 

members, not only on this side of the House, but also on that 

side of the House who represent communities that have a need 

for a school revision. The member for Martensville, I know, has 

been talking about a brand new school for a long time. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that is something that we‟re going to have to address. 

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, one of the final things that I want to 

comment on, and I think I must be nearing 25 minutes, Mr. 

Speaker, is the area of enrolments. Mr. Speaker, the area of 

enrolments. Because there are areas, there are areas like 

Lloydminster, there are areas like Warman, Martensville, 

Balgonie, White City. They have a unique problem. And the 

member from Regina Rosemont would know about this having 

been the critic before; they have a problem of extra students. 

And that‟s a good problem, Mr. Speaker, because for too long 

we‟ve been dealing with a problem of not enough students. 

 

We‟ve had school closures. And we know from the NDP‟s 

record, literally there was hundreds of closures during their 

time. But, Mr. Speaker, those are things that have happened. 

What we need to do, Mr. Speaker, we need to recognize . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, it‟s actually 171 schools that 

were closed during the time of the NDP. Yes, 171, Mr. Speaker. 

So what we‟re looking at today, Mr. Speaker, is the grade . . . 

Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I know of all members, the current 

member speaking certainly has the ability to be heard, but 

sometimes it just gets a little difficult as everyone wants to get 

in on the debate. So I ask members to allow the Minister of 

Education to finish his comments. Other members will have the 

opportunity then to enter the debate. The Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I‟ll conclude my remarks by talking about the enrolments of the 

province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, you know one of the 

telltale signs, Mr. Speaker, is whether or not the kindergarten to 

grade 12 enrolment in the province is increasing, decreasing, or 

at least stabilizing. And, Mr. Speaker, you know the last time 

that the enrolment in the province of Saskatchewan increased, 

that last time was 1991. Interestingly that‟s the last time that the 

NDP . . . that was the first year of the NDP government. 

 

That‟s the last increase, Mr. Speaker. Ever since then, for 17 

consecutive years, we have had a decrease, Mr. Speaker, a 

decrease where in fact the numbers that we‟ve lost in our 

kindergarten to grade 12 system is 36,000. So, Mr. Speaker, 

that‟s a lot of students. 

 

Last year, Mr. Speaker, we saw a bit of an improvement. We 

saw last year that the amount of student decline, it was still a 

decline but it had improved; it was only 1,800. Because we look 

back three and four and five years ago — we were losing on 

average 3,500 students a year. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, that was a loss of 1,800. But what is really 

exciting and finally showing the fact that this province is 

moving forward, that our population is increasing, that we‟re 

attracting people, we‟re attracting families back to this province 

is the fact that this year, Mr. Speaker, we are seeing an increase. 

We‟re seeing an increase for the first time in 17 years. And the 

increase, Mr. Speaker, even though it‟s a small number, it‟s 361 

students. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have lot to be proud of. We have a lot to be 

proud of in this province. We have a great group of people that 

are coming back to this province. We have people, number one, 

that have stayed in this province and are building this province. 

So, Mr. Speaker, I‟m extremely excited about the role that 

education is playing because it is so important. 

 

There‟s many, many other topics I could get into but, Mr. 

Speaker, I want to end by saying that the Throne Speech is 

something that I really, really will support and can support and 

will not support their amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed an honour 

again to stand in my seat to address the Speech from the 

Throne. Before I do that I want to do something that I miss 

more often than I do it, and that is I want to thank my wife 

Lorna, my life partner Lorna, for her continued support. It is 

valued. In my family others — my brothers and sisters-in-law 

and my father — all recognize what a tremendous source of 

inspiration and support Lorna is to me, but I just don‟t say it 

often enough although I feel it every day in so terribly many 

ways. So, Mr. Speaker, my first words are words of 

appreciation and thanks to my wife Lorna. 

 



October 27, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3251 

The second person that I want to single out for thanks is my 

constituency assistant Fred Kress. Fred does just a terrific job of 

keeping Regina Coronation Park constituents well serviced. 

When they come in with a question or a suggestion or a 

problem that they need help with, Fred is just absolutely better 

than virtually anyone I know at cutting through the red tape and 

getting answers for my constituents and for others. 

 

My other words, of course, would be to my more extended 

family and friends — my gratitude for their love and support 

that they‟ve shown me over my entire lifetime, but that they 

continue to support and show that support to me now. 

 

I want, Mr. Speaker, to thank the good constituents of Regina 

Coronation Park. Again I don‟t thank them quite as often as I 

should. I truly, truly have a love affair with my constituency. 

It‟s just full of working people. I‟ve described them many, 

many times as, Regina Coronation Park is a working-class 

constituency. It‟s made up of families. It has a good contingent 

of retired people that have chosen to stay in Saskatchewan and 

make this home. And many of them have, interestingly enough, 

chosen to continue to fight for social justice and to fight for a 

better future for our great province. And for all of them I am 

very grateful. I‟m grateful to the constituents that don‟t 

necessarily support my views but who will share their views 

with me and offer up their suggestions. 

 

Before I get into the Speech from the Throne, Mr. Speaker, I 

have one honour that no other member in this legislature has, 

and that is I have an honour of sitting in the seat that was 

vacated by Harry Van Mulligen, the former member for Regina 

Douglas Park, my pal Harry Van Mulligen who served so 

honourably in this Assembly, both in opposition from ‟86 to ‟91 

and then following that and indeed has served in cabinet and as 

minister of Social Services and minister of Finance, later on 

became our Finance critic in opposition. Harry Van Mulligen 

who I know we‟ve travelled literally thousands of kilometres 

together, and it‟s my hope that Harry and I will travel thousands 

of kilometres together in the future as we wind our way through 

our lives. But my words are thanks to Harry for the great job 

that he did all those years as the MLA for Regina Douglas Park 

and all of those years he served all of the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate the two new members to the 

legislature. First off, I want to congratulate the new member for 

Saskatoon Riversdale. I‟m already enjoying her contribution 

within our caucus and within the legislature. She was asking 

some questions in question period and did a very fine job of 

that. I‟m very much looking forward to many good things 

coming out of Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

My other thanks and congratulations will go to our leader, the 

member for Regina Douglas Park. Mr. Speaker, I want to say to 

our relatively new leader, I want to express my appreciation for 

his leadership and for his support as he urges us to speak out 

when we see things wrong. And even more importantly, he 

demands that we make positive suggestions for the future, Mr. 

Speaker. This is the leadership that the member for Regina 

Douglas Park is providing to us, and I‟m very grateful for that 

particular brand of leadership. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‟re talking today about the Speech from the 

Throne or the government‟s plan, the Sask Party‟s blueprint for 

the coming year. 

 

And I want to say that, as we‟re talking about the Speech from 

the Throne or the Sask Party plan, what our constituents, what 

Saskatchewan people have every right to expect is our best 

diligence, our best efforts at being as truthful and as honest as 

we can be with them. Absolutely there will be differences of 

opinion between — I might as well just say it — between right 

wing government and more centre-of-the-road or left wing 

opposition. There‟s natural that there would be some 

philosophical differences. What we do need is to have the desire 

to work for all of Saskatchewan people whether they live on a 

street in my constituency or whether they live on a farm 

anywhere throughout the province or whether they live in the 

northern Saskatchewan or in the forest or wherever they happen 

to be. 

 

All Saskatchewan people deserve our integrity, our honesty, 

and our best efforts, which leads me to the flagship of the 

Speech from the Throne, Mr. Speaker, where it is safe to say we 

have a difference of opinion because in this Speech from the 

Throne, this Sask Party blueprint, their key feature for the 

coming year is they‟re going to announce a new plan. They‟ll 

unveil a new plan for health care that‟s going to drive down the 

wait-list in Saskatchewan. 

 

[16:45] 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, what‟s the reality of what has happened 

here? Three years ago the Sask Party was in opposition. Three 

years ago they had all the answers. Three years ago Sask Party 

members all across Saskatchewan were saying the only thing 

that was keeping the wait-list in health care from drastically 

going down — the only thing between the lower hospital 

waiting list, surgical wait-list and reality, was the then NDP 

government. That‟s what they said then. 

 

Now after two years in government, what do they say in the 

Speech from the Throne? What did they say? They said well 

you know we didn‟t quite have all of the answers. We didn‟t 

know what to do, so now we‟re going to unveil in the course of 

this coming year a new plan. The old plan wasn‟t worth 

anything, but we‟re going to unveil a new plan, Mr. Speaker, a 

new plan that‟s going to drive down the hospital wait-list. I 

mean it‟s a great idea to drive down the plan, but how on earth 

can we, how on earth can we believe what they‟re saying when 

three years ago they had all the answers on health care? They 

had all the answers on other things too. 

 

They promised in their election platform to drive down hospital 

wait-lists for surgery, Mr. Speaker. And now they‟re saying 

well I guess our plan really didn‟t have any legs. 

 

What‟s the other thing that has happened in health care, Mr. 

Speaker? The other thing that‟s happened in health care is 

essential services legislation. Now get this, essential services 

that say here‟s the minimum amount of service that we need in 

case of a work stoppage. Here‟s the minimum amount of 

service that has to be provided to the people of Saskatchewan, 

to patients in hospitals and nursing homes and health care 

facilities right across Saskatchewan from corner to corner to 

corner to corner. Minimum numbers put forward in legislation, 



3252 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2009 

Mr. Speaker, by who? The Sask Party, the government, the 

Sask Party government puts forward the minimum safety 

requirements. 

 

And you know what? We clearly have a divergent point of view 

about whether this is good legislation or not. But, Mr. Speaker, 

the key point to this is, if it‟s good legislation that you have this 

minimum complement of workers that you need in the case of a 

work stoppage, wouldn‟t it just make sense, common sense, that 

you should have that as the minimum 365 days of the year? 

Shouldn‟t you have that as the minimum? 

 

And what‟s the reality, Mr. Speaker? Thirteen hundred — more 

than 1,300 — 1,300 documented, written documented cases 

where they didn‟t even meet the minimum requirement of 

staffing that they had in their own legislation. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, you can‟t suck and blow at the same time. You cannot 

have it both ways. Mr. Speaker, if it‟s good enough when 

there‟s a work stoppage, it‟s good enough the other 365 days of 

the year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, nobody in Saskatchewan is being fooled by what 

this smoke and mirrors is, this essential legislation. All it is, it‟s 

a way to just divide and conquer. Only it‟s not working. 

They‟re not conquering. They‟re trying to divide working 

people. What did we have? Well yesterday we had nearly 500 

people out on the steps of the legislature, nearly 500 who 

represented more than 25,000 people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you about a woman that I talked to 

that came from Meadow Lake. She got up at 3:30 in the 

morning to be here yesterday because she is so angry at what‟s 

going with a health care facility that she works in, that‟s she‟s 

very proud of. She loves providing the services that she does to 

the good people of Meadow Lake and area. But at 3:30 in the 

morning she‟s up. She drove all the way to North Battleford, 

got on a bus, and fortunately had a ride on the bus from there to 

here. Mr. Speaker, this takes some dedication. This takes quite a 

bit, Mr. Speaker, to make someone that has dedicated their life 

to providing services in health care, it takes a lot to drive them 

to be that angry that they‟ll get up in the middle of the night just 

to come down here and say, you‟ve got it wrong. 

 

Then what happened, Mr. Speaker? After the rally‟s over, after 

this rally‟s over, this group wanted to come in and join us in the 

legislature. Some of them wanted to come in and have lunch in 

the public cafeteria. Some of them had packed their own lunch. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, you know what happened. The doors were 

locked. The doors were locked, and they were told no room in 

the inn, no room in the legislature. 

 

Isn‟t it interesting, Mr. Speaker. I‟ve sat and listened for years. 

Members opposite coined this phrase as they introduced guest 

after guest after guest. Welcome, they say, welcome to your 

legislature. That‟s what they say, welcome to your legislature. 

But not your legislature if you happen to be a health care 

worker, Mr. Speaker. It‟s not their legislature then. What a 

shame, what a . . . almost criminal, Mr. Speaker. That is 

absolutely unforgivable, unforgivable, that it‟s your legislature 

if you‟re coming, bringing candy and roses, but heaven forbid if 

you‟re saying that the Sask Party government might have 

something wrong. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this group, I talked to quite a number of 

them. This group, they‟re not advocating violence or anything 

like that. This group is simply saying give us some honesty. 

Give us what we deserve. Give us a little bit of respect. Of 

course they‟d like to have their contract dealt with. They‟d like 

to have an offer that at least meets what we as MLAs got. You 

know — what was it? — 3 per cent, 3.1. Their offer is even 

lower than that. 

 

I‟m not trying to get into collective bargaining. But they 

certainly deserve respect. They certainly deserve to have better 

than what they‟re getting out of this Sask Party government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to turn to finance. Here we are in the 

budget . . . There is some mention of finance in the budget. 

Before I get to that, I want to say potash was budgeted to return 

$2 billion this year — $2 billion, absolute all-time record, $2 

billion out of potash. And what‟s the reality? Potash revenues 

have collapsed. I was reading in the paper just yesterday. One 

person very much in the know in the potash industry said the 

last sales of any amount were November. Well we‟re in 

October. He‟s talking 11 months ago, November. And that 

person was saying he wasn‟t surprised, Mr. Speaker, that with 

that collapse in sales that potash workers at Rocanville, at 

Allan, and at Cory — 800 of them — got layoff notices. Many 

of them it was their third layoff notice this year. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, is it any wonder, is it any wonder that when 

revenues collapse that the Sask Party government doesn‟t know 

how to govern? Is it any wonder? I‟ve seen this picture before, 

Mr. Speaker. So have many of us. We‟ve seen this. We‟ve seen 

this picture before. When you don‟t get your revenues right, 

then you start putting the problems on regular people. 

 

Then the Sask Party‟s history is lock out health care workers. 

Don‟t let them in their legislature. Lock them out. I‟ve never 

seen that since the days of Grant Devine. I can tell you 

unequivocally it never happened when we were in office, not 

once that there was any group locked out. Not one time was any 

single group locked out, not one time. 

 

And the situation yesterday was, as I‟m being pointed out to 

me, over 80 per cent of the protesters were women. Many of 

them were grandmothers, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Well I thank you, Mr. Speaker. We‟re touching 

some nerves and thankfully because you know, Mr. Speaker, it 

is an honour to stand up on behalf of health care workers and all 

of the other people in Saskatchewan. It is an honour to stand up 

on their behalf. It‟s an honour to point out when things are 

wrong. And I tell you, things are wrong. 

 

You cannot, you cannot lock the doors of the legislature to hide. 

When you do that, you lose the right to govern. You lose all 

respect from the people of Saskatchewan. Don‟t take my word 

for it. Please, I‟d love it, Sask Party members, if you don‟t take 

my word for it because you know what that would do? It would 

guarantee the next premier is the member for Regina Douglas 



October 27, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3253 

Park. And it will happen the next election. So don‟t take my 

word that you can‟t lock the legislature. By all means, don‟t 

take my word on it. You just keep on the path you‟re on right 

now because you‟re making enemies every day and in every 

way. That helps us a lot. That makes this gentleman the next 

premier, and I am looking forward to that part. I‟m not looking 

forward to the mess that we‟re going to have to clean up, Mr. 

Speaker. I‟m not looking forward to that. 

 

And I know that the health care workers aren‟t looking forward 

to what they‟re going to have to endure between now and 

November 7th, 2011. Mr. Speaker, the good news is we‟ve 

gotten a date. We know when the next election is. The health 

care workers know when the next election is. We‟ll be there and 

we‟ll be ready. Mr. Speaker, this is in many ways the first 

stroke of wind in our sails if I could describe it that way. I wish 

it weren‟t so. I wish that the health care workers were simply 

treated with dignity and respect. I wish there was a reasonable 

offer on the table for these health care workers. I wish that I . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — There‟s only three minutes left before the 

recess. I wonder if members can just allow the member to fill in 

that time without constant loud comments across the floor. It‟s 

certainly not befitting of the members of this Chamber. I 

recognize the member from Regina Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Member from Regina Coronation 

Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I see from the sad 

looks, the member . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Members are not to refer or 

make any comments in regards to rules by the Chair or 

comment about responses. I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I‟ve got 

to confess; that threw me. I didn‟t realize I was doing that. Mr. 

Speaker, the fact of the matter . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Being near 5 o‟clock, this House 

recesses until 7 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly recessed until 19:00.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3223 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3223 

  LeClerc .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3223 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3223 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3223 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3223 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3223 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3224 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3224 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3224 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3224 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3224 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3224 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Health Care Providers’ Week 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3225 

 Commemorating the Commission of Inquiry on the Blood System in Canada 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3225 

 Heavy Oil Recovery Project 

  Chisholm .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3225 

 Fighting Poverty 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3225 

 Duck Lake 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3226 

 Achievement in Business Excellence Awards 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3226 

 The Spirit of Thanksgiving 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3226 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Staffing in Health Care Facilities 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3226 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3227 

 H1N1 Pandemic Planning 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3227 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3227 

 Employment Issues 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3229 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3229 

 Availability of Affordable Housing 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3230 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3230 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Response to H1N1 Flu Threat 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3231 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3232 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 97 — The Agri-Food Amendment Act, 2009 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3232 

 Bill No. 98 — The Municipal Financing Corporation Amendment Act, 2009 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3232 

 Bill No. 99 — The Emergency 911 System Amendment Act, 2009 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3233 

 Bill No. 100 — The Doukhobors of Canada C.C.U.B. Trust Fund Amendment Act, 2009 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3233 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3233 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3235 



 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3241 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 3245 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3250 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium Development 

Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

 Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

Government House Leader 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. James Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Capital Commission 


