




















































Hansard: November 03, 2009


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 8A  TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 3, 2009, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3407 

 November 3, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s my pleasure, to 

you and through you to the House this afternoon, to introduce in 

your gallery Representative George Eskridge from the state of 

Idaho, George and his wife Jenise. George is a past president of 

the Pacific North West Economic Region and is in our city to 

spend the next two or three days with us in our PNWER 

summit. He was so excited he came a day early. So, Mr. 

Speaker, we welcome you to our Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to all 

members of the legislature, I‟d like to introduce some iron 

workers who contribute greatly to our province. Mr. Speaker, in 

the gallery now Bert Royer, business manager Ironworkers 

Local 771, Wayne Worral, business agent Ironworkers Local 

771, and Jason Dielschneider, member of Ironworkers Local 

771. I ask all members to welcome these iron workers to their 

legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Humboldt, the 

Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today in 

your gallery we are joined by representatives of the program 

implementation advisory team for the province‟s new 

Saskatchewan assured income for disability program. The 

program‟s implementation advisory team, comprised of 

members of the disability community, has been established to 

provide advice to the Ministry of Social Services on the 

implementation and development of this important new 

initiative for Saskatchewan people with disabilities. 

 

So joining us today, Mr. Speaker, are the team Chair, Mr. Merv 

Bender, Mr. Dave Nelson, and Mr. Michael Richter. So if 

everyone could please join me in welcoming these very, very, 

very hard-working gentlemen to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too on 

behalf of the opposition would like to join in with the minister 

in welcoming these folks. They‟ve done some incredible work 

over the past year, and I too want to welcome Merv Bender, 

Dave Nelson, and Mike Richter too. 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Wascana Plains, the Minister Responsible for Government 

Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you I‟d like to welcome to the Legislative 

Assembly, sitting in your gallery here this afternoon, Greg 

D‟Avignon and Bryan Cox. They‟re both from the national 

Brewers Association. If you gentlemen could please stand for a 

minute. They were here this morning meeting with myself, and 

I understand that they had a great reception yesterday. And so if 

all members could join me in welcoming them to the 

Saskatchewan legislature. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present a petition on behalf of concerned citizens in 

Saskatchewan who are concerned about the safety of Highway 

22. They are concerned as the highway has a potential safety 

hazard to the residents who drive on that highway, and it is 

clear that Highway 22 is in dire need of an upgrade. And I‟ll 

read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to commit to providing the 

repairs to Highway 22 that the people of Saskatchewan 

need. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from Earl 

Grey, Saskatchewan. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present yet another petition calling for wage equity for 

CBO [community-based organization] workers. And we know 

that these workers in community-based organizations 

throughout the province have traditionally been underpaid, and 

many continue to earn poverty level wages. And this results in 

high staff turnover, and the subsequent lack of caregiver 

continuity has a negative impact on the quality of care that 

clients receive. And, Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

development and implementation of a multi-year funding 

plan to ensure that CBO workers achieve wage equity 

with employees who perform work of equal value in 

government departments. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And these petitioners come from the good cities of Regina and 

Saskatoon. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 



3408 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2009 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

in support of a new long-term care facility in La Ronge. The 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately invest in the planning and 

construction of new long-term care beds in La Ronge. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by the good people of La Ronge and area, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition in support of fairness for Saskatchewan 

students. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately expand the graduate 

retention program to include master‟s and Ph.D. 

graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals that signed this petition are 

residents from a variety of communities here in Saskatchewan. I 

so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition on 

behalf of rural residents of Saskatchewan who question why the 

Sask Party government is leaving them behind with respect to 

providing safe and affordable water. And the prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to financially assist the town of Duck 

Lake residents for the good of their health and safety due 

to the exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency, and that this government fulfills its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good residents of 

Duck Lake. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I stand and present a petition 

today in support of the withdrawal of Bill 80. Mr. Speaker, we 

all understand the benefits of a stable labour relations 

environment which provides for equality work and safe 

construction sites. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to withdraw its ill-conceived Bill 80, The 

Construction Industry Labour Relations Amendment Act, 

2009, which dismantles the proud history of the building 

trades in the province, creates instability in the labour 

market, and it impacts the quality of training required for 

workers before entering the workforce. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petition is signed by residents of Regina, Saskatoon, Moose 

Jaw, Strasbourg, and Prince Albert. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m pleased to rise 

today to present a petition in support of affordable rents and 

housing for The Battlefords. The petitioners note that rent 

increases of about 40 per cent have been received by residents 

of The Battlefords and that the vacancy rate for rental 

accommodation is very low: 

 

The petitioners pray that your Legislative Assembly may 

be pleased to call upon the Government of Saskatchewan 

to develop an affordable housing program that will result 

in a greater number of quality and affordable rental units 

to be made available to a greater number of people 

throughout The Battlefords, and that will implement a 

process of rent review or rent control to better protect 

tenants in a non-competitive housing environment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by residents of the city of 

North Battleford and the town of Battleford. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m honoured 

to rise and present petitions on behalf of concerned residents of 

Saskatchewan as it relates to the unprecedented 

mismanagement of their finances by the Sask Party, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to start managing our 

provincial finances responsibly and prudently to ensure 

that it does not continue its trend of massive budgetary 

shortfalls, runaway and unsustainable spending, equity 

stripping from our Crowns, and irresponsible revenue 

setting. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by concerned citizens in Swift 

Current and Regina. I so present. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 



November 3, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3409 

Saskatchewan Assured Income for Disability Program 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today we have 

been joined in the legislature by members of the program 

implementation advisory team for the province‟s new 

Saskatchewan assured income for disability program, also 

known by its acronym as SAID. 

 

On this occasion I would like to provide the House with a brief 

update on the implementation of this program initiative, which 

will ensure that Saskatchewan people with significant long-term 

disabilities no longer have to rely on social assistance for their 

basic living expenses. As requested by the disability 

community, the new Saskatchewan assured income for 

disability program is separate from social assistance, has fewer 

reporting requirements, and will be less intrusive. 

 

The disability community has waited a long time for their voice 

to be heard and I‟m happy to say that, under our government, 

their voice has been heard. Implementation of this historic new 

program is now well under way. Although participation in the 

new program is voluntary, more than 2,000 people have already 

enrolled with more applications being processed daily. Over 

time our government hopes to expand enrolment to the new 

program to as many as 8 to 10,000 Saskatchewan people with 

significant long-term disabilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, SAID is designed in complete collaboration with 

the members of the disability community. They told us what 

they wanted — an income program for people with significant 

long-term disabilities that was separate from social assistance. 

We have delivered. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Our Children Are Precious 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our children are 

precious. We need to do all that we can to keep them safe. I 

want all members of the Legislative Assembly to know that I 

was very much moved by the September visit to Saskatchewan 

of Rodney Stafford of Woodstock, Ontario. Rodney is the father 

of Victoria Stafford, a sparkling eight-year-old girl who earlier 

this year went missing and later was found to have been 

abducted and murdered. Rodney, in this time of tremendous 

grief, was cycling across Canada to raise awareness of child 

safety and the plight of missing children. 

 

Every citizen and community leader needs to take to heart the 

message of Rodney Stafford and Child Find, the organization 

helping him with his Kilometres for Kids campaign. What 

Rodney Stafford is telling us is that his tragedy could happen to 

anyone. As parents, teachers, neighbours, friends, we need to 

keep our eyes open. We need to talk to our kids. We need to 

look out for them. We need to rely on each other to keep our 

kids safe. 

 

As community leaders, we should make the issue of child safety 

a priority, and we should in all ways support Child Find 

Saskatchewan as they work to provide preventative education 

and awareness programs to decrease the number of children 

who go missing every year in our province. As the organization 

says, together we can work towards the goal of bringing our 

missing children home. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Food Drive Shows That Moose Jaw Cares 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A very successful 

food drive was held on Saturday organized by members of the 

Hillcrest Church in Moose Jaw. This, the fourth annual food 

drive, collected about 21 tonnes of food to assist the needs of 

the Moose Jaw Food Bank. The food drive is one of the most 

charitable events in the city. Pre-circulated bags were filled and 

ready to be picked up by most residents. If residents were going 

out for the evening, they simply left the bag on the front steps 

for volunteers. 

 

As the city canvass takes place, other volunteers start the 

sorting process. Pastas, foods, and canned goods and everything 

else is sorted into particular categories, then boxed on pallets, 

ready to be delivered to the food bank. This year food donations 

exceeded their box inventory and about 10 p.m. a call went out 

to all open businesses in Moose Jaw for more boxes. It was a 

great problem to have. And at the end of the evening, much of 

the product had to be stacked until more boxes could be found 

to complete the packing process. 

 

The food drive presents an overwhelming feeling of goodwill 

for the 350-plus volunteers. At the end of the evening, the tired 

workers cleaned up the church auditorium and made their way 

home with a feeling of compassion and caring for some of the 

underprivileged in our community. I‟d like to acknowledge the 

volunteers and the donors for giving so generously. Your effort 

shows that Moose Jaw is a caring community. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Multicultural Event in Prince Albert 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, I recently had the pleasure of 

attending Tapestrama in Prince Albert. This event is held every 

year and is organized by the Prince Albert Multicultural 

Council under the direction and guidance of its executive 

director, Marge Nainaar. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Tapestrama has been held every year since . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Pardon me. I recognize the member from 

Prince Albert Northcote. 

 

[13:45] 

 

Mr. Furber: — From the beginning, Mr. Speaker? Mr. 

Speaker, I recently had the pleasure of attending Tapestrama in 

Prince Albert. This event is held every year and is organized by 

the Prince Albert Multicultural Council under the direction and 

guidance of executive director Marge Nainaar. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Tapestrama has been held every year since 1965 

and is held over two days. It provides an opportunity for people 

to experience food, music, and culture from all over the world. 

This year‟s Tapestrama boasted participation from Africa, 



3410 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2009 

South America, Europe, Asia, as well as North America. 

 

Each year Prince Albert welcomes more and more newcomers 

to our city that bring with them new customs, traditions, foods, 

and culture. All of these cultures are celebrated at Tapestrama. 

The event attracts many people from Prince Albert and 

surrounding area who want to experience the different foods 

and entertainment provided. And at one point Marge Nainaar 

asked the crowd to raise their hands if they had rubbed 

shoulders with somebody from a different culture that day. 

Needless to say, Mr. Speaker, almost everyone raised their 

hand. 

 

This is exactly why the multicultural council holds this event, to 

promote knowledge and understanding of all cultures. Mr. 

Speaker, I ask that all members join with me in congratulating 

Marge Nainaar and her volunteers of the Prince Albert 

Multicultural Council in holding another very successful 

Tapestrama. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm 

River-Watrous. 

 

Watrous Wins Celebration Tour Competition 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This summer I had 

two towns in my constituency, the towns of Watrous and 

Wynyard, going head-to-head bidding on the Kraft-TSN [The 

Sports Network] 10 towns in 10 days Celebration Tour. Both 

towns put on an excellent bid, and both towns had said that it 

brought the community together for local sports. And both 

towns did an excellent job. I know TSN had a very hard time 

picking between the two. 

 

In the very end, they picked the town of Watrous. The focus of 

the Watrous committee was on the many and varied uses of the 

Watrous Centennial Arena and the need to get much-needed 

repairs done to this 42-year-old facility. The Watrous 

Centennial Arena also plays host to all ages of minor hockey as 

well as the senior hockey team, the Watrous Winterhawks, who 

compete in the LLHL [Long Lake Hockey League] and have 

won several league and provincial titles. 

 

Indeed the community of Watrous is a very progressive, 

growing place, and a town where Saskatchewan spirit is always 

on display. It is this level of commitment and enthusiasm that in 

the end convinced the TSN award panel judges to grant the 

town of Watrous 25,000 which the community is putting into 

their arena. Later this summer, TSN landed its SportsCentre 

cast and crew in Watrous for a live one-on-one broadcast to 

promote the community of Watrous and talk to the area 

residents about their town and the sports fans. 

 

I want to personally congratulate the people of Watrous and 

also the people of Wynyard for putting in bids in TSN, and I 

would ask that all members of the House join me in 

congratulating both towns for The Sports Network 10 in 10 

award of 2009. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

Saskatchewan Women Compete in Softball Championships 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, this past summer, many of our 

provincial women‟s softball teams competed in championship 

games in Ontario. I am proud to extend my congratulations to 

the success of these teams. 

 

At the junior women‟s Canadian championships, the Saskatoon 

Outlaws placed fifth. At the bantam nationals, the Regina 

Lazers also placed fifth. From that team, Megan Gurski was 

named the all-star pitcher of the championships, and her 

teammate Alex Baylak was named as all-star outfielder. 

 

At the midget girls‟ championships, the Quill Plains Blazers 

finished eighth, and the Regina Gold finished 16th. At the 

senior women‟s championships, DBJ Leasing placed fifth in the 

country. Heather Bourdon was named the all-star second 

baseman with a batting average of 462 and a perfect fielding 

percentage. Her teammate Carrie Britton was named all-star 

outfielder of the entire tournament. 

 

In addition to these outstanding athletes, several Saskatchewan 

umpires were chosen to officiate at the championships. As you 

can see, Mr. Speaker, our province is well represented by these 

teams and these athletes. 

 

Unfortunately, I was disappointed to hear that when the Ontario 

Women‟s Softball Association requested a Saskatchewan flag 

from the Sask Party government to display at their tournament, 

their request was denied. I am honoured to have provided a flag 

to the association on behalf of the official opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all MLAs [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly] to join with me in recognizing Saskatchewan‟s 

women softball teams and their accomplishments. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Saskatchewan Population Numbers 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have always 

considered myself a glass . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Northwest. 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟ve always 

considered myself a glass-half-full kind of person. The benefits 

of having a positive attitude are undisputed. Positive people live 

longer, are less stressed, and are just generally happier about 

their lot in life. It‟s a good way to live, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But there are times, with like anything, you can take it too far. 

Optimism has to be tempered with a dose of pragmatism — a 

reality check, if you will. You have to take off the rose-coloured 

glasses from time to time, Mr. Speaker. There‟s optimism and 

then there‟s blind optimism. 

 

With that in mind, let‟s go back to March 2003, when the 

members opposite put out a news release bragging about how 



November 3, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3411 

out-migration numbers were the lowest in four years. Say what? 

Let me get this straight, it‟s okay for people to leave 

Saskatchewan as long as they‟re not leaving that quickly. Mr. 

Speaker, when I read that, I actually got dizzy. 

 

Well I‟m happy to tell the members opposite that for the first 

time in many years, there are more people coming to 

Saskatchewan than are leaving — over 30,000 in-migration 

since November 2007. That puts a big smile on my face, Mr. 

Speaker. I hope the members opposite can join me and turn 

those frowns upside down and be happy. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Workplace Safety Issues 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, my question has to do with the 

government‟s failure to enforce occupational health and safety 

rules in Saskatchewan, even when that failure to act endangers 

the lives of Saskatchewan workers. Can the minister explain 

how a crane, which routinely is lifting 10 tonnes of steel over 

the heads of ironworkers who are erecting the Regina perishable 

distribution centre, has been allowed to operate unsafely since 

July, when the contractor‟s own safety coordinator said the 

crane was in need of critical repairs, did not meet the minimum 

safety standards required by Saskatchewan law, and should not 

be allowed on the construction site? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, this government, like the 

people of this province, take workplace safety, we take it very 

seriously. And that‟s one of the reasons, Mr. Speaker, that 

we‟ve increased our work in a number of areas. For example, 

the number of workplace inspections between 2007-08: 3,658. 

We increased that to . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Regarding work stop orders, in 2007-08, there were just 317. In 

2008-09: 775 — an increase of 269 per cent, Mr. Speaker. We 

take occupational health and safety very safety. That‟s why 

we‟ve gone forward with occupational health committees where 

we‟ve increased training and we‟ve increased the number of 

people by 20 per cent to ensure that our workplaces are 

increasingly safe. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, the minister should know that 

under Saskatchewan occupational health and safety regulations, 

any crane of this size must have a logbook that details all the 

previous maintenance, inspections, and hours of operations 

since its last maintenance and inspection, as well as any repairs 

that have been made to the machine. 

 

Can the minister explain how a crane operated by X-Act 

Contracting Ltd. of Ontario got onto this construction site 

without anyone producing a logbook that complied with the 

occupational health and safety laws, and after the contractor‟s 

own safety coordinator informed both the contractor and his 

department that the crane was in need of critical repairs? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Again, Mr. Speaker, thank you very much 

for the opportunity to reinforce that this government, like the 

people of this province, takes occupational health and safety 

very seriously, Mr. Speaker. Obviously, Mr. Speaker, if there‟s 

a case where additional information can be gathered, I welcome 

that from the opposition. 

 

But I would like to highlight it‟s one of the reasons that we‟ve 

moved forward with WorkSafe Saskatchewan. That is a 

membership, that‟s a partnership between the WCB [Workers‟ 

Compensation Board] and the Ministry of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Labour. That‟s one of the reasons, Mr. 

Speaker, that we continue to make progress as it relates to 

workplace safety. 

 

That‟s why in 2002 it was 4.95 per cent, Mr. Speaker, that we 

had problems. That was reduced and, Mr. Speaker, I‟m happy 

to say that in 2008 it‟s 3.7. There‟s certainly room for 

improvement. It‟s one of the reasons that we‟ve come forward 

with Mission: Zero, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that we‟re making 

workplaces more safe for the people of this province. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, there are two cranes working 

on this huge construction site. The other crane, owned by 

Giesbrecht & Son Cranes of Saskatchewan, has a logbook, has 

been inspected, and has been certified as safe by a professional 

engineer. 

 

The out-of-province crane has met none of these legal 

requirements. If the minister thinks this out-of-province crane is 

safe to be moving tonnes of steel over the heads of 

Saskatchewan ironworkers, perhaps he can explain why the 

operator of the Giesbrecht crane has been told by his company 

to refuse to do tandem lifts with this out-of-province crane until 

it has been properly certified and is safe. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, again I‟d like to reiterate for 

this government, like the people of this province, Mr. Speaker, 

occupational health and safety is a key priority of this 

government. It‟s one of the reasons that we can look at the 

issuing of contraventions including cessations of work, notices, 

and compliance assurance. It‟s gone up by 28 per cent, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, every day we have 80 full-time 



3412 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2009 

equivalents, Mr. Speaker, out working on occupational health 

and safety . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — I think the members are aware of the fact that 

it‟s . . . They probably heard from visitors that attended that it‟s 

difficult to hear when there‟s a lot of interruptions. And if . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Order. The member will come to 

order. 

 

The member has been given the right to ask a question. 

Members have the right and the public have the right to hear the 

answer. I recognize the Minister of Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. With 

80 full-time equivalents taking care of occupational health and 

safety in this province, Mr. Speaker, we can see that this is a 

key priority. It‟s one of the reasons that we‟ve put forward the 

memorandum of understanding between the WCB, Mr. 

Speaker, and the Ministry of Advanced Education, Employment 

and Labour. 

 

Is there more to do, Mr. Speaker? Certainly there is. We are 

making progress; we can demonstrate that empirically, Mr. 

Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, workplace safety is a key priority 

for this government. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on September 14th, the 

minister received this email from Victor Haire, the president of 

a safety consulting company that had been hired by the general 

contractor to serve as safety coordinator for the construction 

project. 

 

Mr. Haire informed the minister that he had withdrawn his 

services because the company had continued to use an unsafe 

crane at the construction site, in violation of Saskatchewan law. 

The minister took three weeks to respond and then referred Mr. 

Haire back to the occupational health and safety officer who 

ignored these violations in the first place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when is this government going to start taking its 

responsibilities seriously and to act to protect the lives of 

Saskatchewan workers? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Again to reiterate, this government, like the people of this 

province, take occupational health and safety very seriously, 

Mr. Speaker. We can demonstrate that with the number of 

workplace inspections that have increased. We can demonstrate 

that for work stop orders, Mr. Speaker.  

 

What I‟m surprised by, Mr. Speaker, is reference to one of our 

officials, Mr. Speaker. If the members opposite have 

information that they‟d like to share, Mr. Speaker, we‟re happy 

to receive that. But, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, as we return 

that, as we return that letter as the work continues, Mr. Speaker, 

it continues to be a priority to ensure that occupational health 

and safety is a key . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. There are a number of members who 

continue to interject or interfere. And I do not want to cast 

aspersions on all members, but it‟s a handful. I remind members 

of the responsibility to pay attention and to give both the 

individual asking the question and the minister responding the 

opportunity to be heard. I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Occupational health and safety continues to be a priority. That 

strong public support, it‟s in this Assembly, it‟s across the 

province. And, Mr. Speaker, that‟s why there‟s been a 25 per 

cent reduction in the injury rate between 2003 and 2008. 

There‟s more to do, Mr. Speaker, but I‟m happy to say that 

progress is being made. Thank you, sir. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s somewhat disconcerting to 

have that minister say that he‟s unaware of this when he 

received the email and then answered back. But Mr. Speaker, 

there‟s more. 

 

[14:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, the same day the minister received Mr. Haire‟s 

email, the occupational health and safety officer filed a report 

— this report — which suggested this out-of-province crane is 

inspected by a company called Morrison Inspection Services of 

Ontario. Mr. Speaker, the principal of Morrison Inspection 

Services is one Mike Morrison, who happens to also be an 

employee of the contractor who owns the unsafe crane — not 

exactly an arms-length relationship, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, was the minister‟s staff aware of this relationship 

when they used this inspection to suggest that the crane had 

been safely inspected and certified? And does he agree that this 

report confirms that his OH & S [occupational health and 

safety] officer was violating Saskatchewan law by allowing this 

crane to continue to operate? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, in May 2008, we came out 

with a Mission: Zero initiative. And that goal, Mr. Speaker, is to 

ensure that we continue to make progress in ensuring that 

occupational health and safety is a key priority, Mr. Speaker. 

It‟s one of the reasons that we continue to make progress, Mr. 

Speaker, and we can demonstrate that. 

 

Is there more work to do on occupational health and safety? Of 

course there is, but we can see that through occupational health 

committee and supervisor training programs which have 

increased by 10 per cent. The occupational health committee 

and supervisor training participants, those participants have 

increased by 20 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 

 



November 3, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3413 

Is there more to do? Yes. But there are more people engaged in 

more safety activities in Saskatchewan today than when we 

came into office. Mr. Speaker, we‟ll continue to make progress 

here. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Options to Expedite Surgical Procedures 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When the Minister of 

Health was asked questions about buying surgeries from BC 

[British Columbia], it became clear that the minister was so far 

out of the loop that the Premier had to step up and take over. So 

I‟ll direct my questions to the Premier. 

 

The Premier says Saskatchewan will not be paying a premium 

for these surgeries, while the BC Health minister says 

Saskatchewan approached BC to buy the surgeries and said, 

well look, we will pay you and pay you a premium to deal with 

some of our people. 

 

To the Premier: who‟s got it right — the Premier or the BC 

Health minister? Is Saskatchewan going to pay a premium or 

not? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I‟ve said before and I‟ll 

say again — I‟m very proud of the goal that our government set 

to reduce the wait times down to three months over the next 

four years. It‟s going to take a lot of work, and it‟s going to take 

a lot of looking at different procedures outside the country, Mr. 

Speaker, on how other countries have met this goal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‟re not eliminating anything at this time. The 

Premier talked to the Premier from British Columbia and my 

officials have talked to them, Mr. Speaker, about 400 

procedures. 

 

Now that‟s kind of an interesting number, Mr. Speaker, because 

I know they‟re against that, but let me recapture what they did 

in the last four years when they were in government, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, from 2003 to 2007, there were 366 hip 

and knee operations purchased by the NDP [New Democratic 

Party] government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. Order. Order. I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Premier says the 

discussion he had with the BC Premier was simply about 

capacity, no talk of costs or premiums, and that sending people 

to BC for surgery is a last resort. The BC Health minister is 

telling a completely different story. He‟s saying . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The BC Health 

minister is telling a completely different story. He‟s saying we 

approached them, put forward the 400 surgeries as a target 

number, and said we would pay a premium. The BC Health 

minister also says: 

 

. . . the two provinces are close to signing a memorandum 

of understanding that would have 400 orthopaedic 

surgeries done for people from Saskatchewan in British 

Columbia‟s public hospitals over [the next] two years. 

 

To the Premier: are the two provinces close to signing an MOU 

[memorandum of understanding] as the BC Health minister 

suggests? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, we‟re 

looking at all options. It is a very preliminary discussion. Our 

ministry phoned to see if there was any capacity in other 

provinces. I would expect that those members would know 

there‟s capacity in other provinces because in the last four years 

of their mandate, they purchased out-of-province hips and 

knees, Mr. Speaker, for 366 citizens from Saskatchewan, out of 

province. 

 

And then we pursue it further. Did they pay for the travel 

expenses? No, they didn‟t, Mr. Speaker. For some reason, if we 

did, it‟s two-tier health care; but when they do it, it‟s perfectly 

fine. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a nice diversion, 

but it isn‟t going to work. 

 

It‟s interesting that the Minister of Health and the Premier say 

they know little about the pending deal with BC to buy the 

surgeries, and yet BC says the two provinces are close to 

signing an MOU. Not only is the BC Health minister saying the 

two provinces are close to signing an MOU, he also says 

Saskatchewan approached BC, saying Saskatchewan doesn‟t 

have the money it takes to make the massive investments in the 

kind of surgical facilities and expertise they have in BC. And 

that Saskatchewan said, you know what? We don‟t want to have 

to make the huge upfront investments that you‟ve made in 

British Columbia. 

 

To the Premier: how can buying surgeries in BC be a last resort 

when BC is being told that the Saskatchewan government 

doesn‟t want to invest in surgical expertise and facilities here at 

home? When did the Premier‟s last resort become his first 

resort? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s interesting that they 

continue to talk about wait-lists. And I can understand that 

because under 16 years of NDP government, the wait-list did 

nothing but increase and increase. In fact in 1999, the election 

campaign for the Saskatchewan New Democrats, which were 

elected on this promise — this was the promise by the NDP in 

1999 — that we would cut waiting lists by 30 per cent. 



3414 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2009 

You know what happened? They increased by 61 per cent, 61 

per cent, even though they were buying operations all over 

Canada, Mr. Speaker. And they weren‟t covering the travel 

expenses. I guess there‟s two tiers, Mr. Speaker. Tier number 

one is what they say; tier number two is what they do. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I think that the people are tired of 

this minister hiding behind what we did or didn‟t do. He is now 

responsible for what he is not doing or what he is doing. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the Premier admits that he approached 

Premier Campbell in June of this year and had a discussion with 

him about sending Saskatchewan people to BC for surgeries. 

Then on October 16th, the Premier and his government cut 

funding to the Regina surgical centre, which would have 

performed the surgeries the Premier is now negotiating to buy 

from BC. 

 

To the Premier, if buying surgeries really is a last resort, why 

did the Premier and his government cut funding to a surgical 

care centre that could have done many of the surgeries he is 

now going to send people to BC to have? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we are looking at 

certainly reducing the number of people waiting on our 

wait-list. Twenty-seven thousand is absolutely unacceptable. 

And so in the next four years, we‟re going to look at every 

option that‟s available to our government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, first of all, is capacity within our province. Mr. 

Speaker, if it‟s a private deliver within a public system, publicly 

funded, no queue jumping, Mr. Speaker, we‟ll look at that. And 

in the last option, Mr. Speaker, would be looking at capacity 

outside the province. 

 

Now I don‟t know where they‟re at on this, Mr. Speaker. I just 

don‟t know where they‟re at. They‟re saying that‟s absolutely 

unacceptable. But under their watch they did it — 366 times in 

four years, Mr. Speaker. They bought procedures, just hips and 

knees, out of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. How does that 

square, when they think that it‟s just absolutely terrible if 

another party does it, but it‟s perfectly fine if it‟s under the 

socialist NDP? 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the member from 

Cumberland. 

 

Forestry Sector Issues 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, the government has sent out 

news releases on possible plans to redevelop the Prince Albert 

pulp and paper mill, the Big River mill, and the mill in Hudson 

Bay, Carrot River. So far no concrete announcement have 

actually been made. But they‟ve been silent on the future of the 

Wapawekka saw mill near Prince Albert. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I have in my hand a liquidation list for the 

assets of Wapawekka saw mill with a deadline of October 2nd, 

2009 — over a month ago. The question to the minister, can he 

tell us what‟s happening with Wapawekka saw mill? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, the forestry sector in 

Saskatchewan is a troubled sector without question. It‟s like 

that all across Canada. I note in British Columbia there was 

another mill closed last week as a result of the downturn in the 

housing starts in the US [United States]. It‟s a tough time in that 

industry. 

 

We are working with big forestry companies, with small 

forestry companies, with independents, with Métis and First 

Nations folks as well, to look at changes in the forest 

management agreement. We are working towards an agreement 

that I think will serve them very well in the future. They‟re all 

expecting that we will see at some point an upturn in housing 

starts in the US market, which is where all these lumber 

supplies go. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, we‟re told that one of the 

reasons that Wapawekka mill is being shut down for good is 

that the government won‟t guarantee possible buyers a wood 

timber supply. Naturally no one would want to buy it under 

these circumstances. Now that the equipment in the mill — 

expensive, state-of-the-art equipment — has been sold off by 

the receiver, the mill is likely to close forever. To the minister: 

why didn‟t he even try to save the Wapawekka saw mill? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, the forest management 

system that we are looking at is a co-managed system that will 

allow large companies, smaller companies, independents, First 

Nations, and Métis to participate in this agreement, Mr. 

Speaker. I would remind the member opposite, Mr. Speaker, 

that the Wapawekka facility closed under the NDP watch. 

 

And just prior to the last election, the former Premier tried to 

revive it by putting $100 million of taxpayers‟ money on the 

table, and people at the time said it simply wouldn‟t work. It 

was only an NDP ploy to try and get more votes for them. It 

didn‟t work then, and it won‟t work now. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — I‟m actually surprised, Mr. Speaker, the 

minister knows the word forestry. Mr. Speaker, we now know 

that the former employees of Wapawekka saw mill have no jobs 

to go back to, and we still have no confirmation on what‟s 

happening in other forest communities. Now these communities 

are being made to pay for this government‟s fiscal 

mismanagement. 

 

Two weeks ago the Minister of Finance announced that he was 

holding back 1.5 million of the Community Development Trust 

— money intended to help forestry communities. To the 

minister: why are forestry workers, their families, being made 



November 3, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3415 

to pay for this government‟s mismanagement of the finances? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, the history of this facility is, 

is one that has been plagued by a lot of problems over the years. 

The NDP closed that facility as a part of the Weyerhaeuser 

closure that happened under their watch. After that, then they 

tried to revive it just prior to the election of 2007, putting $100 

million of taxpayers‟ money at risk. And on April 2nd of 2008, 

when asked by the media about the deal, Weyerhaeuser said 

that they thought that there was nothing that could be done. And 

then they . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, then 

the member from Prince Albert Northcote, his quote with 

respect to the opening of it said, well I guess it‟s true then. 

Nothing can be done. That was the NDP‟s response. 

 

We‟re working with industry today, Mr. Speaker. We will 

continue to work towards a positive solution for the forestry 

sector in our province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Public Safety Procedures 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, the policy to deal with the escape 

or release in error of a level 1 dangerous offender is clear. The 

public is made aware of the incident immediately, unless the 

relevant police service objects to the issuance of the media 

advisory. 

 

To the minister: which police force objected to making the 

public aware that a dangerous sex offender was unlawfully at 

large? 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, our first concern is for public safety. And in order 

to ensure public safety, we have to run our corrections system 

in an orderly and disciplined way. 

 

If a correction worker has concerns about public safety, there‟s 

a right way and a wrong way to express those concerns. The 

right way would have been for a worker to speak to a senior 

official in the ministry. The wrong way is for an employee to 

improperly take a confidential inmate file and then breach his 

oath of office by giving it to a member of the opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟ve asked my deputy to reassure all correction 

employees that if they have concerns about public safety, 

they‟re always welcome to raise those concerns with senior 

officials within the ministry. But it is never appropriate for them 

to breach their oath and improperly disclose confidential inmate 

files. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s clear that the minister doesn‟t 

want to tell us which police force told him not to make it public 

because there was no such indication by a police force. Mr. 

Speaker, it‟s clear that the minister is more concerned with 

finding out who informed the public of a dangerous sex 

offender‟s release than he is in finding out where his system 

broke down. 

 

To the minister: what message is the minister sending to the 

people of Saskatchewan about what is more important — 

protecting the public from danger, or protecting the minister 

from his own incompetence? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, speaking about 

concern, this morning I received an email from Scott Taylor, a 

corrections worker at the Regina Correctional Centre. And I 

would like to quote from that email. I quote: 

 

It has come to my attention that the document Mr. Yates 

received through unknown sources regarding inmate 

Brock Wiebe had my name and another corrections staff 

name shown on the document. 

 

I have worked as a Corrections Worker for 11 years now 

and I believe that I have a good reputation. 

 

I feel my name being left unblacked out on a document 

that Mr. Yates should never have received is offensive . . . 

because people will infer that I had something to do with 

Mr. Wiebe‟s release. 

 

Mr. Taylor has also emailed the member for Regina Dewdney 

asking for an apology, but he has had no response. Is the 

member from Regina Dewdney going to apologize to these 

correction workers, and is he going to return the documents? 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The member from 

Athabasca will come to order. 

 

Before orders of the day, I received a letter from the member 

from Regina Dewdney. If the member from Regina Dewdney 

would like to . . . I‟ll recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

PRIVILEGE 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on a point of 

privilege. As required by the standing orders of this Assembly, 

yesterday I delivered to you, Mr. Speaker, notice that I would 

be rising on a motion of privilege. 

 

I asked Mr. Speaker to review the Hansard from October 29th, 

Thursday of last week, on page 3320. And you will find the 



3416 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2009 

series of questions from myself to the Minister of Public Safety, 

Corrections and Policing, as well as the answers provided by 

the minister. 

 

I would like first to draw attention to the first question and the 

answer. And, Mr. Speaker, in those questions and answers, I 

asked a very direct question. I asked the minister if he had 

knowledge of an incident and the answer was no. Later in the 

conversation or in his answers, Mr. Speaker, not only did he 

clearly indicate that he had knowledge, but extensive 

knowledge of the incident before the House. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I asked the minister whether or not he was 

the one who released the information to the public The minister 

said he clearly was the one responsible for releasing the 

information. Then he goes out, Mr. Speaker, in the same day, 

goes out into the rotunda and foyer and says that he wasn‟t 

responsible for making the decision. In fact, his deputy minister 

was. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there‟s a long-standing tradition in this Assembly, 

as indicated in the paper that I handed to you, Mr. Speaker, 

about this issue, that the members of this Legislative Assembly 

and ministers must answer honestly. They should not mislead 

this House. And, Mr. Speaker, I believe that is exactly what 

occurred. And, Mr. Speaker, we ask you to review the issue and 

the motion that was put before you at that time that said: 

 

Be it resolved that the Standing Committee on Privileges 

be instructed to examine the issue of the statements made 

to this Assembly by the Minister of Corrections, Public 

Safety and Policing on October 29th, 2009 and report 

back to the Assembly; and that until such time that the 

committee reports, the Minister of Corrections, Public 

Safety and Policing shall be removed from his position as 

a minister. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to take 

the opportunity to respond to the point of privilege raised by the 

Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a point of privilege is a very serious matter, and it 

relates to the fact that the privileges of a member have been 

violated, either by incomplete information or misleading 

information, that the member has misled his or her colleagues. 

And it‟s very serious. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m sure when you review the transcript of the 

questions, you will recognize that the initial question that was 

posed to the minister was deliberately vague of any specifics. 

And the minister in Hansard said clearly that he was not aware 

based on this information, and asked that the member from 

Dewdney would provide him with additional information. 

 

By the third question, the member from Dewdney did indeed 

provide additional details so that the minister could know 

specifically what incident that the member was referring to, and 

provided as complete an answer as he was able to, once he was 

aware of that information. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on the other point, the minister said that “one of 

the reasons that we decided and I decided not to make a public 

announcement . . .” I think it‟s very clear that the we and I 

refers to the minister and ministry officials that make the 

decision in a proper protocol relationship. Mr. Speaker, I think 

it‟s important to also note that in ruling in the House on June 

7th, 2002 in the Assembly, the Speaker made the following 

ruling: 

 

. . . I would like to say that with respect to the evidence 

the member gives about statements that happened outside 

of the Assembly, the Speaker will not rule on any 

statements that are made or any action that is taken 

outside of the Assembly. 

 

I would therefore rule that the prima facie case is not 

established. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe for these reasons that the prima facie 

case indeed has not been established. 

 

The Speaker: — I thank the Opposition House Leader and the 

Government House Leader for their comments this afternoon. 

As was mentioned yesterday, the Opposition House Leader 

gave notice of the question of privilege, and the notice 

concerned responses by the Minister of Corrections, Public 

Safety and Policing, as the member has outlined, made during 

the oral question period of October 29th, 2009. 

 

The notice and details of the subject matter were in writing, and 

the proposed motion of remedy was received at least two hours 

prior to the regular opening of the Assembly, in accordance 

with the requirements of rule 12. The Opposition House 

Leader‟s case is that the Minister of Corrections, Public Safety 

and Policing breached the privileges of this Assembly by his 

responses during the oral question period. 

 

To begin with, I want to outline for all members the 

parliamentary issue that is raised by the Opposition House 

Leader‟s question of privilege. The allegation of the member is 

that the Minister of Public Safety, Corrections and Policing 

was, and I quote, “attempting to mislead the House.” An 

allegation of attempting to mislead the House is equal to a 

charge that a member has wilfully and deliberately misled the 

Assembly. 

 

I think all members are familiar with the rule that prohibits the 

making of a personal charge or accusation against another 

member in the normal course of debate. The charge that a 

member has made deliberately misleading statements, if 

well-founded, is treated as contempt of parliament. Accusations 

and personal charges against a member must be made directly 

by substantive motion or by raising a question of privilege. 

 

I remind all members that it is not the role of the Speaker to 

decide if a breach of privilege or contempt has been committed. 

This is a question that only the Assembly can decide. It is the 

Speaker‟s role to decide whether a prima facie case has been 

established. What that means is, the Speaker is to judge whether 

there is sufficient evidence to merit setting aside the regular 

business of the Assembly to debate the matter. If the Speaker 

finds the prima facie case has been established, then the 

question is put to the Assembly in the form of the motion 

included as part of the Opposition House Leader‟s case. 



November 3, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3417 

Yesterday I deferred my ruling on the case in order to carefully 

review the evidence put forward by the Opposition House 

Leader, the authorities, and the relevant precedents. And I thank 

the Opposition House Leader and the Government House 

Leader for their comments today. And I‟m now prepared to rule 

on the case. 

 

First of all, I want to outline the parliamentary practices of the 

Houses of Commons in Ottawa and Westminster when 

allegations are made against a member for deliberately making 

a false statement. I do this because both Ottawa and 

Westminster practice are cited in the case and because 

Saskatchewan practice differs somewhat. 

 

At Ottawa and Westminster, the primary threshold of proof that 

a member deliberately misled the House is the member‟s own 

admission of guilt. The Opposition House Leader cites a House 

of Commons case in Ottawa which he states is virtually 

identical to his case against the Minister of Public Safety, 

Corrections and Policing. He quotes the Speaker, who cites 

House of Commons practice by quoting from Erskine May as 

follows: 

 

The Commons may treat the making of a deliberately 

misleading statement as contempt. In 1963 the House 

resolved that in making a personal statement which 

contained words which he later admitted not to be true, a 

former Member had been guilty of a grave contempt. 

 

The quoted passage can be found at page 132 of the Erskine 

May‟s Parliamentary Practice, 23rd Edition, where the 

Profumo case is cited as the guiding precedent. In that case, 

Profumo, a minister of the Crown, confessed that he had misled 

the House and lied in testimony elsewhere. 

 

Similarly, although not mentioned by the Opposition House 

Leader, in the Ottawa case, the minister of Defence admitted to 

the media that he had misled the House. This is why the 

Speaker quoted the 1963 Westminster case. 

 

In the case before us, there is no admission by the Minister of 

Public Safety, Corrections and Policing that he had deliberately 

misled this Assembly in question period on October 29. 

Therefore the Ottawa situation is not virtually identical and 

does not support the Opposition House Leader‟s case. 

 

In Saskatchewan, however, a contempt charge does not 

necessarily require an admission of guilt. Contempt has been 

found on the basis of evidence. On November 18, 1975 the 

Speaker ruled that unless evidence can be produced that 

demonstrates, and I quote, “. . . knowing and deliberate 

deception of the Assembly, there is no question of privilege.” 

 

Such was the case on July 13, 1982, when a prima facie case 

was established that a minister had deliberately and wilfully 

misled the Assembly when a letter proved that he had 

personally been involved with the dismissal of an employee, 

after having denied the fact in question period. In the absence of 

a confession, the Speaker must review the details provided by 

the Opposition House Leader for evidence to determine if the 

minister did commit a knowing and deliberate deception of the 

Assembly. 

 

I first deal with the exchange in question period of October 29, 

which is where the Opposition House Leader begins his case. 

The Opposition House Leader has quoted in the first instance 

the minister did say he had no knowledge that a dangerous sex 

offender is unlawfully at large. What isn‟t quoted is that the 

minister then said, and I quote, “If the member would like to 

pass some information over to me, I will definitely look into it.” 

After another exchange about government policy, the minister 

asked for details on the specifics of the case. The Opposition 

House Leader then provided the specifics, which the minister 

addressed. 

 

It is clear, and I don‟t think disputed, that the minister did 

provide the information sought by the member. What is under 

review is whether the minister had, by this evidence, 

deliberately attempted to mislead the Assembly. 

 

It is apparent that after further questions, the minister did know 

that the person in question was at large. The Opposition House 

Leader claims that if the initial answer had been allowed to 

stand, then “the minister would have misled this Assembly 

without anyone being the wiser.” Their operative words are 

“would have misled.” If the record had not been corrected, the 

member might have a case if it could be proved that the 

minister did knowingly mislead the Assembly. The fact of the 

matter is that the minister did not allow his initial answer to 

stand, and he corrected the record after more information was 

supplied by the member. 

 

For this reason, I find that the Opposition House Leader has not 

provided proof that the minister did knowingly and wilfully 

attempt to mislead the Assembly. Nor has the Opposition House 

Leader provided evidence that the exchange in question period 

had in any way obstructed or impeded the Opposition House 

Leader or any other member in the performance of their duties. 

 

[14:30] 

 

I will now deal with the claim that the minister said one thing in 

the Assembly about his responsibility and another thing outside 

the Assembly in the media. Generally the Speaker is not 

concerned with what is said outside this Chamber unless it has 

some bearing on it or connection to the rights and privileges of 

the Assembly and its members. 

 

In this case, the Opposition House Leader alleges that what was 

said outside by the minister to the media is evidence that he 

deliberately misled the Assembly. In the Assembly the minister 

stated, and I quote, “. . . we decided and I decided not to make a 

public announcement.” 

 

It is common and required in this Assembly for ministers to 

take responsibility for their administrative and policy decisions 

of the ministries regardless of who actually committed an 

action. The Opposition House Leader has not provided any 

evidence that the minister attempted to deceive or mislead the 

Assembly in this regard. 

 

For these reasons, I find that the Opposition House Leader has 

not produced the evidence necessary for the Speaker to find that 

a prima facie case of contempt has been established. 

 

 



3418 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2009 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 143 through 204. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 143 to 204 tabled. I recognize the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Question 205 is ordered. 

 

The Speaker: — 205 is ordered. I recognize the Government 

Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — I wish to table the answers to questions 206 

through 270. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 206 through 270 tabled. I recognize 

the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Answers to questions 271 through 274 are 

ordered. 

 

The Speaker: — 271 through 274 ordered. I recognize the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — I wish to table the answers to questions 275 

through 277. 

 

The Speaker: — 275 through 277 tabled. I recognize the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — The answer to question 278 is ordered. 

 

The Speaker: — 278 is ordered. I recognize the Government 

Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — I wish to table the answers to questions 279 

and 280. 

 

The Speaker: — 279 and 280 are tabled. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by the Hon. Mr. McMorris, seconded 

by Ms. Ross.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Thank 

you very much. It‟s an honour for me to be able to rise with this 

team of women and men on the government side of the House, 

members of the Saskatchewan Party government, and engage in 

the debate on the Speech from the Throne. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I get into any substantive discussion of 

what the Speech from the Throne and the vision that the 

government has laid out, I would like to make a few 

acknowledgements, if I may. I‟d like to first and foremost thank 

Tami and our family, our kids back at home for their continued, 

well some might call it endurance of this vocation that I have 

pursued. And I want to acknowledge her love and support at 

home in Swift Current and on the road as she seeks to carry out 

her duties around the province at different charitable events and 

different meetings and causes that she has taken up. 

 

I would also like to thank our kids, Megan and Colter and Faith, 

for their patience with the fact that I‟m not at home as often as I 

would like to be. And I‟m not at home as often, at least, as I 

would like to think that they would want me to be but, Mr. 

Speaker, they‟re obviously the very, very most important things 

that I have in my life. And I‟m grateful for their support and 

partnership. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our family, like most families, had a busy summer 

in Saskatchewan. We wish the weather would‟ve been a little 

better for camping in July, but it was great to be about the 

province in the summertime. 

 

And fall, it‟s been busy. You know, in Saskatchewan fall 

signals obviously a return to many things, a return to a more, I 

guess, regular order of business for families and for businesses 

themselves, even for this legislature. And that was true in our 

household, with music lessons that start up and school begins in 

earnest. 

 

And football begins, Mr. Speaker. And I know some members 

in this House hate the fact that people in Saskatchewan like 

football. They get grumpy about the fact that people support 

football, that they like cheering for the Riders, that they even 

may on Sundays watch what they call, what some members call 

American football, but others in 2009 call the NFL [National 

Football League]. But that‟s part of the household activities that 

we enjoy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I also have the great privilege of volunteering to coach a little 

bit of minor football in Swift Current. And I‟m happy to report, 

Mr. Speaker, that perhaps in my last year of minor league 

coaching, because I‟ve been at it for four years and my son‟s 

now going to move on to high school ball and actually was 

playing on the high school team already as well as minor . . . 

And the team that I helped coach on the defence, the Stark & 

Marsh Chartered Accountant Vikings, we defeated the Swift 

Current Steel Steelers — we‟ve got to work on shortening the 

names in our minor league, Mr. Speaker — who had in turn 

defeated the Fabro Fabricating Ltd. Falcons. 

 

We defeated them though, Mr. Speaker, and we won the 

championship, Mr. Speaker. And some would credit good 

coaching for that, but it had nothing to do with it really, Mr. 

Speaker. It was a great team. We had great young people and 

just a great season of football and family time we‟ve had this 

fall. So again I want to acknowledge them. 

 

I want to thank some people back in the constituency as well. I 

just recently had an annual general meeting for our 

constituency, and soon we‟re going to have a nomination. Mr. 

Speaker, I have decided — and I thought I would announce at 



November 3, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3419 

the start of the speech — I have decided to seek the nomination 

again for the Saskatchewan Party in Swift Current. 

 

And we‟ll get to that here I think, actually later this fall. You‟ll 

be hearing from our party, Mr. Speaker, actually, as we 

nominate in a number of ridings around this province, both in 

the ones that are incumbent and then in the months that follow 

in incumbent or what we would call target ridings, Mr. Speaker, 

as we look to two years from now when we‟re going to work 

very, very hard to earn the support and trust of Saskatchewan 

people and hopefully, in a growing province, grow this side of 

the House a little bit, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But there are people at home that are a great help to me, and I 

want to acknowledge them as well. We have a new constituency 

assistant in Swift Current, as our former constituency assistant 

has joined the Minister of Health‟s excellent team in trying to 

provide service to the people of the province. And so I want to 

welcome Nola Smith who just started here in the last week or 

so. And she may be tuned in to the proceedings here in Swift 

Current. I want to thank Nola for her excellent start already and 

for the work that she‟s going to do on behalf of myself, but 

most importantly on behalf of our landlords, the people of the 

constituency of Swift Current. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the theme of the Speech from the Throne was 

“Moving Forward.” That was the theme or the name of the 

Speech from the Throne. And we began the Speech from the 

Throne with a quote from Albert Einstein, and I‟ll just 

paraphrase it. Obviously the quote is fairly brief. He talked 

about the importance of maintaining your balance if you‟re 

going to continue to move forward, and the analogy he used 

was riding a bicycle. He talked about the importance of not just 

momentum going forward, but keeping your balance in order to 

stay moving forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And you know, throughout the Speech from the Throne 

document there were a number of examples that were provided 

of how this province has been moving forward over the last 

couple of years, Mr. Speaker. And I‟ll touch on some of them, 

but first I‟d like to talk a little bit about some very recent 

examples that may have been referenced in the Speech from the 

Throne, but maybe were not — good examples of this province 

moving forward. 

 

I note today, Mr. Speaker, in The StarPhoenix of this date, a 

headline that reads as follows: “$150-million refinery to be built 

near Langham.” Mr. Speaker, it‟s a hydrometallurgical 

processing facility — and I challenge members to say that five 

times very quickly. That‟s the facility that‟s been announced by 

Fortune Minerals Ltd. The facility will process about 80 000 

tonnes of product from Nico, a mining operation in the 

Northwest Territories. Each year they expect to employ about 

85 people in specialty jobs, and that production is going to 

happen over the next 15 to 20 years. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, think about this for a minute. What we have 

seen, if you‟ve watched BNN, the Business News Network that 

some have called lately the bad news network, what we‟ve seen 

in the pages in the national papers that are dedicated to 

reporting on the economy and business, what we‟ve seen on 

television and what we‟ve heard on radio for the last year or so 

is just a litany of bad news from around the country that nobody 

takes any pleasure in. 

 

We have seen layoffs. We have seen obviously recessionary 

growth numbers — in other words, gross domestic product 

backing up in jurisdiction after jurisdiction. We‟ve seen reports 

of layoffs and employment reductions. We‟ve seen reports, Mr. 

Speaker, of population out-migration from certain jurisdictions 

as people are looking for a little bit of hope and looking for 

some opportunity. 

 

What‟s been happening in the province of Saskatchewan during 

that time? Well you could make the case that unfortunately for 

much of this country and North America and the world, things 

have been moving backward. 

 

What‟s been happening over the last year or so in 

Saskatchewan? We‟ve chosen to go in another direction. We‟ve 

chosen to move forward, and when I say we, I don‟t mean the 

government. Hopefully the government can get some things 

right, get the basics right so that it creates the fundamentals for 

growth and momentum. But we know the credit belongs to the 

great blessing of resources that we have. It belongs to our 

people, and it belongs to the business women and men of this 

province and to a growing corporate sector. 

 

But whatever the reason, our economy has been moving 

forward, and in the midst of a recession, though we see the 

signs of growth coming. That this headline would appear, not 

just that we are holding our own in Saskatchewan — and we 

have been with the lowest unemployment rate in the country, 

the lowest unemployment rate for cities in Saskatoon and 

second lowest in Regina, the fastest rate of population growth in 

the middle of a bash-your-teeth-in recession in 50 years in the 

province of Saskatchewan — it isn‟t just that we‟ve been 

holding our own, but we‟ve been moving forward. But then to 

see in the paper today, a company say, you know, we could be 

in a lot of places to do business, to do this processing, to create 

these jobs, to add value to this mineral processing. But this 

company‟s saying, we choose Saskatchewan. This company‟s 

saying, we‟re going to choose to be very near Saskatoon. 

 

It‟s a good example of what the Speech from the Throne was 

talking about. We are continuing to move forward into a time of 

growth and prosperity in the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But this side of the House, as much as we prize announcements 

like this, announcements like this new refinery in Langham, as 

much as we welcome them and as much as we want to talk 

about them and promote the fact that investment‟s still 

happening in this province where it may not be happening 

elsewhere, this is not the end game for our government. Never 

has been. 

 

We didn‟t run, Mr. Speaker, simply to grow the economy of the 

province. We didn‟t run in the elections that our party has 

contested simply to see the population grow or that jobs would 

be created or that we would be a have province permanently 

within the Confederation. Those were all objectives, Mr. 

Speaker. They were objectives and they remain the objectives 

of this government, but they‟re not the end game. They‟re not 

the goal. 

 

The goal of the government, Mr. Speaker, has simply been this: 



3420 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2009 

that we could create the environment that would ensure the 

development and the expansion of our economy, that we would 

create and foster the kind of environment that would see the 

expansion of a tax base — that does what? That provides the 

very best quality of life in the Dominion of Canada. 

 

That‟s the end game. When we‟re moving forward, that‟s the 

destination that we‟re moving forward to. We want to have 

better health care for people — more on that in a moment. We 

want to have a place where you don‟t wait 19 months in 

excruciating agony because you can‟t get an operation on your 

back. We want to live in a province, Mr. Speaker, where if 

you‟re fighting colorectal cancer, you can get support from your 

government because the drug is funded, Mr. Speaker. We want 

growth so we can fund new nursing positions so emergency 

rooms in rural Saskatchewan don‟t close at 5 o‟clock on Friday 

and stay closed until Monday at 9 o‟clock. Because that‟s where 

we have been, Mr. Speaker, when members opposite ran this 

place. We‟re going to work very hard that we not return to those 

days. That‟s the end game that we seek, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:45] 

 

And so I think today‟s announcement, today‟s invitation by the 

Minister of Social Services and by the words of the member for 

Yorkton are particularly important as we look to examples of 

how this province is moving forward. Because as much as I 

love this announcement in The StarPhoenix from this company 

about this investment that they‟re making and the jobs they‟re 

creating, I‟m most interested in the things that they‟re going to 

be able to pay for, what will be supported by the tithes they 

bring, if you will, Mr. Speaker, to the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Because earlier this day we met some people who have been 

working for a very long time in Saskatchewan. The acronym of 

their organization is SAID. They are the disability community 

in our province. They have been working toward some 

important program changes that would provide for greater 

independence, some investments. But even more important than 

that, they‟ve been looking for a government that would simply 

say, you know, we want to acknowledge the fact that those in 

the disability community have been saying for years, we don‟t 

want to collect social assistance. For those who are in the 

long-term and permanently disabled, they want to be a part of 

an income plan, an income plan that can be supplemented in 

many cases by the work they do. Mr. Speaker, other provinces 

have done this for a very long time. They have provided the 

right investments and they‟ve characterized it in the right way. 

 

My brother and his family moved some years ago now to 

Alberta from here. And we miss them, but they‟re enjoying life 

in Alberta. And I‟ve asked permission from my sister-in-law 

and my brother to use my young nephew as an example, and 

they‟ve agreed to that. My young nephew, he‟s a great young 

man. He‟s 18 years old now. I can hardly believe it. He has 

Williams syndrome. Mr. Speaker, it‟s an intellectual and a 

physical disability, and it‟s a permanent disability. He is . . . I 

hate the word high functioning. It sounds too bureaucratic. He‟s 

a great guy and he has a lot to contribute. 

 

For a long time in Alberta . . . And I‟m not saying any other 

province gets everything right, but here‟s something Alberta has 

had right. For a long time in that province, they made this 

distinction where someone like my nephew wasn‟t on — after 

he got to be 18 and maybe was even doing some work — 

wasn‟t on welfare or social assistance, as important as that is for 

some. But rather he was on an income plan. He was under an 

income supplement. And there was a recognition under that 

government‟s programs that this would be important for those 

individuals who were still ready and willing and able to work. 

 

And he does that today. He works in a greenhouse not far from 

Lethbridge, Saskatchewan. He lives with a roommate in a 

mobile home, and he takes a great deal of pride in his work, Mr. 

Speaker, and he should. And his family and, I believe, Darren 

has a great sense of pride about the value that he brings to the 

place he works and the value that his province, his home, places 

on him. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, today we were reaffirmed of an 

announcement our government made a long time ago, that in 

addition to a number of investments we‟ve made for those who 

are most vulnerable among us, for those who are disabled, we 

gave them that same value and that same recognition. And they 

were here in the gallery to say thank you for that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that‟s why we pursue announcements like this, 

this $150 million refinery in Langham, so we can acknowledge 

and do the right thing for people like my nephew, Darren, who 

now, if they were living in this province, can receive that same 

recognition, that same value, and that same dignity. They‟ve 

been asking for it for a long time, Mr. Speaker, the disability 

community. It‟s happened today in the province, and that‟s how 

we‟re moving Saskatchewan forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are a number of elements in the Speech from 

the Throne — I‟ll touch on a few of them — that I think are 

examples of our government‟s intent on moving forward, 

moving the province forward. But I don‟t think there are any as 

poignant, as compelling as in health care. Many would argue, I 

think, that was the centrepiece of the Speech from the Throne. 

And of the many items mentioned with respect to health care, 

the wait times commitment that we‟ve made obviously was the 

most important of those. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you will know this. The Minister of Health 

mentioned it earlier today in question period. You will know 

that 27,000 Saskatchewan people today are waiting for surgery 

of some sort. You will know that 4,000 or so have been waiting 

for more than 12 months. Can you imagine that? Imagine that. 

 

I invite every member in this House, including those who want 

to debate the process of this, who oppose any use of any private 

clinics or private doctors even in a public system if we need to 

do that, even without queue jumping. I challenge those 

members who would rather focus on process and ideology to 

think about 4,000 fellow citizens — people that sign our 

cheques in this Assembly — that have an expectation and a 

right that we would deliver in the most timely way possible 

appropriate health care. 

 

I want members of this House on both sides and anyone 

listening to think about those perhaps who have gone through 

excruciating back pain or . . . Let‟s pick on back pain for 

example. It‟s an example close to my house literally, in Swift 



November 3, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3421 

Current, literally, thankfully not in my house but next door not 

very far down the street. 

 

For those members who refuse to look at every single option in 

a public system to try to deal with these wait times, I challenge 

them to consider excruciating pain for 12 months. What were 

we doing on the 3rd of November 2008? I don‟t know. I don‟t 

know exactly what I was doing. But I know it was a long time 

ago. I know it is an especially long time ago if I had been 

suffering or any member of this House had been suffering from 

debilitating back pain, the kind of pain that makes you sell your 

business that you‟ve had for 30 years, the kind of pain that 

makes it hard to get out of bed, the kind of pain where you have 

to be loaded up on so many drugs that you‟re not even yourself 

anymore. Not a week, not a month, not six months, but twelve 

months, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And those people that have been waiting for those treatments, 

some longer than that, 4,000 today and more in the past, they‟ve 

seen some lip service paid to their issue by governments 

previous. And here, Mr. Speaker, I‟m going to be a little bit 

partisan because there‟s a record here that we are going to 

expose. And you have to sometimes, to contrast the fact that 

we‟re moving forward, you have to look at what we‟ve done in 

the past. 

 

What those people who are suffering from back pain for a very 

long time heard from member‟s opposite when they were the 

government, when they were campaigning for re-election is, 

they heard promises. The Minister of Health exposed one of 

them today in question period, the promise that was given to 

Saskatchewan people when the current Leader of the 

Opposition was the deputy leader of his party and no doubt 

signed off on that platform document in 1999 said, we, our 

government will cut wait times by 30 per cent. That‟s what it 

said. 

 

The result today, the result at the end of their term, not even 

today, wait times increased. Wait-lists, sorry, increased by 60 

per cent, Mr. Speaker. You see, you can‟t just have words. 

You‟ve got to back it up with a plan and some resources. 

You‟ve got to be open to some things that maybe we haven‟t 

been open to in the past. You‟ve got to look at some innovation 

from around the world and find out how can we bring that to 

bear in the province. What resources are needed so that we can 

deliver the health care that people have an expectation to 

receive? And, Mr. Speaker, again I ask people to think about 

what you were doing last November. Can you imagine from 

then until now being in excruciating, debilitating pain and 

getting from your government brochures and words and empty 

promises? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I say this very clearly, as clearly as I can in this 

Assembly, this government, as highlighted in the Speech from 

the Throne, intends to move forward with action. We are going 

to look at expanding capacity, using existing capacity in the 

province of Saskatchewan as it exists, using existing orthopedic 

surgeons and other surgeons as they already exist in the 

province. But we‟ll also be open to bringing in potentially 

private clinics to set up on a temporary basis or private doctors 

to come in and to deliver the service. And if we have to, we‟re 

going to be prepared to look at out-of-province options as has 

been the case for years, and more on that in a moment. 

The bottom line is this, Mr. Speaker. Those members are, the 

NDP are going to give the people of Saskatchewan more 

rhetoric and more reasons why it can‟t be done based on 

ideology, based on matters of process. We are going to deliver 

on this. We‟re going to provide people and keep a promise of a 

three-month wait time for any surgery in this province within 

four years because what people deserve is less debate and 

rhetoric and more action. And that‟s what they‟re going to get 

from this side of the House. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, the new Leader of the Opposition I 

think has portrayed himself as a bit of a political strategist. And 

so I think he has seen in this commitment in the Speech from 

the Throne some sort of political opportunity perhaps. I think he 

has seen for himself some sort of chance to resurrect something 

that people in Saskatchewan know quite well as mediscare. It 

has had many manifestations in the past. 

 

I‟ve seen it first-hand. I‟ve seen an NDP party say that if you 

vote a certain way in a by-election, then all five hospitals in a 

riding will be closed. 

 

An Hon. Member: — What happened to those hospitals? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — You know, Mr. Speaker, the member for 

Cannington asks more than a rhetorical question. He just asked 

a question: what did happen to those hospitals? Well they did 

all close. You know who closed them, Mr. Speaker? It was the 

NDP government that was elected thereafter. 

 

We‟ve seen this mediscare manifest itself in many ways, and 

we know that this new Leader of the Opposition has decided 

that it is on this wait times where he going to attempt to scare 

the people of the province. But it‟s not going to work, Mr. 

Speaker. Here‟s why it‟s not going to work. Because everyone 

in Saskatchewan knows someone in that cohort, that group of 

4,000 who have been waiting over a year. And if they don‟t 

know someone in that 4,000, they know someone I think in the 

11,000 that have been waiting more than four months. And if 

they don‟t know someone in that group, they know someone 

who had been waiting and finally did get their surgery, but only 

after waiting for far too long. 

 

And the people of this province have said to pollsters and 

politicians that would care to listen to what they‟re saying, our 

number one concern is health care. We worry about 

professionals, doctors and nurses in rural Saskatchewan and 

elsewhere. And that goes directly to treatment and to care. 

We‟re worried about wait-lists. 

 

Why in the birthplace of medicare would we stand to be so near 

the bottom of all the provinces, Mr. Speaker? Well that was 

their willingness. It‟s not ours on this side of the House. 

 

I look forward to the debate and potentially a campaign in two 

years because, Mr. Speaker, we‟ll have been about the business 

of getting people surgery that they need by that point of time. 

And I can‟t wait to campaign on this plan to move forward that 

we have unveiled versus what they would advocate, which is 

back to the past, back to wait-lists increasing by 60 per cent, 

back to a time when we had 800 fewer nurses than we needed, 

back to a time when hospitals were being closed in rural 

Saskatchewan. We welcome that debate now, and we‟re looking 



3422 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2009 

forward to it happening when the next election happens, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

You see, because the members opposite — who will vote 

against this commitment in the Speech from the Throne, I 

expect — they have, Mr. Speaker, not only a record to deal with 

in terms of what happened to wait times, but amazingly they 

have their own practices that they‟re going to have to deal with. 

 

What an interesting question period it was today, when the 

member for — what‟s her seat again — Saskatoon Eastview, 

the Health critic, when she stands up and is going to ask some 

questions of me and whoever would get up, maybe the Health 

minister, about our plan for wait times. Because we‟ve said as a 

last resort we‟re going to look at getting people the care they 

need, we may have to look at the capacity in other provinces. 

And the NDP have decried this now, remember. 

 

Now in this legislature and outside in the scrums they‟ve been 

indignant. Why would you send people for hip and knee 

surgeries outside the province instead of doing them all in the 

province? That‟s what they‟ve asked. That‟s been the question 

in this House and outside, and it relates directly to the Speech 

from the Throne. Why would you do that? Why would you send 

people who need hips and knee surgeries outside of the 

province of Saskatchewan, they said. 

 

You know what, Mr. Speaker? I was reading the newspaper just 

this morning from February the 4th, 2005, because we do that 

on this side of the House. We get done this paper and then we 

go back and we read some other papers, especially when we‟re 

trying to compare what it is they say on that side of the House 

and what it is they do. And so this is an interesting article from 

the Leader-Post, February 4, 2005, headline, “One man‟s 

needless wait for surgery.” And it details what was happening 

to an individual who was waiting for, I think, a hip surgery is 

what it was. It was a right hip he needed to be replaced. 

 

Responding to . . . And I‟m going to quote this, Mr. Speaker, so 

we‟re going to name a member, but here‟s a quote. Remember 

now, members opposite, including the member for Lakeview 

who‟s going to feature prominently in this next little bit right 

here, including the member for Lakeview, Regina Lakeview, 

have said today they oppose any notion that we would use 

capacity outside the province for — say — hips or knees for 

example. Here‟s the quote: “Responding to Ritson in January, 

Health Minister John Nilson told him . . . ” Ritson, by the way, 

I‟m sorry, was the patient that was looking for a hip treatment, 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

Responding to Ritson in January, Health Minister John 

Nilson told him most out-of-province treatments are 

covered, with the exceptions of MRIs [covered by the 

government, he‟s saying with the exception of MRIs], 

cataract surgery and other select services. However, Sask. 

Health does not cover costs for travel, meals and 

accommodation when patients access out-of-province 

services, he said. 

 

Meaning the minister at the time, the current member for 

Lakeview. But then he goes on to say, the member who now 

opposes and says they oppose using capacity outside of the 

province for hip and knee surgery, at the end of the article it 

says he, meaning that member, the member for Lakeview, “He 

acknowledged that the province is short of orthopedic surgeons 

so patients should ask family physicians about out-of-province 

options.” 

 

[15:00] 

 

He acknowledged that the province is short of orthopedic 

surgeons, so patients should ask family physicians about 

out-of-province options. Well could it be then, Mr. Speaker, 

that under the NDP who now decry the notion that hips and 

knee surgeries would happen outside the province, could it have 

happened under them when they were the government? I 

wonder. Well as we found out today in the legislature — and I 

think much to the member for Saskatoon Eastview‟s 

disappointment — that has happened. And over four years of 

their government, Mr. Speaker, we‟re talking hip and knee 

replacements exclusively, never mind all the other treatments. 

 

And we know in southwest Saskatchewan about the reciprocal 

health care that goes on between the community of Medicine 

Hat and the rest of the province. It just is a fact of life and has 

been under the NDP and under any government in the province. 

But under their term, in terms of hip and knee replacements, 

Mr. Speaker, 366 surgeries. That number is powerfully close to 

400 which is the number that‟s been bandied about, that our 

ministry would have said, hypothetically, look, if we need the 

hip and knee surgeries, you have capacity for 400. Three 

hundred and sixty-six — is there any wonder, Mr. Speaker, is 

there any wonder that when it comes to health care, when it 

comes to the economy, when it comes to just integrity in debate 

and discussion even in this legislature, that members opposite 

just simply are lacking? 

 

They are found lacking by the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan. You simply can‟t say that you oppose the thing 

you were doing two years ago, and doing in numbers exactly as 

been proposed by officials of the Minister of Health. It‟s 

absolutely amazing, Mr. Speaker, both those quotes and the fact 

of the matter and the reality of the record. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‟ve been working very hard to move 

Saskatchewan forward in terms of a number of areas. I know 

members opposite have dealt a lot with and members on our 

side have dealt with the issue of affordability. And I don‟t want 

to repeat everything that‟s been said in the debate but, Mr. 

Speaker, I‟m just going to read a list of things that we have 

worked on in terms of affordability issues. 

 

One of the challenges of a growing economy is that there are 

increasing costs. That‟s one of the challenges of an economy 

that grows in any jurisdiction, and we‟re not immune to that, 

Mr. Speaker. I think we‟re all grateful that our economy‟s 

growing. Better that than the alternative that‟s being 

experienced all over the world today, all over the world. 

 

But we have some challenges because there are those 

low-income people — seniors in some cases, young people in 

other cases — that are vulnerable to the increasing costs. So our 

government said, look, we‟ve got some resources. What could 

we do with those resources? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, our government has implemented the largest 



November 3, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3423 

single-year income tax reduction in the province‟s history. And 

80,000 people — you know, think about this number, Mr. 

Speaker — 80,000 low-income people no longer pay any 

provincial income tax at all. The cut was so dramatic, the cut 

was so dramatic that that is in fact the number: 80,000 

low-income people are no longer on the tax rolls of the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

And the rhetorical question has been asked by members 

opposite: where has the money gone? Well some of the money 

went there, back into the pockets of those who need it the most, 

by the way, of whose money it is in the first place. 

 

You see, it‟s interesting — and I‟ll get to my list in a moment 

because it‟s a great list — but it‟s interesting that they would 

ask this question over and over again. And it speaks to a bit of a 

mentality in terms of where the money went, implying, where is 

the government‟s money? It goes to a mentality that we saw 

when they were government, especially towards the end, Mr. 

Speaker, when increasingly they were tired and old and out of 

touch. And every once in a while there‟d be that slip that you‟d 

see from members opposite. They‟d start talking in the 

possessive about our money, the government‟s money, the 

government‟s resources. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that was when it was pretty clear things were over 

for that government. That was the beginning of, I think, the end 

for the government is when that mentality seemed to take hold 

across members opposite. And it‟s interesting, Mr. Speaker, 

because you‟d think two years in opposition, after a fairly sound 

defeat at the polls, they might have learned. But they haven‟t. 

You hear that in the tone of questions. You hear that in that 

rhetorical question we‟re talking about. 

 

On this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, we‟re working very, 

very hard to make sure we begin each day with a reminder that 

we‟re just tenants on this side of the House. There are landlords 

that are there to evict us if they ever see fit to do so. Hopefully 

they give us a few more opportunities. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Couple decades. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Couple decades, the member for Kindersley 

says. And I hope that he‟s got the stamina for that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there‟s something else we try to remind ourselves 

every day on this side of the House. The resources of the 

government are the people‟s resources; this isn‟t our money. 

You know, there‟s $800 million still in a savings account. 

We‟ve got it in a savings account. It‟s cash now, mind you. 

After all the things I‟m about to read and debt reduction and 

infrastructure investments — I‟ll get into that in a bit — there‟s 

$800 million still in the bank. That‟s also part of the answer to 

their question, where it went. 

 

But you know, that‟s not the government‟s money even though 

it‟s in the bank. And it‟s there hopefully for, well potentially for 

a rainy day. We hope never to have to use it. But it‟s there 

today, and it‟s not the government‟s money. It belongs to the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan, as does every single 

dollar that is collected by government on behalf of the people of 

the province and then invested back into Saskatchewan, 

whether we reduce the debt or cut taxes or deliver services. 

So, Mr. Speaker, though, one of the priorities of our 

government, to take a look at the money that belonged to the 

people of Saskatchewan, is to make sure those who are most 

vulnerable, those who are at the low income, are sharing in the 

prosperity. So there is the income tax cut I‟ve already talked 

about. There‟s the largest education tax cut in the history of the 

province. Certainly some of those low-income people, people 

who are vulnerable, seniors, have a real concern about property 

taxes, and so they share in the largest education property tax 

reduction in the history of the province. Saskatchewan families 

now earn more tax-free money here than anywhere in Canada, 

anywhere in the country. Saskatchewan families earn more here 

tax free than anywhere else in the nation. 

 

By the way, maybe that‟s one of the reasons that that company 

said, you know, we can be anywhere in the world — that 

refining company that announced today for Saskatoon — but 

we choose Saskatchewan. 

 

We doubled the Saskatchewan low-income tax credit, doubled 

the Saskatchewan Income Plan, maximizing benefit for seniors, 

and made 10,000 more seniors eligible for the program. We‟ve 

increased the Saskatchewan employment supplement by $2 

million. That benefited 6,000 working families. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we moved to index so many of the allowances, 

especially the housing allowances that are available. We want to 

index them to inflation because we know housing is key and 

housing prices move up with the economy. And so rather than 

waiting on the special dispensation and the good graces of any 

government, we‟ve said, let‟s just tie it to inflation. And more 

than that, let‟s be innovative. Let‟s determine inflation in a 

region because real estate inflation in Saskatoon might be 

greater than it is in Invermay. So let‟s just make sure that the 

reality of the inflation in the area where people need those 

housing supplements is hard-wired into the program, that no 

petitions need to be presented, no letters need to be sent to 

politicians, that it just happens because it‟s the right thing to do. 

 

And that‟s how you reinvest . . . [inaudible] . . . Mr. Speaker, 

again if you‟re talking about moving forward, you‟re implying 

that we‟re moving forward from somewhere. And so where 

were we before on the issue of affordability? Mr. Speaker, when 

the NDP had a revenue shortfall in their budget prior to the . . . 

well it was exposed just after the ‟04 election, but it was 

obviously occurring prior to that, what did they do, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

They had a revenue shortfall. What the government is 

experiencing today with respect to potash isn‟t anything new. 

The scope of it‟s significant, but it‟s happened to governments 

in the past. It happened to the NDP just after the ‟04 election. 

What did they decide to do to make up the shortfall? 

 

Mr. Speaker, did they make any — first year of their new 

government — did they make any cuts? Did they do any belt 

tightening? Did they stop the $25 million every year they were 

investing through Investment Saskatchewan into companies, 

picking winners and losers? Did they stop the madness around 

SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 

Company], the $33 million lost? Did they stop pouring money 

into SaskTel in projects like Navigata that wound up losing 90 

million taxpayers‟ dollars? Was that on their list of choices to 



3424 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2009 

deal with a revenue shortfall, Mr. Speaker? 

 

No. They increased taxes, you see, because it belonged to them, 

the government, the revenue and the tax structure in 

government. 

 

So after campaigning on no tax hike, immediately after that 

election, after the ‟04 election, they increased the PST 

[provincial sales tax] by a per cent. 

 

And I remember what the minister of Finance said, the former 

member for Regina Douglas Park. The former minister of 

Finance said this when asked about it: well of course we‟re not 

going to talk about a tax hike during an election. That‟s what he 

said, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It‟s a bit of a digression, but I want to make this commitment as 

well, and I think it is part of a government moving forward. I 

think for any government to make the case to its citizens that 

it‟s moving forward, it perhaps has to keep in mind this most 

important imperative: you should probably keep your promises. 

You should probably do the things that you said you would do, 

and you should not do the things that you said that you 

wouldn‟t do. 

 

And this example, Mr. Speaker, of what they did with respect to 

the PST is doing something precisely the opposite. And who 

can afford a consumption tax the least, by the way, on the issue 

of affordability? Low-income people. People on fixed incomes 

are hurt most when we increase consumption taxes. 

 

They never acted on the education property tax in a long-term 

way. They never increased, they never increased the caregiver 

tax credit in 16 years. The NDP did not raise the Saskatchewan 

Income Plan for seniors for 16 years. And general living 

allowances — Mr. Speaker, get this — general living 

allowances for those who need help the most, from 1992 to 

2005 . . . And for some of those years there was growth 

happening, to be sure. For that period of time, 1992 to 2005, 

general living allowances were never increased for those who 

were most vulnerable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if you‟re going to talk about moving forward, you 

need to consider where you‟ve come from. And I think when it 

comes to the record of this side of the House in government in 

terms of investment in people, in terms of help for those who 

are low-income, in terms of tax cuts for those who are 

low-income — dropping them from the tax rolls versus a lot of 

rhetoric but inaction from that side of the House, Mr. Speaker, 

we are moving forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what about agriculture? You know, I think for a 

long time in this province, people have felt — certainly under 

the previous government — that agriculture just wasn‟t at the 

top of the priority list for the government. So if an area of the 

government‟s been neglected in particular, I think a measure of 

any commitment or promise in a Speech from the Throne or any 

other document that you‟re moving forward, one of the 

measures is going to be how are you doing in terms of 

agriculture. Because it has waited a long time, a very, very long 

time as a sector to get the attention of whoever the duly elected 

government here in Regina was. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know there‟s more work to be done. And we 

know in agriculture there are so many issues that require 

principally the federal government — trade issues, for example; 

the national suite of agricultural programs, for example. But 

there are a few things that the provincial government and every 

single capital in this nation can do to stand with farmers. There 

are a few things that governments can do. One of them is the 

education property tax. Maybe the very, very biggest thing that 

a provincial government can do for agriculture is do something 

about the education property tax. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne highlighted that we 

are moving forward on this issue. We announced in this last 

budget a provincial mill rate. We announced in this last budget 

the largest property tax reduction, land property tax reduction in 

the history of the province of Saskatchewan — phase 1 last 

year, phase 2 to come next year. Mr. Speaker, we campaigned 

on property tax relief, not just for agricultural land but for the 

whole province. And once again we delivered. 

 

And I want to contrast that with the members opposite. They 

also campaigned on the property tax issue, if you remember. It 

was in their platform. They said they would do something about 

property tax. Were they going to do anything more for farmers? 

No, they weren‟t. They were expressly excluded from their 

plan. Expressly excluded from the NDP‟s plan were farmers 

and ranchers in terms of property tax relief, where arguably the 

problem is most acute because it‟s every single quarter after 

quarter after quarter after quarter, this capital tax on such an 

important business sector in the province of Saskatchewan. And 

again their record previous was some rebates, some progress, 

but no long-term plan. 

 

We needed to move forward, Mr. Speaker. It‟s an area that the 

province has some control of. And we have done that, Mr. 

Speaker, with the leadership of the Minister of Education and 

the Minister of Agriculture and, frankly, rural members of this 

caucus, who day in and day out speak up for farmers and 

agriculture in the government caucus. And more than talking 

about things, they get things done for their constituents and 

farmers. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, there‟s another thing that provincial governments 

can do that impact on agriculture significantly — not only 

provincially, but we‟re a big part of it — and that‟s crop 

insurance. Now the federal government obviously is a big 

player in crop insurance as well. But the province, if it‟s 

prepared to play a leadership role, the province can make 

changes for the better. 

 

And I remember in opposition our party would, prior to my 

time as leader and after that, our party and our rural members 

would get up in question period and work in committees and 

say, you know, one line of defence, in addition to whatever 

federal program there may or may not be, is crop insurance. But 

what we‟ve seen over the years is the erosion of coverage and 

the increase of premiums. 

 

What we‟ve seen is a government seemingly happy to see crop 

insurance or directing that crop insurance just retreat from the 

front line, retreat from its role as a partner with producers. And 



November 3, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3425 

I remember members of this House very passionately saying, 

that‟s got to stop. I mean we should be a leader in terms of crop 

insurance delivery and policy development in Canada. We have 

half of the arable acres in the country. 

 

And so you know what, Mr. Speaker? We campaigned on 

improvements. We campaigned on something different. We 

campaigned on crop insurance that was stronger. We 

campaigned on crop insurance that had realistic premiums but 

coverage that was also realistic, coverage that was fair, Mr. 

Speaker, for the producers and for the crops that they were 

growing, for prices at the time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those changes were part of a review; we kept our 

promise about it. And here again I think is the difference 

between our government moving forward and the previous 

government. When the review of crop insurance was done, the 

Minister of Agriculture took a radical approach. He acted on the 

recommendations of the review and improved crop insurance, 

much as we did with the report from the member for Rosetown 

on land taxes, on property taxes. We reviewed these two key 

issues in agriculture, and then we acted on those two key issues 

in agriculture. 

 

And I have noted with interest the comments from the member 

for Regina Douglas Park prior to him becoming a member and 

soon after — well actually when he was running for the 

campaign and soon after now that he‟s the Leader of the 

Opposition — saying, we are going to make agriculture a top 

priority. We are going to be asking a lot of questions in that 

legislature on behalf of farmers because the farmers are 

unhappy with the government. 

 

By the way, I‟m sure there are some producers that aren‟t happy 

with everything, but in terms of those that are unhappy with the 

government, I have not met a lot, Mr. Speaker. And I have been 

travelling the province. And the MLAs report and the minister 

reports that while there is work to do in terms of what this 

government has done, the promises it has kept, this government 

enjoys the support of agriculture because finally they have a 

government that‟s serious about their issues and backs it up 

with action. 

 

But I‟ve noticed this, Mr. Speaker, that notwithstanding the 

promises by the new Leader of the Opposition that he was 

going to be all over agriculture, I have noticed that maybe 

there‟s been one question in question period. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Not one. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Has there been . . . There‟s been none, 

members tell me. Not one question, and the Minister of 

Agriculture is probably saying thanks a lot; they‟re probably 

coming tomorrow. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the bottom line is that I think the members 

opposite understand that not in the last 20 years in 

Saskatchewan has there been a government that is more 

determined to deal with the issues in agriculture. And by the 

way, it‟s not just crop insurance and property tax. It‟s roads. It‟s 

rural infrastructure. It‟s partnering with SARM, the 

Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities who‟ve been 

waiting for a long time just for a government that‟s willing to 

partner, knowing that we can‟t deal with the entire 

infrastructure deficit left behind by members opposite in two 

years or in three or four years. But they just wanted to see a 

government earnest and sincere about rural issues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say to them, through you and through 

this Assembly and through the Speech from the Throne, when it 

comes to rural Saskatchewan, when it comes to agriculture, we 

understand the importance to the economy. We understand the 

importance to the fabric of life in this province. When it comes 

to agriculture and rural Saskatchewan, we will move forward 

together. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there were many other elements mentioned in the 

Speech from the Throne, many examples of the government‟s 

interest in moving forward. One of the important references in 

this Speech from the Throne — and I‟m not going to list all of 

them, but I‟m going to finish with this one — is energy. Mr. 

Speaker, the Speech from the Throne talks about the importance 

of us moving forward as a province in terms of developing 

energy supply in a sustainable way and making sure that costs 

are affordable for people right across our province and for 

industry down into the future. It speaks about the importance of 

Saskatchewan dealing with a carbon footprint that‟s significant. 

 

We know there is a post-carbon economy coming. Some aren‟t 

particularly happy about it, but it‟s coming. It‟s coming. And so 

in that kind of a post-carbon economy, our government has 

already been working very hard to make sure Saskatchewan‟s 

not just ready, but that we can be a leader in terms of our energy 

sources and potentially in new technologies that the world is 

going to be interested in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, an important part of the energy question too is 

non-carbon sources of electrons or energy, and of course we can 

think about wind. We‟re actually going to be doubling our 

current portfolio of wind, announcement recently made by the 

Minister Responsible for SaskPower. 

 

In fact this is interesting because I think the NDP were, the 

opposition critics were critical of the announcement by the 

Minister of SaskPower that he was going to . . . that our 

government would be doubling our wind energy, adding 175 to 

200 megawatts of wind generated electricity. And so the 

Minister of Energy, of SaskPower happened to have, by 

coincidence, a copy of their platform that they ran on, Mr. 

Speaker, that the NDP ran on. This same group that was 

complaining about 200 new megawatts of wind power 

campaigned on 100 new megawatts of wind power. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when it comes to things like wait times, when it 

comes to things like their commitments on SaskPower, 

members should maybe check what they said in their platform, 

maybe peruse what they said in Hansard before they make 

pronouncements either in the rotunda or in this Assembly. But 

certainly wind is part of our plan for the future. 

 

In terms of non-carbon-emitting sources of energy, we‟ve also 

had the discussion in this province recently around uranium and 

nuclear power. You know, Mr. Speaker, it‟s been an interesting, 

it‟s been a very interesting debate in Saskatchewan to see the 

changes that have occurred in the province as we‟ve had the 

discussion, to see the changes occur in gymnastic style, frankly, 



3426 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2009 

in the position of the Leader of the Opposition on nuclear 

power. 

 

But I just want to say, I just want to say this. It‟s well known 

that Saskatchewan mines 26 per cent of the world‟s uranium. 

It‟s well known. And it‟s well known in this Assembly that the 

next ounce of yellowcake that we add any value to at all will be 

the first, the very first . . . decades of mining uranium, a world 

leader, with world-class uranium companies that themselves are 

vertically in agreement. 

 

Cameco and AREVA are principally located, in terms of their 

Canadian operations, in our province because this is where the 

uranium is. Both of those companies are vertically integrated. 

The member for Thunder Creek knows very well this file, has 

met with them. The current Minister of Energy, the Minister of 

Enterprise today, members on this side of the House know how 

vertically integrated they are. They don‟t just mine it; they are 

involved in other things elsewhere in the world. 

 

But why not here in the province? Why do we not add any 

value here? Whether you want to make electrons or not, and 

power, but what about all the other things like refining it or 

conversion or fuel or science? What about all of that? They‟re 

involved in all of those things, Mr. Speaker, for the most part. 

Why not here? 

 

Did it have anything to do with the government that we‟ve had 

for a very long time, I wonder. Did it have anything to do with 

the government that we had, an NDP government whose 

operatives, whose volunteers literally chased out the only 

chance we‟ve ever had to do something other than mine the ore 

but refine it at a project in Warman? In fact the former minister 

of the Crown that was responsible for much of this file led the 

charge. It was a charge that was joined by a number of others 

who made an appearance at a number of public meetings that 

we had in the province here over the last number of months. 

And that‟s fine. That‟s why we had the public meetings. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, could it have anything to do with the fact that 

on the issue of uranium, that party opposite is simply incapable 

of deciding to move forward, of doing something with our 

uranium other than just mining? Mr. Speaker, I think that was 

the case. I think that was the problem because we have the 

evidence of members opposite who would drive those 

value-added initiatives out of Saskatchewan. 

 

And we also have this glaring reality in our province that we 

did once add value in the most spectacular way to uranium 

because the very first cobalt-60, I think, the very first cobalt-60 

treatment happened where? At Rochester? At MIT 

[Massachusetts Institute of Technology]? It happened at the 

University of Saskatchewan, and a woman battling cervical 

cancer won her battle. She was 40 at the time, 41 at the time. I 

think she lived to be over 80. She won her battle, and the world 

of medicine has never been the same since. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that was the record of Saskatchewan, not of any 

political party, but that‟s what was happening in the province of 

Saskatchewan. That was the opportunity that existed. 

 

Now we have spent decades wasting that opportunity because 

of the ideology, for the most part, of the government of the day. 

And so what this government has said is this. We are going to 

for the first time, for the first time in the history of the province, 

we‟re going to have a consultation process, involve all of the 

province of Saskatchewan. It‟s called the Uranium 

Development Partnership. We‟re going to get some work done 

by those who know best about what opportunities are there. 

They‟ll make some recommendations, and we‟ll turn it over to 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

I think it‟s passing strange, by the way, in a province that mines 

26 per cent of the world‟s uranium, a province whose uranium 

actually fires 6 per cent of the electricity in all of the United 

States, I find it passing strange that that province has never yet, 

up until now, up until our government‟s initiative, had never 

asked people what they think. 

 

And we heard from members opposite. It wasn‟t enough, and 

the consultation was all wrong, and the government had it 

wrong. Not once in all their years of government, since the ‟50s 

when mining started, not once, Mr. Speaker, did they deign, did 

they bother to ask the people of the province of Saskatchewan 

what they would like to see done with their resource, Mr. 

Speaker, going back to that mentality that I talked about earlier. 

Not once. 

 

We did, Mr. Speaker. We went through a process. It was 

imperfect. Every public consultation process is going to be 

imperfect. And we asked the question, not just about nuclear 

power, we asked about science. And we asked about medical 

isotopes, and we asked about refining and even what do we do 

with mining. And Mr. Speaker, we‟ve received the report of the 

government. 

 

And then in addition to that, under the leadership of the member 

for Lloydminster, the Chair of the Crown and Central Agencies 

committee of legislature, we are going out again to the people 

of the province of Saskatchewan. We‟re inviting their input in 

narrowing the focus on the energy needs of the province, the 

electricity needs of the province. 

 

Guess what, Mr. Speaker? First time that‟s ever happened, first 

time any government has bothered to stop in the process and 

ask people what they think about the most important economic 

issue 20, 30, and 40 years down the road and that is, how will 

we affordably and environmentally sustainably keep the lights 

on and keep businesses growing in the province of 

Saskatchewan? First time ever. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‟re going to act on what we hear from 

Saskatchewan people. We‟re going to act on that public 

consultation process. We‟re going to lead the world, Mr. 

Speaker, I think, in a number of energy-related technologies. 

Carbon capture is chief among them but not limited to that. 

We‟re going to increase our wind envelope. We‟re going to 

look at natural gas, at its prices now to help us get through this 

time of this lack of technology, the next big technology, Mr. 

Speaker. We‟re going to work to ensure that we have a cleaner 

coal alternative which will be good news to the people of 

southeast Saskatchewan and the industries that are down there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and we‟ll have done it after widespread 

consultation with the people who own the utility in the first 

place and whose resources that fire that electricity in that utility 



November 3, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3427 

. . . it is in the first place the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan. One of those options may be a nuclear reactor. 

 

Mr. Speaker, nobody will be surprised in this House when they 

find out that this is not the first time a nuclear reactor 

alternative has been considered in the province. It was 

considered previously in the province — we know that; we‟ve 

seen the documents — by the previous government. 

 

The previous government, Mr. Speaker, the previous 

government, the NDP government, looked at the nuclear option. 

Did they tell anybody? Was there a public meeting held? Did 

they come to Meadow Lake or did they go to Swift Current or 

did they go to Saskatoon? Did they go anywhere in the province 

and say, you know what, we‟re looking at the potential, 

anyway, of nuclear power, which would be a sea change in the 

province of Saskatchewan. We‟re looking at this option. Maybe 

we better check with the people of the province and see what 

they think. No they didn‟t, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I heard the member from Regina Douglas Park, the Leader of 

the Opposition, use the word hypocrisy in his Speech from the 

Throne. It‟s in Hansard. I wonder. We should look very 

carefully at what the definition of that word is when it comes to 

the issue of nuclear power, with how he in government acted as 

minister responsible for all the Crowns, what he has said since 

then in terms of promoting nuclear power, and now what he‟s 

saying referencing the government‟s plan for either public 

consultation or to explore all the options. 

 

[15:30] 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, he has a lot of explaining to do to the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan on his position with 

respect to energy and any number of other issues. But you know 

what, Mr. Speaker? I‟m not going to get into them this 

afternoon. Other members have done that. 

 

Oh, well this is interesting though. I will add this. I will add 

this. It‟s on one of the yellow pages that‟s sent over from the 

Minister of the Environment, I think. It says this. This is a quote 

from the member for Regina Douglas Park. It speaks to what 

I‟m saying here about a debate. In order to move forward, we 

need to have veracity in debate. There needs to be some 

consistency in debate. And the member for Athabasca can laugh 

but he knows it‟s the truth. 

 

Here‟s what the member said, the member for Regina Douglas 

Park, the new Leader of the Opposition said, who now opposes 

any proposal for nuclear power. He said, “I think it‟s immoral 

to say, „I want to mine uranium but I don‟t want to make power 

from it.‟” That‟s what he said December ‟08. It‟s not like this 

was years ago. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Like in the ‟70s. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Like in the ‟70s, the member for Cypress 

Hills says. He says, “I think it‟s immoral to say, „I want to mine 

uranium but I don‟t want to make power from it,‟” Mr. Speaker. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Not even a year ago. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — This is just not even a year ago, as the 

Deputy Premier has said. It‟s not like from the time when he 

was in the oil towers of Calgary coming into Saskatchewan to 

lecture everybody about why we‟re not building nuclear power 

reactors. I remember those days. Those days were preceding the 

days when he‟d come and try to lobby members in this House 

to change legislation so the head office of the oil company that 

he got a job with — it used to be a Crown corporation — could 

take their head office jobs out of the province of Saskatchewan. 

It wasn‟t at that time either. 

 

An Hon. Member: — It was a safe landing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Right. Well that was a safe landing, but I‟m 

saying that‟s not when he said those things. He said them less 

than a year ago, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I guess that brings me to a conclusion. There are a number 

of other things in the Speech from the Throne that we could talk 

about in terms of examples of this government working hard to 

move the province forward. But I want this Assembly to 

understand, and the people that may be watching, that we 

understand in government we have been able to, in partnership 

with the people, achieve a lot. But we understand we have also 

been blessed by providence, and there‟s been a lot of good 

fortune for this new government. I have readily admitted that. 

 

I think it‟s incumbent on a government, by the way, faced with 

that good fortune, to do the right things with it, to be able to 

answer that question: what have you done with the resources? I 

think that‟s important for a government to be able to do. I think 

it‟s important for that government to be able to say, you know 

what? We‟ve rebuilt our highways that were in a sad state. 

We‟ve invested record levels in those highways in rural 

Saskatchewan. All over this province we‟ve invested in 

municipal infrastructure in record numbers. 

 

We‟ve invested in health care infrastructure with those 

resources, with that good fortune. We have, Mr. Speaker, 

invested in people in ways I‟ve just mentioned, in adding drugs 

to the formulary that literally give life, extend the life of those 

who might be fighting cancer. That‟s what we‟ve done with 

those resources. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have worked hard to fix the roofs on countless 

schools across this province that couldn‟t get any attention from 

the previous government. We‟ve announced new schools that 

would be built to accommodate a growing province and more 

students. That‟s what we‟ve done with the resources. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‟ve cut taxes for Saskatchewan people. We put 

their money back in their pocket in record levels in income tax. 

We‟ve finally done something about the property tax, Mr. 

Speaker. That‟s where the resources have gone. And most 

importantly of all, Mr. Speaker, we have reduced the debt of 

Saskatchewan by 40 per cent, Mr. Speaker, and there‟s $800 

million in the bank. That‟s where it‟s gone. 

 

Mr. Speaker, were the election tomorrow . . . And you know, 

Mr. Speaker, I‟d be tempted to call one but we can‟t because we 

kept the promise to set elections, Mr. Speaker. But were there 

one tomorrow, I‟d campaign on that record. I‟d do so happily 

because of what we‟ve been working to achieve, in partnership 

with the people of the province. 



3428 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2009 

We would campaign in humility. We would acknowledge the 

fact that we‟ve been blessed by all of these things, that there‟s 

more work to be done. We‟d campaign with an air of optimism 

about the future of the province of Saskatchewan because, you 

know, again I could go down the list of accolades from 

economists and from the business news organizations around 

this country who just keep singling out Saskatchewan as a 

leader in almost every category through this recession. We‟d 

campaign in that way, with optimism and hope, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There won‟t be a campaign obviously but that‟s how we‟re 

going to conduct the next two years of our government. That‟s 

how we‟ll finish off this next bit of work we‟ve got mapped out 

in the Speech from the Throne. That‟s how we‟re going to 

move forward. And I invite people to consider that approach, to 

hold us accountable, to hold me accountable for what I‟ve just 

said. 

 

I invite people to consider that approach from what they‟ll see 

from members opposite. And the Leader of the Opposition in 

the Speech from the Throne said that the economy of 

Saskatchewan was in a “free fall.” I think that was a direct 

quote. There are so many, example and example of just 

negativity coming from members opposite despite the fact that 

Saskatchewan has not seen a better run ever in the history of the 

province, despite the fact our population is growing faster than 

it ever has in 50 years. 

 

You hear a lot of gloom and doom and negativity. Frankly, Mr. 

Speaker, they‟re grumpy. Why would they be grumpy, Mr. 

Speaker? The Riders have a home playoff game. The economy 

is leading the country. People are sharing in the benefits of the 

. . . Well there you have it maybe, Mr. Speaker. Maybe that is 

why they‟re grumpy over there because they realize that if this 

continues — and we‟re going to move heaven and earth to 

ensure that it does — that when that next election comes 

around, the people of this province might just say, we like this 

moving forward. We like this government. We‟re going to hire 

them on again for another four years. Maybe that‟s why he‟s 

grumpy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, maybe that‟s the reason. All I know is this, that 

we‟re going to work very hard. As a government we‟re going to 

keep doing what we‟re doing. 

 

I‟m very fortunate to have such a great team of women and men 

to work with both here in the Assembly and those that back us 

up in offices in this building. And I want to be grateful to the 

civil service and express our appreciation to our civil service. 

They helped to develop the Speech from the Throne. They 

helped develop policies that will execute it after the government 

provides that direction. I certainly want to acknowledge them 

today. 

 

And I want to acknowledge the work of the House Leader and 

the House leadership team as we go through this session as 

well. Typically he gets a chance to thank everybody at the end 

and I don‟t. Let me just say what a pleasure it is to work with 

such a group on this side of the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will be enthusiastically, enthusiastically 

supporting the Speech from the Throne and I encourage 

members opposite, I encourage members opposite to take a look 

at this document, to take a look at what‟s there just in terms of 

health care, for no other reason, just to provide people‟s 

surgeries within four months, to just set aside the grumpiness 

for the time it takes for a vote and support the Speech from the 

Throne and support this province that we love, moving forward. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion presented by the member from Indian Head-Milestone, 

seconded by the member from Regina Qu‟Appelle Valley: 

 

That an humble address be presented to His Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor: 

 

To His Honour the Honourable Gordon L. Barnhart, 

Lieutenant Governor of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

May it please Your Honour: 

 

We, Her Majesty‟s dutiful and loyal subjects, the 

Legislative Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan in 

session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for his 

gracious speech which Your Honour has been pleased to 

address to us at the opening of the present session. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — Those in favour say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed say nay. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Nay. 

 

The Speaker: — I believe the ayes have it. Standing vote. Call 

in the members. 

 

[The division bells rang from 15:39 until 15:51.] 

 

The Speaker: — Those in favour of the motion please rise. 

 

[Yeas — 35] 

 

Wall Stewart Elhard 

Bjornerud Draude Krawetz 

Boyd Eagles McMorris 

D‟Autremont Hickie Heppner 

Harpauer Gantefoer Kirsch 

Norris Morgan Hutchinson 

Huyghebaert Brkich Hart 

Reiter Allchurch Weekes 

Tell Wilson Duncan 

Michelson LeClerc Ottenbreit 



November 3, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3429 

Ross Chisholm Bradshaw 

Harrison McMillan  

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion please rise. 

 

[Nays — 20] 

 

Lingenfelter McCall Belanger 

Harper Trew Higgins 

Junor Atkinson Nilson 

Forbes Vermette Broten 

Furber Morin Yates 

Iwanchuk Taylor Quennell 

Wotherspoon Chartier  

 

Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 35; those 

opposed, 20. 

 

The Speaker: — Motion carries. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I move this House do 

now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. This House stands adjourned 

until tomorrow afternoon at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 15:54.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Chisholm .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3407 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3407 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3407 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3407 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3407 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3407 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3407 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3408 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3408 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3408 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3408 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3408 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3408 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Saskatchewan Assured Income for Disability Program 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3409 

 Our Children Are Precious 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3409 

 Food Drive Shows that Moose Jaw Cares 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3409 

 Multicultural Event in Prince Albert 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3409 

 Watrous Wins Celebration Tour Competition 

  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3410 

 Saskatchewan Women Compete in Softball Championships 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3410 

 Saskatchewan Population Numbers 

  LeClerc .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3410 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Workplace Safety Issues 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3411 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3411 

 Options to Expedite Surgical Procedures 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3413 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3413 

 Forestry Sector Issues 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3414 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3414 

 Public Safety Procedures 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3415 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3415 

PRIVILEGE 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3415 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3416 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3416 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3418 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3418 

 Recorded Division....................................................................................................................................................................... 3428 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium Development 

Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

 Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

Government House Leader 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. James Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Capital Commission 


