




















































Hansard: November 24, 2009


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 19A  TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 24, 2009, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3765 

 November 24, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well 

today is an extraordinary day in the Legislative Assembly. 

There is a very famous citizen that I’d like to introduce to you 

and through you to the rest of the members of this Assembly, a 

very famous citizen of the province of Saskatchewan. 

Surprisingly though, this is the first visit of this special citizen 

to this Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he has joined us on the floor of the Assembly, 

well frankly, because he’s unable to fit in the gallery. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s a pleasure to introduce to you and through you that 

very special guest, Gainer the Gopher. 

 

Mr. Speaker . . . Good job, Gainer. I just have a few more 

remarks. All right, I’ll go ahead. 

 

Through you, Mr. Speaker, to Gainer. Mr. Speaker, if you go to 

Gainer’s official bio, you’ll learn that from his earliest days in 

Parkbeg, Saskatchewan, Gainer knew he was different from his 

brothers and sisters. “Instead of spending his early days” — this 

is a quote: 

 

Instead of spending his early days digging holes in 

farmer’s fields, Gainer was studying the art of silent 

comedy, practising motivational miming, and watching his 

favourite football team, the Saskatchewan Roughriders. Of 

course this led to Gainer becoming the Riders’ number one 

cheerleader over the last decade or so. 

 

This Sunday marks Gainer’s triumphant return to McMahon 

Stadium. Let’s not forget that this is a gopher that’s been 

embroiled in controversy in Calgary. In 2006 the Stampeders 

actually banned Gainer from McMahon Stadium for the Riders’ 

playoff game there. But the fans rallied around Gainer and the 

Riders won the football game. 

 

In fact there now appears to be a bit of a Gainer’s curse on the 

Stampeders. Ever since they banned Gainer, they have never 

beaten the Saskatchewan Roughriders in the playoffs. The 

Riders beat them in ’06. We beat them in ’07 on the way to a 

Grey Cup win, and we beat them on Sunday on the way to a 

Grey Cup win. So now Gainer’s going to go back to McMahon 

Stadium and lead the Rider fans in cheering our team to victory. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know all members of the Assembly will want to 

join in welcoming him here, but we also want him to do a little 

bit of work. We have a banner that we would like to have all 

members sign, on both sides of the House, that we want Gainer 

to bring to the Saskatchewan Roughriders who left this day for 

Calgary. It says, “Go Riders. Bring the Cup Home. 2009 Grey 

Cup.” And we will send this around to members of the 

Assembly and will present this to Gainer so that he can in turn 

present it to the Saskatchewan Roughriders. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would just say this, that we welcome 

Gainer here to the Assembly. Obviously we’re having some fun 

this week in Saskatchewan, and so we should. And I want to 

thank you, Mr. Speaker, for allowing some of that fun to 

happen right here in this Legislative Chamber. And I want to 

warn Gainer, just for the record, that he should probably stay 

clear of the Minister of Agriculture, given the programs that the 

Minister of Agriculture’s engaged in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with that — and I’m sure there’ll be comments 

from the member for Regina Douglas Park — I say, welcome to 

Gainer the Gopher. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it’s indeed a pleasure to rise 

and join the Premier in welcoming the special, special guest to 

the Assembly, who’s quietly and discreetly camouflaged in a 13 

jersey, representing that group of Saskatchewan people who 

help make our team so greatly successful. 

 

I just want to say as well that I’m proud that Gainer lives along 

the Trans-Canada Highway, the Premier has mentioned, in a 

small town, Parkbeg, which we drive by many times. I also 

want to thank the Minister of Agriculture for helping out Gainer 

with his bounty on coyotes because that makes his life a little 

easier, but doesn’t quite make up for his other programs. 

 

I want to say too how proud I am to be part of the clan 

supporting the Riders this weekend in Calgary. And I want to 

say that, while Gainer is the favourite and most talented gopher 

and gets a lot of excitement going, I want to say his biggest 

trick is not riding a bike and playing football, but driving 30 or 

35,000 fans crazy at every game. And I want to thank you for 

that on behalf of the people in my caucus. 

 

Finally I just want to say, Mr. Speaker, that this is a great day 

and it’s a great day when members of government and 

opposition can come together and really wish the greatest 

amount of success for the Saskatchewan Roughriders. Go, 

Riders, go, and good luck to all. 

 

[Gainer the Gopher led the hon. members in a cheer.] 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Go Riders Go! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That’s a rather 

hard act to follow. But sitting in your gallery is one of my 

favourite radio personalities from Moose Jaw by the name of 

Dustin Dion. Dustin, if you just want to give us a little wave 

there. Dustin is the morning host on Country 100 in Moose Jaw. 

He was born on a grain farm near Torquay, Saskatchewan. He 

actually spent four years in the broadcasting career in Medicine 

Hat, and then joined the movement of Saskatchewan people 

back home from Alberta to make his home in Moose Jaw. 

Dustin is in Regina all week reporting live for Country 100 and 



3766 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2009 

Golden West Radio from Agribition. 

 

Along with Dustin is another employee from Golden West 

Radio in the name of Gord Currie. Gord also works with 

Golden West Radio in my favourite department and that’s in 

marketing. So, Mr. Speaker, I ask all of our colleagues to 

welcome these two personalities to our Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you it gives 

me great pleasure to introduce a former colleague, Dr. Erica 

Bird, and her baby, Daphne. She is the Chair of the Children’s 

Discovery Museum. And her fellow board member, Genevieve 

Dessommes Denny. Thank you. I’d like to welcome them to 

their Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to all members of the 

legislature, I’d like to introduce George Haas, a farmer from 

Langenburg, a councillor on the Churchbridge RM [rural 

municipality], and president of my local constituency, Mr. 

Speaker. I would ask all members to welcome him to his 

legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to introduce to you a 

number of . . . 12 students from Balfour Collegiate and their 

teacher, Erin Harlos, who is seated in the east gallery. And I just 

want to say to the students, you’re observing how we carry on 

every day, and I hope you’re enjoying the discussion so far. But 

truly, Mr. Speaker, it is an honour to have a group of students 

from my constituency here today, and I wish all members to 

join with me in welcoming them here. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Weyburn. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

want to join with the member for Saskatoon Riversdale in 

welcoming Ms. Denny and Ms. Bird and Daphne to their 

Legislative Assembly. We had a very good introductory 

meeting this morning, and I want to thank the member for 

Riversdale for setting that up. 

 

And I’d ask all members to again welcome them to their 

Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

southwest, the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you 

and to all members, seated in the west gallery, Neil Buechler, a 

resident of Saskatoon. A former director of Marsh Canada, now 

retired, on the SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 

Science and Technology] board of directors and one of 

Saskatoon’s citizens that does a lot of volunteer work for a lot 

of good charities, and a good individual. And I’d like to 

welcome him to his Assembly today. 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 

proud today to rise on behalf of concerned citizens of 

Saskatchewan to present a petition on Highway 310. And the 

concerned citizens are particularly concerned about the portion 

of 310 Highway between Ituna and Foam Lake. 

 

The petitioners say that the condition of the highway has 

deteriorated to the point where it’s no longer safe for residents 

of the area to travel on. And, Mr. Speaker, I’ll read you the 

prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to commit to providing the 

repairs to Highway 310 that the people of Saskatchewan 

need. 

 

And in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And this petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by the good folks from 

Ituna and Leross, Saskatchewan. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition in 

support of a new long-term care facility in La Ronge. And the 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately invest in the planning and 

construction of new long-term care beds in La Ronge. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by the good people of La Ronge and area. I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition in support of fairness for Saskatchewan 

students through the necessary expansion of the graduate 

retention program. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately expand the graduate 

retention program to include master’s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are from 

the city of Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 



November 24, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3767 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present yet another petition on behalf of rural residents 

of Saskatchewan who question why the Sask Party government 

is leaving them behind with respect to providing safe and 

affordable water and who have yet not had any commitment of 

assistance. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to financially assist the town of Duck 

Lake residents for the good of their health and safety due 

to the exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency, and that this government fulfills its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the residents of Duck 

Lake and Macdowall. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I stand today and present a 

petition in support of maintaining quality health care services. 

Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan needs to 

recognize the essential role of all health care providers as 

valued members of the health care team. And in order to 

achieve that, Mr. Speaker, there should be commitment to 

adequate funding and the installation of good faith in the 

provincial bargaining process. And the petition reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to commit to maintaining quality health 

care services and job security for all public health care 

providers. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the petitions are signed by residents of Duck Lake, 

Domremy, Prince Albert, and Rosthern. I so submit. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased today to 

rise and present a petition in support of affordable rents and 

housing for The Battlefords. The residents note that some 

apartments have been given notice of rent increases of about 40 

per cent which most feel are outrageous. The prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to call upon the 

Government of Saskatchewan to develop an affordable 

housing program that will result in a greater number of 

quality and affordable rental units to be made available to 

a greater number of people throughout The Battlefords, 

and that will implement a process of rent review or rent 

control to better protect tenants in a non-competitive 

housing environment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by residents of North 

Battleford, supported by residents of Cut Knife and Wilkie. I so 

present, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents across 

Saskatchewan as it relates to the unprecedented 

mismanagement of their finances by the Sask Party. And while 

we’re all cheering for the Riders this week, and you could say 

that we’re united with our excitement with the sea of green, 

Saskatchewan residents are concerned with their books of red. 

And the opposition New Democrats are tackling deficits and 

taking names, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to start managing our 

provincial finances responsibly and prudently to ensure 

that it does not continue its trend of massive budgetary 

shortfalls, runaway and unsustainable spending, equity 

stripping from our Crowns, and irresponsible revenue 

setting. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These are signed by many concerned citizens here in Regina, 

Mr. Speaker. I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Recognizing Lorne Scott 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

proud to rise today to recognize the achievements of Lorne 

Scott, an outstanding Saskatchewan citizen, a former NDP 

[New Democratic Party] cabinet minister, a recipient of the 

Order of Canada for his outstanding contribution to nature 

conservation in Saskatchewan, and just last week he received 

the Saskatchewan Order of Merit. 

 

Lorne Scott is a long-time farmer, activist, and steward of the 

land in the Indian Head area. He has spent his entire life 

working to protect the natural world and helping other people 

share his passion. I am proud to say that Lorne brought his 

wealth of knowledge and talents to this Legislative Assembly, 

representing the constituency of Indian Head-Milestone for 

many years, serving in the NDP caucus alongside some of my 

colleagues in the ’90s. As Environment minister, Lorne worked 

diligently to care for the environment in this beautiful province. 

He successfully protected 3.4 million acres of Crown land 

under The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. 

 

Through his many years of service in whatever form that has 



3768 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2009 

taken, Lorne Scott has shown an exemplary record of working 

to ensure that environmental concerns are addressed. Mr. 

Speaker, I am proud to say that from a very young age, Lorne 

was an environmentalist, a leader, and a visionary. Mr. Speaker, 

I ask all the members to join with me in recognizing the 

amazing work that Lorne Scott has done in the past and will 

continue to do in the future to protect the environment of 

Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

The Grinches and the Whos 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP suffers from a 

condition first diagnosed by the late, great Dr. Seuss. Yes, Mr. 

Speaker, it saddens me to say that the members opposite suffer 

from having hearts two sizes too small. They sit atop Mount 

Crumpit, hurling their doomy rhetoric on the positive people of 

Saskatchewan. And true to grinchy form, the members opposite 

are envious of Saskatchewan’s positive outlook, especially 

when theirs is so grim. 

 

And why is Saskatchewan’s future so promising? Well, Mr. 

Speaker, many are predicting good things for this province’s 

economy. We have the lowest unemployment rate in the 

country. For the first time in a century we have two new cities. 

Our population is growing faster than it has in 50 years. Mr. 

Speaker, we have five of the best cities to conduct business 

within the country. Construction is booming, Mr. Speaker, 

because of private investment and much-needed government 

infrastructure spending. 

 

We made the largest income tax, property tax cut in this 

province’s history. And last but not least, we have cut the 

taxpayer debt by 40 per cent. Mr. Speaker, the Grinches 

opposite want to ruin the holiday season by painting a grim 

picture, but the merry and warm-hearted Whos of Whoville, 

Saskatchewan, won’t let them spoil the Christmas. To the 

Grinches opposite, turn those frowns upside down. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Children’s Discovery Museum 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, according to Fred Rogers, 

famed educator and children’s TV host: 

 

. . . play is a way for children to learn who they are, how 

the world works, solve problems and express feelings. 

Yes, play is the real work of childhood. 

 

The recently opened Children’s Discovery Museum in 

Saskatoon provides a wonderful venue for children and their 

families to engage in this important work of childhood. The 

Children’s Discovery Museum on the Saskatchewan is the 

not-for-profit charitable organization that operates the museum. 

The museum’s mission is to foster creativity, curiosity, and a 

lifelong love of learning in children 10 and under through 

hands-on exhibits, programming, and outreach. 

 

After spending a very successful summer in 2008 operating as a 

travelling museum in Saskatoon, the board decided it was 

critical to get the doors open on its first permanent space. With 

the support of donors and sponsors and the hard work and 

dedication of volunteers, the organization opened its current 

facility in Market Mall this past May. The museum is roughly 

2,000 square feet and features three permanent exhibits — a vet 

clinic, a northern Saskatchewan campsite, and a performance 

arts stage. In addition they offer several smaller activities and a 

variety of workshops and other programming. 

 

The board is pleased with its success, but it is also looking 

down the road to the third phase of its growth — building or 

renovating a large state-of-the-art facility in a downtown 

location. An expanded facility will allow the Children’s 

Discovery Museum to develop a greater range of exhibits and 

programs which reflect our heritage here in Saskatchewan, our 

culture, and our landscape. This broader range of exhibits will 

draw families into the city centre and become a major tourist 

attraction in Saskatoon, benefiting local businesses and the 

city’s economy but most importantly, Saskatoon families. 

 

I ask all members to join me in congratulating the Children’s 

Discovery Museum on its success in opening the 10th 

children’s museum in Canada, and encouraging the board to 

continue to work on its long-term goal of building a destination 

attraction and a family space in downtown Saskatoon. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

The Seat Belt Challenge 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise to 

offer my congratulations to Muscowpetung First Nation on 

winning SGI’s [Saskatchewan Government Insurance] Seat Belt 

Challenge in the File Hills Qu’Appelle Tribal Council. 

 

The Seat Belt Challenge is a community-driven project SGI 

launched last year to raise awareness of the benefits of wearing 

a seat belt and increase seat belt use in rural and First Nations 

communities where seat belts use continued to be lower than in 

urban areas. The community with the highest percentage 

increase in seat belt use during the competition wins up to 

$50,000 for local road safety improvements. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Seat Belt Challenge is proving to be a great 

success. Muscowpetung First Nation increased the use by an 

incredible 132 per cent, more than double its usage rate at the 

beginning of the challenge. In fact all eight First Nations 

communities that participated increased their seat belt use. 

Other participants were Carry The Kettle, Pasqua First Nation, 

Standing Buffalo First Nation, Peepeekisis First Nation, Star 

Blanket First Nation, Nekaneet First Nation, and Little Black 

Bear First Nation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to recognize all these communities for the 

success during the challenge. Seat belts save lives and these 

communities are all safer as a result of this work. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 



November 24, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3769 

University of Regina’s Alumni 

Crowning Achievement Awards 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past Friday 

night I along with my fellow University of Regina alumnus, the 

member from Regina Rosemont as well as the member for 

Regina South, had the pleasure of attending the University of 

Regina’s Alumni Crowning Achievement Awards. 

 

Each year the university and the Alumni Association celebrates 

outstanding graduates, people who exemplify the University of 

Regina’s motto, as one who serves. 

 

The Lifetime Achievement Award went to John R. Hewson. 

The Distinguished Alumni Award for Professional 

Achievement went to Justice Georgina Jackson, one of 

Canada’s top jurists. The Award for Distinguished 

Humanitarian and Community Service was bestowed upon 

Laura Pettigrew, a person who gives a tremendous amount back 

in terms of the opportunities and musical talent with which she 

has been blessed. The Dr. Robert and Norma Ferguson Award 

for Outstanding Service went to “a blue collar guy with a 

vision,” an individual who was and is a great friend of the 

university, a champion for post-secondary education, and an 

accomplished public servant, Don Millard. 

 

Last but certainly not least, high school educator Corey 

Matthews was honoured with the Outstanding Young Alumnus 

Award. Corey is a proud, young Métis man and excellent 

basketball coach and is someone who has that gift of being able 

to draw upon personal experience to relate to students and to 

make a tremendous difference in the lives of inner-city youth. 

I’ve had the privilege of being there to see Corey make that 

difference in person, Mr. Speaker, and that award was 

particularly well deserved. 

 

Congratulations to the honourees and congratulations to the 

University of Regina administration and Alumni Association on 

a successful and inspiring evening. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Policy Renewal 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP recently sent out a 

letter about their policy renewal process. The letter says their 

policy renewal will largely follow the same process they used to 

develop their New Deal for people in 1971. Only the NDP 

could take something they did nearly 40 years ago and call it 

renewal. 

 

The letter also talks about how this will be a public and 

transparent process. I note that their first meeting took place last 

Saturday, and I haven’t read or heard a single word about it 

anywhere. Only the NDP could hold a closed-door meeting and 

call it public . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I’d ask the opposition 

members to come to order and allow the member to complete 

her statement. I recognize the member. 

Ms. Schriemer: — Only the NDP could hold a closed-door 

meeting and call it public and transparent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the letter ends with a statement of what the NDP 

hope to accomplish with its renewal process, and I quote, “By 

building the next party platform in public, it will demonstrate 

party unity and strength and help to attract quality candidates 

and future civil servants.” Mr. Speaker, after all the sanctimony 

out of the NDP about depoliticizing the civil service, one of the 

stated goals of the NDP policy process is to attract NDP civil 

servants. The NDP say one thing, and do another. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Consecration of Chaldean Catholic Parish in Saskatoon 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — On Sunday, November 15th, the member for 

Massey Place and myself attended the dedication and 

consecration of the Sacred Heart Chaldean Catholic parish in 

Saskatoon. The Saskatoon Chaldean Catholic community has 

purchased the former church of St. Timothy’s Anglican 

community in my constituency. Under the auspices of His 

Excellency Bishop Ibrahim Ibrahim, the Roman Catholic 

Diocese of Saskatoon, Father Sabah Kamora, parish priest, and 

parishioners of this church, guests were invited to witness the 

consecrating mass. A celebration dinner followed at the 

Travelodge Hotel. 

 

Mr. Speaker, prevalent in Iraq, Iran, Turkey and Syria, the 

Chaldean Catholic Church is an Eastern rite church which 

began unification with the Roman Catholic Church in 1551. 

Christianity in Iraq dating from the second century had roots in 

Nestorianism. Nestorians who became Catholics are called 

Chaldeans. The current line of Chaldean patriarchs of 

Babylonia began in 1830, and the current patriarchal residence 

is in Baghdad. 

 

In the last decade there have been hundreds of Chaldean 

Catholics from the Middle East emigrate to Saskatoon. Mr. 

Speaker, we have one of the largest settlements in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know my colleagues will join me in 

congratulating Bishop Ibrahim Ibrahim, Father Sabah Kamora, 

the parish council, and the parishioners of Sacred Heart 

Chaldean Catholic Church on their new place of worship in 

Saskatoon. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Management of Provincial Economy 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question’s to the 

Premier. In light of the fact that the March provincial budget 

has now been exposed as the most irresponsible budget in 

Saskatchewan’s history, and to quote a Saskatchewan reporter, 

and I quote: 

 



3770 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2009 

In this second half, one thing is for sure. The government 

needs to recognize you don’t applaud when you get 

sacked. Two standing ovations in the house for the finance 

minister was not just inappropriate but frankly insulting. 

You don’t applaud a deficit of one billion dollars. You 

show contrition and resolve. 

 

Otherwise, you just look like cheerleaders. 

 

Yesterday in the House, rather than apologize to the people of 

the province, the Premier said that he called this real progress, 

that getting to a recession and a billion dollar deficit, was in fact 

progress. 

 

I want to ask the Premier: how and when did a billion dollar 

deficit and a recession amount to progress? When did that 

happen? 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for the 

question. It’s a chance for me to say, and I was absent that day, 

but it’s a chance for me to say I’ve talked to members on this 

side of the House, that they are obviously not, we’re not 

applauding the fact that potash sales are where they’re at, but 

they are applauding the efforts of the Minister of Finance. 

Because under his leadership, Mr. Speaker, the same minister 

that those members were attacking last week, the same minister 

has presided over the following: inheriting $6.8 million in debt 

and 1.2 billion in the savings account. He . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Again we have a number of members, 

basically on the opposition side of the House, not all of them. 

But let’s be mindful of the fact that many members are trying to 

honour the process of the Assembly. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, this Minister of Finance 

inherited $6.8 billion in provincial debt and 1.2 billion in the 

savings account, to be sure. The debt now stands at 4.2 billion. 

There’s 600 million in the savings account. That’s a net 

improvement. These are facts. That’s a net improvement in the 

fiscal position of the province of Saskatchewan of $2 billion 

during an unprecedented recession, Mr. Speaker, one in which 

is seeing this province lead in employment. And, Mr. Speaker, 

we’ll have more good news about Saskatchewan’s position with 

respect to the rest of the country economically in subsequent 

questions. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, this government’s 

mismanagement and waste and incompetence has led to $293 

million in program cuts and capital projects being delayed and 

cut. And the majority of these cuts have in fact been — where? 

— in the Department of Health. 

 

In fact the cuts to the children’s hospital, $95 million; and 3 

million to surgical care in Regina; and 122 million in cuts to 13 

nursing home projects across the province. In fact the 220 

million cuts to the Health Department amount to 80 per cent, 

almost 80 per cent of the total cuts. 

 

Now yesterday in the Assembly the Premier said that these 

would be picked up next year. And what I’m asking the Premier 

now, and the Department of Health, does that mean that the 

budget will be 220 million more, $220 million more than 

planned? Or will it mean that other projects are delayed for 

years to come? Which is it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — It’s interesting you know, Mr. Speaker, 

when you listen to the member opposite refer to these decisions 

as cuts, and then in the end of his question he admits they’re 

deferrals. They are deferrals, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We know that the health region in Saskatoon is still planning 

with respect to the children’s hospital. The health region in 

Saskatoon and those committed to a children’s hospital have 

said, look, this is not the year to be expending the $100 million 

because we’re not ready. So, Mr. Speaker, that money remains 

available for that important project — a project that waited 16 

years for the attention of members opposite. They never gave 

that project anything but lip service. 

 

It’s true for long-term care home after long-term care home. 

That former minister of Health, Mr. Speaker, announced the 

Preeceville hospital in 1999. And then it was re-announced I 

think seven times later until the people had enough and said, 

we’ll replace that party with a party that’s actually prepared to 

act, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting. When the 

Premier is not cheerleading, he’s throwing blame. And I want to 

ask him, in terms of the fiscal mismanagement and 

incompetence, he has talked about $30 million in educational 

cuts. Can he give me the list of where those cuts will occur for 

this year? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — You know, Mr. Speaker, for members 

opposite all in their Riders jerseys, I welcome questions about 

cheerleading today in the Assembly. Because if somebody’s 

leading cheers, and I’m sure it’s members on this side and 

hopefully members on that side, the implication is that there are 

people who are wanting to cheer. And I think that is the case, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Witness today’s news that’s in the National Post. Witness 

today, Mr. Speaker, that a long-time economist from central 

Canada, Dale Orr, has done a study. Mr. Speaker, the study is 

now out today. It’s in the National Post and it says this: “ . . . in 

Ontario’s case Saskatchewan will surpass it as the 

second-wealthiest province after Alberta.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, that economic capacity is going to allow us to go 

forward and make important investments in health care — 

investments they ignore, but that will happen under a Sask Party 

government. 



November 24, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3771 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Consideration of Supplementary Estimates 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, when it comes to the budget 

of Saskatchewan, we need to end the cheerleading and start 

tackling deficit and recession. That’s what has to happen here 

today. 

 

My question to the Premier: we’ve had announced $293 million 

in budget cuts in 19 different departments and agencies. And 

yesterday our caucus wrote to the government and asked that 

we be allowed to ask questions about this $293 million in cuts. 

And the response, a written answer, and I quote, “The 

opposition is given the opportunity to ask questions regarding 

reductions during question period.” 

 

That’s a response from the government about when we should 

ask about the cuts. Not in the estimates, but here in question 

period. In light of that answer, can the Premier now guarantee 

that we will have eight extra days of question period in order to 

ask about the 293 million in cuts? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, this is incredible. This is 

absolutely incredible. In that same letter, the government 

offered members opposite up to 54 hours more of debate, Mr. 

Speaker. And now they’re yelling, and now they’re yelling. 

Here’s what . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The member will come 

to order. That’s correct. The member who asked the question 

will now allow the Premier to respond. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday in this building 

there were two committees of this legislature. They were 

investigating estimates, Mr. Speaker. Both Chairs government 

members. Both Chairs of those committees offered to members 

opposite the chance to go till midnight. 

 

And what did members opposite do after making all of this 

noise about needing more days in the legislature to debate 

estimates? And that’s the words he just used in his question, 

Mr. Speaker. Those are the words he just used. What did they 

do? They called the clock. They wanted to get out of this 

building by 10:30. Yesterday that member said, well you don’t 

want MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] working 

that hard, working all the way till midnight. It’s not rational, he 

says. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there a lot of sectors in this province including 

health care, including the energy sector he claims to know a lot 

about, that are prepared to do the work. Members on this side of 

the House are. Last night we found out that they’re all about 

politics and not about a debate on the budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier will know that 

he’s less than forthcoming when he says that last night 

members were allowed to ask questions about the 293 million 

in cuts. That’s not true. What he said is not true. We are not . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The Leader of the 

Opposition will come to order. Members have been informed 

over time and time again that the rules of the Assembly do not 

allow members to accuse another member directly what they 

can’t do indirectly. There’s other ways of addressing the 

question. I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my simple question to the 

Premier, in light of his previous answer: will he allow for the 

asking of questions in committee about the cuts of $293 

million? Will he allow those questions to be asked and 

answered? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, what will be allowed will be 

allowed by both sides of this Assembly when they agreed to the 

rules of this Assembly. And how this legislature operates, now 

that we have two sittings, one in the fall and one in the spring, 

is that there are supplementary estimates. And last night those 

supplementary estimates were introduced for discussion and 

debate. Some of the changes that have occurred would be 

reflected in the mid-term report. Well they all would be, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Yesterday members opposite had a chance to ask detailed 

questions till midnight if they wanted on Advanced Education, 

Social Services, First Nations and Métis Relations, and 

Municipal Affairs. But what did members opposite do? They 

are so concerned about these budget issues that they called the 

clock. They wanted to wrap it up at 10:30. Mr. Speaker, we 

make the same offer today. 

 

And I would say this to that member opposite. If this, you 

know, if this is about the actual budget issue including the 

supplementary estimates, why won’t he direct his ministers to 

engage with government members at least till midnight? Or is 

that too many hours of work for members opposite? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, question to the Premier. It’s 

exactly this kind of hiding from the facts from the public that 

have gotten us to a recession and $1 billion deficit. In the 19 

departments, in the 19 departments and agencies affected by the 

$293 million cuts, he knows, the Premier knows that he is not 

allowing us to ask questions and give answers. He knows that. 

And he’s not telling us the whole story when it comes to how 

the Assembly is working. He’s not telling the public all of the 

answers about the cuts. In fact he’s not telling any answers. 

 

In light of the fact of this lack of transparency, I will be 

introducing an emergency motion calling on the government to 

agree to extend the sitting days by eight, because he has said 

and the government has said we can ask the questions in 

question period. Will the Premier agree with this motion? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, in the preamble to the 



3772 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2009 

question, once again the member opposite ran down the 

economy of the province of Saskatchewan, as he did yesterday. 

As he did yesterday when he referred to it being in bust. As he 

did yesterday when he referred to it being in bust. The day after 

that member, who wants to be the . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The Premier. Order. The Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member 

said the economy’s in bust. Today a leading economist in the 

country says for the first time ever we will overtake Ontario as 

the second most prosperous province in the Dominion of 

Canada, Mr. Speaker. That’s what was said. The premise of the 

hon. member’s question goes to forecast. It does. The premise 

of the hon. member’s question goes to the budget challenge we 

face. I wonder what his old company, Nexen said just last year 

in their projections, Mr. Speaker? 

 

What they said in their forecast . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I recognize the Premier. 

The Premier can complete his response. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the budget for Nexen, the 

company that he was a senior executive for this year, used the 

following forecasts in their budget: for West Texas Intermediate 

oil, $50 to $65 a barrel; for natural gas, $6.50; and for the US 

[United States] to Canadian dollar exchange rate, 83 cents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, forecasters across the world reflected numbers like 

that, Mr. Speaker. That was the case in the budget here. We are 

going to meet the challenge, Mr. Speaker. And he asked, what 

are they saying about us today? Here’s what they’re saying. 

They’re giving us a credit rating upgrade for having the 

strongest financial balance sheet of any province in the 

Dominion of Canada. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Efficiency Secretariat 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I think they’re also talking 

about the fact that we’re the province that’s leading the nation 

in a decline in retail sales, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would like to quote from a recent story in the Leader-Post on 

November 20, and I quote, “The only significant new savings 

announced Thursday were from the deferral of $122 million in 

capital funding for new long-term care facilities.” We know that 

this government has been slow to admit and quick to deny that 

they have a problem when it comes to the management of our 

finances. They have no plan to actually cut costs. 

 

The Minister of Finance has hung his hat on the new efficiency 

secretariat that he created by collapsing the ill-fated P3 

[public-private partnership] secretariat into the Ministry of 

Finance. Can the Minister of Finance confirm that he is 

spending over 1 million on the efficiency secretariat, which is a 

60 per cent increase over what was being spent on the P3 

secretariat? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the efficiency secretariat that is now situated in the 

Ministry of Finance is destined to provide an important service 

to government as we look into the future and make sure that the 

services we deliver to the people of the province are done so as 

effectively and efficiently as possible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is an important initiative, and it’s going to 

begin its work shortly. And we look forward to the fact that it’ll 

help us in our budget process, and to make sure that we spend 

every hard-earned tax dollars that come into the care of the 

government with a great deal of prudence and caution. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Or maybe it’s just a problem with the 

people sitting around the Treasury Board table, Mr. Speaker. I 

would remind the minister of another recent story in the 

Leader-Post on November 20. And I quote: 

 

What was truly most disturbing was the complete and total 

lack of humility we saw from the Saskatchewan Party 

government which should [and I’ll skip this 

unparliamentary refrain from the columnist] . . . be 

embarrassed by its own incompetence right now, rather 

than celebrating. Yes, celebrating. 

 

They have created a so-called efficiency secretariat that they are 

spending over $1 million on, a 60 per cent increase. Sounds a 

bit counterintuitive, Mr. Speaker. But in answers to written 

questions, they have confirmed that this secretariat has issued 

no reports and sent no information to cabinet for discussion. To 

the Minister of Finance: what exactly is he spending $1 million 

of taxpayers’ dollars on? Or is this just another example of his 

own ministerial incompetence? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, Mr. 

Speaker, this efficiency secretariat has just been set up in the 

Ministry of Finance, and it’s going to begin its work moving 

forward. And the amount of the budget for this secretariat is 

annualized over a year. It includes some of the functions that 

already are in Finance, and it includes the functions from the P3 

secretariat. 

 

This secretariat has just been set up. It’s going to begin its 

work, and we look forward to the reports as they come 

available, as the secretariat moves forward. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I continue to quote from 

the Leader-Post. I quote: 



November 24, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3773 

We just witnessed Thursday a Saskatchewan finance 

minister present a mid-year budget update revealing that 

. . . he forecast last March [what] was now an overall 

$1.05-billion deficit . . . 

 

And Gantefoer gets two standing ovations from his caucus 

colleagues in Thursday’s question period? Are you 

kidding us? What is it about running government that you 

don’t understand? 

 

We’re asking the same thing, Mr. Speaker. What is it about 

running government that that Finance minister and that Premier 

don’t understand? 

 

According to the government’s own documents, the head of the 

new efficiency secretariat is receiving a salary of $183,564. 

This is an increase of $8,000 from when that same person was 

running the P3 secretariat — same person. Can the Minister of 

Finance confirm that the only official act of the efficiency 

secretariat has been to give the person running it an $8,000 

raise? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, this 

government has delivered an incredible amount of good news to 

the province of Saskatchewan because this province is based on 

strong economic fundamentals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re coming off of incredible economic growth, 

leading the nation in many categories. And that’s an important 

thing to remember, Mr. Speaker, as we move forward. Mr. 

Speaker, our economy is growing, our population is growing 

faster than it has in 50 years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this efficiency secretariat is going to help us to 

make sure that we do things in an effective and a cost-efficient 

way leading forward, and it’s going to help this province 

continue the remarkable record of growth that we are currently 

enjoying. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Employment and Training Issues 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, as the Sask Party makes deep cuts 

across government, their IOUs [I owe you] keep piling up. New 

businesses across the province are the latest victims of spending 

cuts caused by this government’s fiscal mismanagement. 

 

Mike Nahorney recently opened a new business, M & N Repair, 

in Biggar. He applied to JobStart/Future Skills for funding to 

train an employee to order parts, answer phones, and manage 

the day-to-day operations of the business. On November 4th, he 

was sent a letter informing him that uncommitted funds 

remaining in this year’s JobStart/Future Skills’ budget were 

being cut. The letter also states that new applications can 

resume — guess when? — next year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To the minister: why is the Sask Party cutting funding for 

programs that assist in employment here in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, thanks very much for the 

opportunity to provide an update on what we’re doing regarding 

employment and training initiatives right across this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the NDP’s last budget, they invested just under 

$70 million, Mr. Speaker. What we’ve done is increased that by 

more $23 million. It’s $92 million. That’s including the caps 

that we’ve put in place, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that we’re doing 

so in a fiscally prudent and responsible way. Twenty three 

million more dollars regarding workplace training and 

employment opportunities, Mr. Speaker, that’s our commitment 

to the people of this province. And we’ll continue to work so in 

the fashion that they’ve seen in the past. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this government is so mixed up 

with the math that they can’t even admit that a cut is a cut. Any 

of the new funding that has been received, the vast, vast 

majority, Mr. Speaker, is from the federal government. On the 

provincial front, we see nothing but cuts. 

 

Mr. Nahorney was counting on JobStart/Future Skills to help 

him, and he made an application to the program in good faith. 

Last week he told me: 

 

It means I have to pay the person to run the front and I 

work for nothing. Maybe the Minister of Labour would 

like to get paid nothing and for a money-saving [cost], he 

could pay the wages to his aides, and then we’ll even it 

out. 

 

To the minister: why are business operators like Mike Nahorney 

forced to pay the price and the consequences for this 

government’s mismanagement of the economy? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, we continue to make 

progress in a number of areas, Mr. Speaker. But as it relates to 

the term cut, Mr. Speaker, happy to report that we have cut the 

provincial debt by 40 per cent, Mr. Speaker. Happy to report 

that we’ve cut 80,000 low-income earners off the tax rolls, Mr. 

Speaker. Happy to announce that the number of nursing 

vacancies has been cut, Mr. Speaker. Happy to announce that 

property and education portion of property taxes have been cut. 

And we continue to work on cutting the infrastructure deficit 

that we inherited from the members opposite, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We continue to build a very, very productive and strong 

province on behalf of the people of this province, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s where we remain focused. That’s where the investments 

are going. We’re doing so in a fiscally prudent fashion, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 



3774 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2009 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, once again members opposite 

won’t even admit that a cut is a cut. They don’t want to discuss 

the cuts. They not only will not discuss them, they won’t even 

admit that a cut is a cut. Especially troubling on a day like 

today, Mr. Speaker, when we see from Statistics Canada that 

the number of people receiving EI [employment insurance] 

benefits month over month has increased by 1,600; year over 

year, by 6,180, Mr. Speaker. 

 

People like Mike Nahorney recognize the value of this program 

even if the Sask Party doesn’t. He told me last week: 

 

This is very important. It’s designed to create full-time 

opportunities plus training at the same time. When 

unemployment’s at a higher level, this is a big help for a 

lot of people. 

 

He goes on to say, “It’s an important program. It should never 

be cut. Training or education should never be cut.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, why at a time when Statistics Canada shows us 

that unemployment is increasing in the province, more people 

are on EI benefits, why would the Sask Party choose to nickel 

and dime a program, Mr. Speaker, that helps unemployed 

workers, and that helps new businesses get established in the 

province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Once again, thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker, for the opportunity. I think what’s important, Mr. 

Speaker, is to realize, obviously, right across Western Canada 

economies are being affected. That’s why we can see that EI 

has increased by 25 per cent in Alberta, 14 per cent in 

Manitoba, just about 13 per cent in BC [British Columbia]. And 

the lowest in Western Canada is right here, Mr. Speaker, in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

But importantly, Mr. Speaker, what we can see is, when we 

look at Saskatoon and Regina, we have the lowest 

unemployment rates in the nation in these two cities, Mr. 

Speaker. In Saskatoon there have been, year over year, 5,900 

new jobs created. In fact the number of job vacancies on the 

saskjobs.ca website has gone up 14 per cent just in the last 

month, Mr. Speaker. And since April 2009, more than 55,000 

vacancies have been posted on the saskjobs.ca website. 

 

We know there’s certainly more to do, Mr. Speaker. We know 

there’s more to do, but we stand on our record. We’re working 

on behalf of the people of this province. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Cannington has a point of 

order. Member may state his point of order. 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

it’s a long-standing tradition of this House and parliaments in 

general that a member cannot impugn the honour of another 

member. During question period, Mr. Speaker, I clearly heard 

the Leader of the Opposition call the Premier a fibber, not 

telling the truth, and lying, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I ask that 

the Leader of the Opposition apologize and unequivocally 

withdraw those remarks. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — The member is correct. I did refer to the 

Premier as fibbing. I believed that that was true. But I apologize 

for it and withdraw the comments. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The member . . . Order. The 

member has raised a point of order in regards to the comments 

from the Leader of the Opposition and I would ask the Leader 

of the Opposition to withdraw the comments unequivocally 

without any further explanation. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I withdraw the comments 

unequivocally. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 119 — The Ticket Sales Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 119, 

The Ticket Sales Act be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved first 

reading of Bill 119, The Ticket Sales Act. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 120 — The Financial Administration 

Amendment Act, 2009 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

Bill No. 120, The Financial Administration Amendment Act, 

2009 be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved first 

reading of Bill No. 120, The Financial Administration 

Amendment Act, 2009. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 



November 24, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3775 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, next sitting of the 

House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, in accordance with 

rule 7(7) of The Election Act and the tabling of documents, I lay 

on the Table the report of the Chief Electoral Officer with 

respect to the use of the Chief Electoral Officer’s emergency 

powers November 19th, 2009. 

 

I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I 

rise to ask leave to introduce an emergency debate under 

standing order 59. 

 

The Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition has moved to 

introduce an emergency debate under rule 59. The Leader of the 

Opposition can state the reasons for the motion and place the 

motion. 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 59 

 

Separate and Distinct Sitting of the Legislative Assembly 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the opportunity 

to say just a few brief words about why the opposition is 

proposing this emergency motion. 

 

The motion that I will be presenting is clearly a pressing urgent 

necessity for the people of the province who are facing now for 

the first time in many years a deficit of $1 billion, but the first 

time a deficit has been announced in a long, long time and also 

in a recession. And I think it’s the first time in a decade that we 

have had negative growth in the province of Saskatchewan. 

And in light of that fact, I hope that the government will allow 

this motion to be put in front of the Assembly. 

 

And I can think of no issue of more urgent need in the province 

today — and I hear this from people across the province in 

Canora, in Prince Albert, as I travel the province — that the 

finances of the province need to be scrutinized, the spending 

cuts announced. What is involved? What programs are at stake? 

Is the seniors’ drug plan involved in the cuts? We don’t know. 

And we need to be asking these questions. 

 

It is the position of the opposition MLAs that the effect of the 

new budget — it really is a new budget — needs to be debated 

here in the open, and we need to shine a light on both the 

increases and the cuts. 

 

And for that reason, Mr. Speaker, I rise today to put forward an 

emergency resolution to allow the Assembly and the people of 

Saskatchewan and the people in the public to properly do the 

work. We need to do the work on behalf of the people. And I 

would move a motion as follows: 

 

That as per rule 3(1) and 5 of the Rules and Procedures, a 

separate and distinct sitting of this Legislative Assembly is 

ordered to occur between December 7th and 17th of 2009, 

for the purpose of examining the recent budget cuts of the 

Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

The ordinary time of daily meetings and adjournments of 

the House, as per rule 6(1), shall be in effect for the 

purpose of this sitting. 

 

I so move. 

 

[14:30] 

 

The Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition has moved a 

motion of a urgent, pressing nature and has asked for leave to 

move the motion. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — Those in favour? Order. Order. Actually leave 

has not been granted. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 532 to 539. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 532 to 539 are tabled. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 117 — The Hunting, Fishing and Trapping 

Heritage Act 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. After my brief 

remarks, I’ll be moving second reading of The Hunting, Fishing 

and Trapping Heritage Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is one of the best places in the 

world in which to live. Our healthy environment and natural 

resources make life better for Saskatchewan families by 

creating jobs and economic growth and contributing to our 



3776 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2009 

social and physical well-being. Our hunting and fishing 

opportunities are not only world-class, but they are major 

contributors to Saskatchewan’s economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our natural renewable resources are valuable, both 

economically and spiritually. Hunting, fishing, and trapping are 

an important part of Saskatchewan’s heritage. For generations 

our province’s residents have pursued these activities for food, 

for recreation, and for commercial and cultural purposes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Hunting, Fishing and Trapping Heritage Act 

acknowledges the important place of these activities in our 

society in two ways. First, the Act recognizes hunting, fishing, 

and trapping as protected activities in accordance with the law 

in Saskatchewan. And secondly, it celebrates their importance 

by designating November 15th of each year as Hunting, 

Fishing, and Trapping Heritage Day. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s very important to point out that the 

legislation does not deter or alter in any way an Aboriginal 

person’s constitutional right to hunt, fish, or trap. What it does 

do, Mr. Speaker, is to tell the world that, in Saskatchewan, 

hunting, fishing, and trapping are a part of our way of life, now 

and in the future. 

 

And with that, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The 

Hunting, Fishing and Trapping Heritage Act. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of the Environment has moved 

second reading of Bill No. 117, The Hunting, Fishing and 

Trapping Heritage Act. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

I recognize the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 

pleased to have an opportunity to be able to make a number of 

comments on the Act respecting hunting, fishing, and trapping 

and which will put in place November 15th of each year as a 

day designated as Hunting, Fishing, and Trapping Heritage Day 

here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are a number of ways that hunting, fishing, 

and trapping could have been recognized in the heritage, as big 

components of the heritage of the province of Saskatchewan. 

But, Mr. Speaker, in my view, one of those ways would be 

taking an option that opens up . . . I guess it’s one option that 

would open up a number of ways with which you could impress 

upon people the importance of all of these areas, and that would 

be by actually taking some initiatives when it comes to the 

environment here in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

We have seen that rather languishing over the last two years. 

There has been very little movement that’s been made by this 

government. They seem to feel that it’s not important. So they 

feel that somehow, I guess, that being able to put forward a day 

that recognizes hunting, fishing, and trapping is part of the 

heritage of this province will cover off any concerns that people 

may have. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, unless we look after the environment with 

which we live right across the province, a heritage day may be 

the only recognition we have for hunting, fishing, and trapping. 

And while each of these occupations and endeavours have 

contributed greatly to the development of Saskatchewan and 

continue, not only from our early, earliest beginnings, but to the 

First Nations and first peoples that inhabited this land, but also 

into the current day which we all reside in this province and 

hopefully will continue to be a big part of the heritage and 

future of our province for many, many years to come. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would be really happy if we would see the 

government put in place some initiatives for the environment 

and work towards cleaning up a number of areas where there 

are concerns, putting in place some legislation that maybe 

expands wildlife lands around this province. If you don’t have 

lands that are set aside and designated as wildlife lands and 

continue to grow and provide space for animals, hunting, 

fishing, and trapping will truly only be a heritage that we will 

be able to look back on, but not something that these people 

will be able to look forward to. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I guess one of the issues that we have had with 

this government is that there has been a real failure to consult 

with interested parties around the province. And I know that 

when this Bill was first introduced, there was representatives 

from the Wildlife Federation, from the Trappers Association, 

also from resort communities — and it escapes me who else 

was sitting in the gallery that day — but I know there were a 

variety. But one thing that was missing, I don’t recall seeing 

anyone representing First Nations or Métis across the province 

to see if there had been any discussion in that area and with 

those peoples. And that is important, especially when it comes 

to areas such as this which are traditional and when we were 

talking about recognizing a heritage day here in the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the First Nations have a great deal of concerns 

when it comes to duty to consult, and we know that this 

government has not made any moves in that area. And they 

have been very slow to make any type of advances or 

improvements in the discussions that are out there. We know 

that duty to consult is a requirement and has been ruled on by, I 

believe, the Supreme Court of Canada, and that all governments 

are moving in this direction. But the Saskatchewan Party 

government seems to be making the decision that this truly isn’t 

an important area for them to make some advances in. There 

doesn’t seem to be a great deal of progress. 

 

And when we see pieces of legislation such as this which, mind 

you, it recognizes the heritage day and it will be a very good 

day for various organizations around the province to celebrate. 

But First Nations and Métis were the first hunters, fishers, and 

trappers in this province and should not they be included in the 

consultations and be included in the gallery when the legislation 

is introduced? It seems to be a major omission. 

 

One thing that I would like to see, as well as . . . Well a number 

of things I guess, and I’ll take some time to go through them. I 

would like to see the government move ahead with some 

environmental legislation. We had a debate in the House and 

the government actually refused to vote on a motion which was 

exactly the proposal they had put forward in their platform in 

the last election. 

 

Now we since know that they have downgraded and really 

broken that commitment. And we do know that they have 

walked away from any sense of duty to the environment. Well 

now the minister says that has nothing to do with anything to do 



November 24, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3777 

with hunting and fishing. Well unless the member opposite 

realizes if you don’t have a good environment, if you don’t 

have habitat for wildlife, if you don’t have clean lakes where 

the fish can breed and grow and continue their cycle of life, 

there will be no fishing and there will be no hunting and there 

will be no fur trapping, Mr. Speaker. So you can’t have one 

without the other. 

 

It’s much the same as our environment. We are all 

interdependent and nothing stands alone and operates in spite of 

the other. We are all connected and we all need to pay attention 

to various aspects. So, Mr. Speaker, to see this government 

actually do something when it comes to the environment, 

environmental standards. 

 

We have seen moves where they are working to downgrade, 

make environmental assessments easier for companies to move 

ahead in a variety of areas. Mr. Speaker, that’s a red flag for 

many, many people across this province who value our life and 

our quality of life. 

 

Blue skies. Many provinces can’t say blue skies any more. If 

you fly into Ontario, it’s pretty brown and pretty grey most 

days. Mr. Speaker, we’re proud of that here in the province of 

Saskatchewan and we want to make sure that it stays. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m sure on your way on the weekend, when 

you’re driving home . . . I know for me driving home to my 

community of Moose Jaw, often you will see deer. You will see 

moose. Now moose look a little unusual out in the middle of a 

stubble field. That’s a little unusual and it has caused a bit of 

havoc for traffic. 

 

But I have to tell you, Mr. Speaker, when you talk to some 

people that have lived in a number of areas, and I think of up 

near Canora, northwest of Canora, people will tell you when 

they were kids in that area, which isn’t that many years ago, 

there wasn’t very many trees. It was pretty wide open, and that 

they didn’t see too many moose around there then. 

 

Well now we see that animals migrate. They adapt to a varying 

habitat. And as we see more and more of these larger animals 

moving into the south of the province, in fact, Mr. Speaker, the 

Department of the Environment has actually opened up moose 

hunting seasons in the southern part of the province because of 

the shift in populations. 

 

And that’s pretty prevalent. You can look at synopses from the 

various hunting years over the past decade to 15, 20 years, and 

you will see shifts where mule deer populations have expanded. 

They have not only expanded in numbers, but expanded in the 

areas that they cover. You will see white-tailed deer, their 

population has shrunk. I know around my community we see 

fewer and fewer white-tailed deer. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, for the member across to say, well what’s this 

got to do with the environment, well it has a great deal to do 

with the environment. Because if you don’t have the proper 

environment, if you don’t look after the environment that we 

have, if we don’t make improvements and do the best that we 

can, it will change drastically, not only in our lifetime but for 

future generations. They may not have the opportunity to go 

hunting or fishing or trapping, Mr. Speaker. So they are 

interconnected. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while some stronger environmental legislation or 

at least any environmental legislation from this government 

would be welcome, and I’m talking about wildlife more specific 

to areas in the topography, I guess, of the province. 

 

And that doesn’t even take us into the whole greenhouse gas 

and greenhouse emissions reductions and targets. That is a 

huge, huge debate which this government has actually walked 

away from. For two days we had debate on discussion. And 

here again, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that the government 

wouldn’t even support a motion that was identical to their 

commitment during the election campaign. So they can’t 

support their own commitments, but yet they can put forward 

very nice pieces of legislation. 

 

And I know that hunters and fishers and trappers around the 

province will be very pleased to see a day that will be marked 

as a heritage day and recognized each year. But, Mr. Speaker, I 

also know that many of these people that are involved in these 

organizations and have spent their lives either as a career or 

enjoying nature, whether as a profession or as a hobby, as a 

sideline, or whether they just live in a spectacular area of the 

province — which is many, many areas of the province — and 

enjoy what we have here in the province, I know they would 

appreciate stronger environmental legislation. 

 

I know they would appreciate some discussion and a look at 

expanding wildlife land around this province and make sure 

also the RANs, the representative area networks, that not only 

maintains and preserves those smaller ecosystems around the 

province. Because, Mr. Speaker, anyone that has had the 

privilege to travel around the province of Saskatchewan will 

know that this is an absolutely beautiful province. 

 

And I often, when I run into engineers, sometimes give them a 

bit of grief because they built the Trans-Canada Highway and 

the railway lines across the flattest piece of property that runs 

through the province of Saskatchewan. And I’m sure it’s cost 

and it’s ease of construction and all the rest of it. But because of 

that, many people when they travel through on the 

Trans-Canada or travel through by train, they figure that that’s 

what Saskatchewan looks like. And we’ve all heard the jokes 

about you can watch your dog run away for three days, and all 

those jokes that we kind of half-heartedly chuckle at, but 

secretly shake our head and roll our eyes because we all know 

it’s not true. 

 

[14:45] 

 

And I read an article the other day in a newspaper. It was about 

a fellow who was raising money and awareness on a particular 

issue. And he was riding across Canada on his bike. And what 

he said was, someone said, well you took the easy part, you 

know, riding your bike across the Prairies here. And he said, if 

anyone thinks the Prairies is flat or Saskatchewan is flat, they 

should try riding a bicycle across the province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, so maybe instead of rolling our eyes when 

people make bad jokes about Saskatchewan being flat and that 

the whole province is like this, we should maybe say to them, 

get out a bike. Ride a bike up and down the Trans-Canada for a 



3778 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2009 

while, and let’s see how flat you think it is after that. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, people also have to realize that when you go 

from the badlands in the South and the Great Sand Hills and 

travel through the fertile agricultural land that we have, Mr. 

Speaker — and a majority, well we’re about 48 per cent I think 

of all arable land is here in the province of Saskatchewan — but 

as you travel north, then you will start to see bushland and trees 

and the ground will start to break into small rolling hills. And, 

Mr. Speaker, we get into the boreal forests and, farther north, 

into the Shield where it’s actually an absolute privilege to have 

travelled from the southwest, southeast corners of this province 

all the way to far North. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I actually haven’t been able to set foot on the 

northeast corner of the province, but I have had an opportunity 

to be in the Northwest, and not actually set foot on the 

Athabasca sand dunes, but to fly over them and have a look at 

them. And that’s my goal, is to be able to access that area and 

go on a great camping trip or canoe trip. It would be wonderful. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it just speaks to the diversity that we have in 

this province. And that many of these people who are hunting, 

fishing, or trapping would greatly appreciate this government 

paying some particular attention, not only to environmental 

legislation that would protect this province and all of the variety 

and diversity that we enjoy in this province, but also wildlife 

lands. And whether it’s in fish hatcheries or the wildlife lands, 

there are many, many things that this provincial government 

could be doing to enhance the opportunities that are out there 

and enhance the beauty. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I have to say my husband has hunted the 

whole time that we have been married, long before we were 

ever married. And I used to go with him on trips. I never 

wanted to be one of those hunting widows where you stayed at 

home and missed out on all the adventure. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, for many people who start out hunting, it 

turns into a pursuit, quite often with a camera, taking pictures of 

wildlife. Because we have an opportunity when you’re 

travelling some desolate areas, whether it’s a community 

pasture in the South to Crown forest in the North, there truly is 

some absolutely beautiful spots in this province where you can 

be out there walking in the hills or walking in the forest or 

walking along the river breaks along the North Saskatchewan 

River. I mean if someone just dropped you there out of the blue, 

you would have no idea you were in Saskatchewan if you 

weren’t from this province. 

 

So hunting, fishing, and trapping may be for sustenance. It may 

be an occupation and a career for many in our province — both 

traditional and otherwise, by choice, I guess would be an 

appropriate term. But, Mr. Speaker, it goes beyond that; it goes 

beyond. For many of these people, it is an appreciation of the 

environment as a whole, and all of those animals that inhabit a 

spot within that ecosystem and within that environment. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would say to the government, stronger 

environmental legislation that truly looks after the environment 

of the province — the trees, the water, the air that we breathe. 

Maintain the wildlife lands and maintain the quality of the lakes 

in northern . . . well, throughout Saskatchewan. 

I know that there was a push to have testing done along the 

northwest boundary of the province because we often talk about 

the 100,000 lakes that are in northern Saskatchewan and the 

pollution that is coming over from the tar sands in Alberta. 

That’s a concern because that affects the fishing in those areas, 

and it affects the animals, and it affects the people that live in 

those areas. 

 

So I would like to say to the minister that there is many, many 

things that could be done in conjunction with this. And while 

it’s important to have a heritage day and to recognize the 

heritage of this province and the future of the province in many 

areas, Mr. Speaker, there’s also a great deal that could and 

should be done to support this legislation along the way. And 

we don’t often make the connection between the two. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, as someone who has been on a lake in 

northern Saskatchewan, try about 4:30 in the morning waiting 

for the sun to come up, dressed up in a chilly morning. And it’s 

absolutely beautiful. The fog is lifting off the lake, and as the 

sun’s coming up over the trees, there isn’t a more beautiful 

province and a beautiful spot to be than Saskatchewan, 

anywhere in the world that I have yet to see, Mr. Speaker. And 

it’s a wonderful place . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s true. It’s a great place to go out in a boat and go 

fishing. 

 

And I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, you put on an electric motor — 

because you don’t want to pollute anything and you want to 

keep it nice and quiet — and you don’t bother putting a hook on 

the end of your line as you toss it over the edge. You just kind 

of drag it along and watch it floating on the lake because you 

really don’t want to do the work and catch anything. It’s just 

kind of a beautiful way to spend the day. You’re kind of rolling 

your eyes at me there. I know you mean . . . 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, there are many, many things that could be 

done. And I truly wish that the minister had brought along with 

this piece of legislation some supporting pieces that would have 

had a huge impact, not only to celebrate heritage day, but to 

make sure that all of this that we enjoy and sometimes are at 

risk of taking for granted, that it’s maintained out into the future 

and not only ever considered in a heritage Act. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Brkich: — I would ask leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Arm River has asked for 

leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm River. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I want to thank 

the speaker that’s speaking who let me in. 

 

In the west gallery I just want to . . . I see my CA [constituency 

assistant] is up here today. He was up doing some work here in 

Regina and possibly maybe going to Agribition later. I just want 



November 24, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3779 

to welcome Mr. Clark Puckett here to the legislature, to his 

legislature. And I would ask all members to welcome him here, 

and I hope he enjoys the proceedings going on, even though I 

know he’s watched it many, many, many times on TV. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 117 — The Hunting, Fishing and Trapping 

Heritage Act 

(continued) 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 

I know there are a number of my colleagues that would also like 

to make comments on this Bill, The Hunting, Fishing and 

Trapping Heritage Act, but I would just like to make one more 

comment. 

 

When the minister talked about this being a way of life now and 

into the future, I have to say I guess a bit of a plea, to please put 

in place and look at the environmental legislation that needs to 

be done here in the province of Saskatchewan to make sure that 

we’re retaining this quality of life and the beauty of our 

province, and actually to make sure that we do maintain this 

way of life into the future for those around the province who 

have built their careers. Many built their families, built a strong 

base of business throughout the province. It’s a beautiful 

province, and that’s truly the way we know we could move 

ahead, but not at the cost of all that we hold dear. So that’s just 

something I would hope that the government would give 

consideration to. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I know there are a number of my colleagues 

that would like to make comments, but there are people that we 

need to speak to on the issue of the Bill. And at this time I 

would adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Moose Jaw Wakamow has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 117. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 99 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert that Bill No. 99 — The 

Emergency 911 System Amendment Act, 2009 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to rise to participate in the debate on Bill 99, the 

emergency system amendment Act, 2009. 

 

Emergencies — of course we’re no strangers to them in this 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker. I think of a time when yourself and 

myself and others were present at a committee meeting where 

there was a medical emergency took place and the ability to 

contact EMS [emergency medical services] right off the bat, 

you know — initiate first aid, of course — but the ability of the 

emergency responders to provide immediate medical assistance 

in terms of the EMS people that showed up, in terms of the 

firefighters that showed up within minutes of the call being 

placed, and then the good work that had been done in between 

in terms of stabilizing the victim and providing that critical first 

response. 

 

I know that we’ve seen, right in this very building, the 

importance of being able to access the emergency measures 

system in this province and those emergency response 

providers. And again, Mr. Speaker, I think about the things that 

worked for us in that circumstance. One was a clear line of 

communication to fire and to EMS. 

 

But of course, that’s not the case around the province. Certainly 

where the people were dispatched to the situation here in the 

basement of this building, we had the advantage of people that 

had medical skills. We had people that had emergency 

responder training. We had the advantage of a public 

defibrillator being able to be brought to bear. And most 

importantly though, we had the fact that the fire was responding 

from the hall down on 13th Avenue. And that emergency 

measures, the paramedics, they were dispatched, I believe, from 

over by Pasqua at the time. 

 

And again, quick access to EMS and the quick response time, in 

terms of those assets being located relatively close on hand, 

meant that what could have been a fatal medical incident for the 

person involved was turned into, you know, a remarkable 

recovery. And that person is alive and doing well to this day. 

 

So I think about that circumstance and the importance of 

communications in a province as vast and as diverse as 

Saskatchewan. And obviously communications plays a critical 

role in ensuring that people have, you know, the best possible 

access, given the distances, to emergency medical services or 

whatever response needs to be brought to bear in terms of a 

situation. 

 

I think about how far we’ve come in the case of my family, Mr. 

Speaker. We come from a quarter section out Montmartre way, 

in country I know you’re well familiar with. And I think about 

in the ’50s when my father and my grandmother were 

essentially flooded out. One of the things that precipitated that 

was the fact that my grandfather had a medical emergency and 

to get him into the hospital in Weyburn, or pardon me, in 

Wolseley at the time, Mr. Speaker, they had to put him in the 

back of a wagon, get him to the Hintons where there was a car, 

and then take him from there into the hospital in Wolseley 

where he subsequently passed on. 

 

And again that was the only option that was had so that’s what 

they did in that circumstance. And I think about the advances 

that have been made in technology and the ability of people 



3780 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2009 

being able to bring to bear that emergency medical response in 

critical situations like that and how things have evolved over 

time. This was in the mid-’50s, Mr. Speaker, and even then it 

sort of strikes me as remarkable that the first half of that 

journey had to take place in the back of a wagon. But those 

were the times and that was Saskatchewan people responding as 

best they could. 

 

[15:00] 

 

I also think about an incident that my younger brother Neil was 

involved in, where they had to, he and another young woman 

had to provide CPR [cardiopulmonary resuscitation] to a 

person, shove him into the back of a station wagon off of the 

beach at Katepwa, and then drive him into the nearest hospital 

where the person subsequently died. And in all of these 

circumstances, Mr. Speaker, quick response, you know, often 

makes the difference. In that case it didn’t. But in our 

experience, our shared experience, Mr. Speaker, we know that 

quick response can make that critical difference and save a life. 

And again in terms of what makes that quick intervention 

possible is the quick access through something that’s available 

like the 911 system. 

 

In Saskatchewan one of the challenges we’ve had over the years 

is the vast geography that we have. We’re a big province with a 

big heart, but a lot of space to cover and a widely dispersed 

population in many cases. I know that previously in government 

we certainly wrestled with what was the best response to the 

replacement of what was then aging and rapidly becoming 

obsolete technology, in the situation with FleetNet. The 

questions of where that was best housed, be it within Public 

Safety or in some kind of a conglomerate with other emergency 

response providers such as the RCMP [Royal Canadian 

Mounted Police]. Whether or not, even then, if something like 

that should continue to be housed with SaskTel, and did that fit 

with the mandate of SaskTel? 

 

A great number of questions to be wrestled with to come up 

with what is the best public policy option for the people of 

Saskatchewan to again ensure that something that is critical 

public safety infrastructure is in place — and that is the ability 

to have a 911 system that is reliable, that is adaptable, that has 

that broad coverage that our province demands. 

 

And again the ability around land locates and how this interacts 

with, you know, Global Positioning technology in terms of if 

somebody’s phoning in from a particular quarter section, you 

know. How do ensure that you’ve got a system that responds to 

that circumstance? Or in the case of a, you know, push to talk, 

is it there for our public safety practitioners, be it in fire or in 

emergency medical practitioners? What is the availability or 

what is the durability of the technology in terms of if you’re 

trapped in a building? And does the technology allow you to 

maintain that vital line of communication as you go about 

responding to the emergency situation? I know that some of the 

technologies being considered, that was one of the shortfalls of 

them. 

 

So again a great number of questions to be considered in terms 

of coming up with something that must be durable, that must be 

reliable, and that must be affordable for the people of 

Saskatchewan. There’s been a substantial investment made in 

what is being referred to now as the provincial public safety 

telecommunications network, the PPSTN for short because of 

course in public policy, Mr. Speaker, we need to have a good 

acronym for everything. 

 

But my hope is that this is something that responds to the 

diverse stakeholders and their needs in terms of the public 

safety need for reliable public safety telecommunications. And 

again that ability to not just access something like 911 but to 

carry the communications that are so critical to effective 

response in terms of emergency management, be it in a flood, 

Mr. Speaker, and the need to keep the team together and 

communicating effectively so that they can calibrate their 

response to the situation as it’s presenting. Be it in the case of a 

fire in a building, Mr. Speaker, and again, the sort of needs that 

arise in terms of being able to have a telecommunications 

technology that doesn’t leave responders stranded or trapped or 

cut off from communications and separated from the team. Also 

within the situation of a forest fire, the broad sort of front of 

response that that requires and coordination of effort. 

 

Again, what is the best public policy response? What is the 

public safety infrastructure that is equal to that job? And we are 

hopeful that what we are considering here today in terms of 

legislation that will house the authority for the management of 

the provincial public safety telecommunications network, that 

will house the authority for this critical infrastructure in the 

Department of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Again I guess, Mr. Speaker, that, as we understand it, is the 

main purpose of this legislation. That’s the intent. And certainly 

that, in and of itself, is a laudable goal and a necessary one. 

 

And again, we’ll see the things that flow from that in terms of 

CPSP [Corrections, Public Safety and Policing] taking the lead 

on this file. We’ll see how that works out with the other 

partners that we know are involved in terms of work that 

SaskPower had been doing in conjunction with the RCMP and 

their public safety communications network. We’ll see how this 

works out in terms of the cost involved for RMs, the rural 

municipalities, in terms of the infrastructure that they’ll need to 

get going with the network. 

 

We’ll see how this works in terms of the coordination with First 

Nations and Métis locals throughout the province. Because 

again, I think of the flooding that took place — Red Earth, 

Shoal Lake country, or Cumberland House First Nation, or 

different other First Nations that have experienced flooding 

over the years or forest fires — and the absolutely vital need to 

keep everybody involved in that emergency response connected 

and communicating effectively so that they can, again, bring to 

bear the best possible response to these emergency situations as 

they present. 

 

So not only does the infrastructure have to do that, but the 

governance of this infrastructure has to accomplish that 

balancing of interest and accomplishing that buy-in, not just in 

governance, but in the ongoing maintenance and funding of this 

project. We’ll be interested to see how this carries forward, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And again there’s no small investment that has been made in 

the FleetNet before this, both in terms of the core, sort of, 



November 24, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3781 

infrastructure, but also the way the different partners access into 

it. And there’s no small investment that has been made in this 

part of this evolution, this stage of evolution, this stage of 

development of the public safety telecommunications network 

as well. So again we’ll be watching closely to see how that 

piece rolls out, Mr. Speaker, and we’ll be watching with great 

interest and listening to what the stakeholders have to say. 

 

I guess the last thing I’d like to say is, it’s also signal of this sort 

of public policy question, Mr. Speaker, that you’re dealing with 

what can be a very rapidly evolving technology. And certainly 

FleetNet and the sort of bulwark that that provided in terms of 

emergency management communication, it’s a technology that 

has reached its life expectancy. And one of the urgencies 

around this replacement is to ensure that you’ve got a system 

that’s reliable, that you can get parts for, that you can continue 

to have there to be relied upon. 

 

And of course, Mr. Speaker, that costs money; money that we 

had certainly brought to the table and that I know the current 

government has brought to the table. But again, if you can have 

effective communications at the core of something like 911, 

that ensures that. You know, the distances might be great but at 

least you’ve got that communication and that ability to access in 

a reliable, consistent way, EMS, then that is something that’s 

definitely worth investing in and taking forward for the people 

of this province. 

 

So I guess those are some of my observations on Bill 99, Mr. 

Speaker. I know that I have other colleagues that want to 

participate in this debate at this time, so I guess what I will do is 

cede the floor for my colleague, the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres, so that she might participate in this debate at this 

time. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

pleased to be able to rise and speak to this Bill No. 99, An Act to 

amend The Emergency 911 System Act. This legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, appears to be the continuation of the work begun by 

the former NDP administration to strengthen the emergency 

911 system. The integration of provincial public safety 

telecommunications network into the 911 system appears to 

accomplish just that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, of course we’re very supportive of the 

legislation in terms of what it’s wanting to accomplish. And 

there are still a number of observations that I would like to 

make on this Bill, Mr. Speaker. And that is the good fortune 

that the Sask Party government has in terms of putting forward 

a Bill to deal with an emergency 911 system Act in terms of 

changing the amount of times the word “department” is referred 

to in the Bill and needed to be changed to “ministry,” because 

that was something that this administration felt it needed to do 

was to change everything from department to ministry. And it’s 

quite surprising how many times this needs to be referred to in 

this particular Bill. 

 

So again it’s another one of those changes that I still don’t have 

an explanation for as to the necessity of going from a 

department to a ministry, but it’s something the current 

administration felt very strongly about and therefore has the 

ability to do in putting forward this Bill to make sure those 

changes are made. 

 

The one concern I do have, Mr. Speaker, is that the system 

currently in place does fall under the purview of SaskTel, and 

it’s my understanding that the system will now be falling under 

the purview of Corrections and Public Safety. And I’m still not 

quite clear as to what their reasons would be to make that 

change. I would appreciate if I could get some more 

clarification on that at some point from the minister and be able 

to understand better why it would need to move out of SaskTel 

where it’s been housed for the duration that it’s been in 

existence and obviously served the public very well in that 

capacity. 

 

Now it’s important obviously to have a very efficient, a highly 

efficient and effective 911 system because of the fact that 

obviously when circumstances arise, then obviously we all want 

to be able to access 911 services as quickly as possible. And I 

don’t think there would be too many people, I would imagine, 

who haven’t either needed to access 911 system either for their 

own families or extended families or situations that one comes 

upon when, especially nowadays, Mr. Speaker, when one is . . . 

There are very few people that travel without a cellphone, 

although obviously we’re going to make sure that it’s not being 

done while somebody’s operating a vehicle in the near future. 

But it’s something that more and more people are able to access 

quickly because the fact that most people do have cellphones or 

BlackBerrys, PDFs. So it’s something that’s become much 

more efficient just through the situation or the circumstance that 

people do carry cellphones and therefore are able to access 911 

services that much quicker for any situations that they may 

come upon in their daily lives. 

 

When people call 911 of course, the process is that the 

dispatcher immediately calls any of the pertinent emergency 

services that are needed, given the circumstances of the 

situation, to deal with the emergency at hand. And the response 

time from that, you know, that dispatcher in terms of locating 

those emergency services, the appropriate emergency services 

and the response time of those emergency services, getting to 

those situations . . . it can all be expedited through the good 

fortunes that we have with modern technology, Mr. Speaker. 

And this hopefully will be another one of those efficiencies that 

we can bring to the system. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, clearly 911 services are not something that 

are exclusive to any particular area of the province. They’re 

something that need to be accessed and people would like to see 

accessible in all corners of the province. And that means that 

when you’re calling 911 from Regina or Yorkton or La Ronge 

or Wollaston Lake or Ile-a-la-Crosse or, you know, other places 

in the province, everybody wants to know that someone will be 

able to be reached when dialling 911. It’s certainly a privilege 

and a comfort that we have as a modern society to be able to 

have these services notified as quickly as possible through a 

911 system. 

 

And it’s something that’s universal, Mr. Speaker. It’s something 

that we know as citizens — doesn’t matter where we are in the 



3782 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2009 

province or outside the province — that when we find ourselves 

in a predicament, needing assistance or when we find ourselves 

needing to provide assistance, which we’ve come upon either, 

obviously, someone who’s been injured, when one is out 

somewhere or coming upon an accident, then it’s always nice to 

know that that, for lack of a better expression, lifeline is there in 

terms of being able to access the 911 system, no matter where 

one is in the province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, wanting to create efficiencies within the 911 

system is something that’s obviously very desirable and 

something that we definitely support. And as I said, we had 

originally initiated the process when we were in government 

prior to 2007 as it was. 

 

So no matter the nature of the emergency, whether it’s, like I 

said, a fire or a request for police assistance or a request for 

medical assistance, these can all be accessed through the 911 

system. And we are very grateful for that to be in place, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Just recently driving home from Saskatoon, there was a slippery 

. . . The highways were a little glazed over in the morning. It 

was an early morning drive. I had to be back in the city for an 

8:30 engagement, and I was in Saskatoon for a very late 

engagement. So I decided to catch a few hours of shut-eye and 

then drive back early in the morning. 

 

So it was probably about 6:30 in the morning, and I saw a 

vehicle travelling from the driving lane — luckily enough, there 

were no other vehicles around him — travelling in the driving 

lane. All of a sudden, he started veering into the passing lane 

and, sure enough, went right into the ditch. And the good 

fortune was that the individual was able to control the swerving 

of the vehicle and the vehicle did not roll. 

 

But I attempted to brake gently because I obviously didn’t want 

to find myself in the same predicament and found, Mr. Speaker, 

that I had great difficulty in coming to a slower speed and 

potentially stopping. Plus there were vehicles behind me. So I 

knew I wasn’t going to be able to provide assistance because I’d 

be too far down the highway, in terms of being able to see that 

the individual was okay, because one never knows whether the 

individual had simply fallen asleep — and I’m sure that that 

would have been enough to alarm the individual to being in 

obviously a very aware state of mind at that point — or whether 

the individual potentially had a stroke or whatever. 

 

And so I was very glad that I was able to access the 911 system 

and just notify the individual on the other end of the phone of 

my location, of what I had witnessed, and that hopefully 

somebody could potentially check up on the individual if they 

drove by and found that the individual was still in their vehicle 

in the ditch, and ensure that there wasn’t something of a more 

serious nature that had occurred for that individual to travel off 

the highway. 

 

Now as I said before, Mr. Speaker, the 911 system is going to 

be moving from the purview of SaskTel, the Crown of SaskTel, 

to Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. And I understand 

that this, you know, may be done potentially to strengthen the 

system. I’m not really clear on that as I said. So I’m hoping that 

that is the purpose for the move, Mr. Speaker, and would 

appreciate, as I said, to get some more clarification on this 

particular Bill. 

 

Now the system as it existed, was certainly something that at 

the time, my understanding is, was state of the art. But 

obviously as technologies change and as our needs change and 

as population growth or decline changes, obviously, there are 

changes that need to be made to the system. And especially 

we’re talking about, Mr. Speaker, areas of the province that are 

a little more isolated than other areas for instance. We want to 

ensure that these individuals and these citizens in those areas of 

the province have the same access to the emergency systems 

that we are able to enjoy, that anyone in the larger centres does 

for instance. 

 

So in having this system move from SaskTel to Corrections, 

Public Safety and Policing, I certainly hope that that is the 

intention and that ends up being the outcome, that the system 

ends up being strengthened because obviously that would be 

something that everybody would be very happy to be able to 

take advantage of. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the system that we currently have in place, as I 

said, has served us very well for the many years that we’ve 

enjoyed it. And the comfort level that people have had in terms 

of knowing that that is available for them to rely on is 

something that we can be very proud of as a province, given 

that we have a vast area in terms of the amount of land space 

that we have and given the lack of population in some of those 

areas, and certainly wanting to make sure that everyone has 

access to the system. 

 

But my understanding is that we’re replacing the FleetNet 

system. And the FleetNet system was something that was used 

for many years. And my understanding from talking to various 

service providers within the emergency services that we have in 

this province, they were very happy with the system as it stood. 

It was a system that was cost effective for them is what I’m 

told, and I’m certainly hoping that by replacing that system, that 

we don’t remove the cost-effective aspect of the new service. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if the new service is going to be of a more 

costly nature, then I would say that we’d have to be very 

cognizant of the fact that there are very limited resources that a 

lot of our municipalities and especially our remote ones, etc., 

that have the ability to pay for those services. So I’m certainly 

hopeful that the government is mindful of the fact there may 

need to be some attention given to the fact that people may not 

be able to afford an increased cost for the upgrade in this 

system. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the emergency 911 system is going to 

incorporate some other emergency systems, is what I’m 

understanding as well. So I’m looking forward to finding out 

some more of the details of this system in terms of what the Bill 

is trying to accomplish. 

 

Now clearly once this Bill goes to committee, there can be 

some questions answered from the members of the opposition 

with respect to some more of the details within the Bill. So 

we’re very fortunate that we have the committee structure to be 

able to use, to be able to answer the questions that we have on 

this particular Bill. 



November 24, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3783 

Now the Bill itself is fairly short and so therefore there aren’t a 

lot of details attached to it. But we’re wanting to make sure that 

all the concerns that we have and the things that we would like 

to see this Bill address with respect to the creation of this new 

system, that they are contained in the Bill itself because as I 

said, there isn’t much detail to the Bill. 

 

So contrary to what happened last night in supplementary 

estimates for instance, we’re hoping that we can actually get the 

answers to the questions that we have on this Bill versus 

sidestepping the issues and asking for intervention from the 

Chair of the committee to be able to sidestep answering the 

questions that we have. I’m certainly hoping that won’t be a 

repeat when we see this Bill go to committee, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I’m understanding that one of my colleagues would like to 

speak to this Bill as well this afternoon, so I’m going to take my 

place and allow one of my colleagues, the newly elected 

member for Saskatoon Riversdale, to make a few remarks as 

well. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to rise 

to enter the debate and discuss the Act to amend the emergency 

911 Act. Saskatchewan people being able to access emergency 

services when we need them, and wherever we may be, is 

critical. I think the opposition supports in principle this Bill, but 

you always have to make sure when you’re making changes to 

any legislation or no matter what you’re doing, that you get it 

right, that you talk to all the people on the ground for whom this 

will have a big impact. 

 

The 911 system, myself, I actually have had to call 911 in my 

own life on a couple of occasions. One time . . . It wasn’t here 

in Saskatchewan. It was in California and I was hiking and 

attacked, and someone had called 911 on my behalf. And so I 

know the need to use a 911 system and have the services there 

when something happens to you is absolutely critical. 

 

I’ve also had the occasion to use it here in Saskatoon and the 

police responded very quickly. But it’s very important that 

when you call 911 that the services that you need, whether it’s 

fire, emergency medical services, or police, are able to respond. 

 

So I understand that this Bill is moving the responsibility for the 

911 system from SaskTel, the FleetNet system, under 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. And I understand this 

is supposed to strengthen the services. I hope that that’s the 

case. 

 

The opposition will . . . We are inclined to support the Bill but 

we are still consulting with emergency services providers and 

communities. We want to make sure that other jurisdictions 

who are using the system, what their experiences are all about. 

 

So the bottom line is here in Saskatchewan, no matter where 

you are, whether you’re in Assiniboia or La Loche, emergency 

services and being able to have quick access to them is critical. 

So I hope that in fact this Act will strengthen the 911 system, 

but we will be continuing to consult with people and for that 

reason we will support it in principle. But the jury’s still out. So 

with that, I’d like to now move this Bill to committee. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is Bill No. 

99 brought forward by the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing, The Emergency 911 

System Amendment Act, that it be now read a second time. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. 

 

Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of government, 

I would like to designate that Bill No. 99, The Emergency 911 

System Amendment Act, 2009, be directed to the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

The Speaker: — The Deputy Premier has moved that Bill No. 

99 be designated to the Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

Committee. 

 

Bill No. 116 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Draude that Bill No. 116 — The 

Traffic Safety (Drivers’ Licences and Hand-held Electronic 

Communications Equipment) Amendment Act, 2009 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 

this afternoon, after a number of good discussions we’ve had 

here on the floor of the legislature, it’s a pleasure to join in on 

the discussion on Bill No. 116, legislation to do with traffic 

safety, Mr. Speaker. The Traffic Safety (Drivers’ Licences and 

Hand-held Electronic Communications Equipment) Amendment 

Act, 2009 — bit of a mouthful but an interesting piece of 

legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:30] 

 

We’ve seen in Saskatchewan how prevalent and how 

commonly used cellphones are with all people here in the 

province. And this is something, Mr. Speaker, that has really 

come to the province over a period of time, and the popularity 

and the use of cellphones and hand-held devices has certainly 

increased. 

 

Now this wasn’t always the case here in Saskatchewan. I 

remember when I was a boy and my parents brought home the 

first cellphone that they had, and it was a rather large, clunky 

item. And perhaps some of the members here remember 



3784 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2009 

carrying a briefcase just to hold their cellphone because they 

were so large at that time. And probably when those cellphones, 

those large cellphones were used at that time, I can imagine the 

difficulty that it would be to be driving an automobile with such 

a large, clunky phone. 

 

But cellphones have changed over time. The size has decreased. 

The affordability of them has improved as well, and now we’re 

at a state, Mr. Speaker, where many people here in the province 

use cellphones. And they use cellphones because it makes life 

easier for them. If we look in a global perspective, if you look at 

the use of cellphones, Saskatchewan people and actually 

Canadians in general studies show have been a bit slower 

coming on to the high use of cellphones. 

 

But if we look in Europe, we look in Asia, other parts of the 

world, we see a very high use of cellphones, and that’s for a 

variety of reasons. Sometimes the infrastructure, Mr. Speaker, 

the land line infrastructure in many of these countries was 

absent because it was a developing country or it was a poor 

country or it didn’t have a tradition of strong Crown 

corporations like we do here in Saskatchewan where quality 

infrastructure is able to be built up over a period of time. So in 

certain countries, the use of cellphones skip that stage of land 

line infrastructure and just went straight to cellphones. 

 

I remember during university I was doing a term abroad in 

Guatemala. And I remember seeing an indigenous woman and 

her daughter — not a wealthy person, a vendor in a market — 

had a Nokia phone that she pulled out and was sending text 

messages. And it seemed in many ways incongruent with the 

level of affluence the person had. But when you think about the 

absence of infrastructure in that country, it really was the most 

affordable option for the person, and it made life easier. 

 

And I say that, Mr. Speaker, because it’s the same principle that 

we see here in Saskatchewan where the use of cellphones makes 

life easier. It makes business flow more smoothly. It makes 

communication with our loved ones more frequent. I know 

probably all members here, when we’re away from our home 

constituencies, we’re BlackBerry messaging or doing other 

communications with our people back in our constituency — 

whether that’s a constituent, whether that’s our CA, and most 

importantly whether that’s our loved ones, our significant other, 

back home. It’s an easy way to stay in contact. It’s an easy way 

to always get a hold of someone. 

 

And we have a real dependency. There’s almost an addiction, 

Mr. Speaker, with communication, with the use of cellphones. 

And it’s an addiction, Mr. Speaker, because they’re so 

convenient. They’re so easy to use. They’re so instant. And we 

have that connection with a loved one. We have that 

information about a business deal. We have that information 

about the goings-on that occur here in the Assembly. 

 

More than once I’ve been sitting in the committee room in the 

basement, Mr. Speaker, and a colleague has been watching the 

proceedings at home, thinks of a good question to ask the 

minister. And in seconds that question is at your fingertips, and 

you can put that question to the minister. So there are many 

ways that this type of communication improves our life, 

improves our ability to get things done, and is a positive thing. 

So I make those comments about how much we like cellphones, 

how much we like communication tools because, as I said, they 

can be addictive, Mr. Speaker, and people can use these tools 

perhaps at times when it’s not exactly wise to do so. 

 

Now there’s various times when it’s not wise to use cellphones. 

I know if I take my cellphone and put it on my nightstand 

beside the bed, my wife does not appreciate when the cellphone 

buzzes at 3 in the morning when someone sends me an email. 

So I’ve learned to not use a cellphone in that instance. 

 

We see with vehicles, Mr. Speaker, though it might be 

convenient, though it might be tempting, though we may really 

want to use that cellphone, there are times perhaps where it’s 

not appropriate to use that cellphone. And that’s when . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . One of my colleagues says you 

shouldn’t use a cellphone in the shower and I agree. That would 

be another instance, another occasion when you should leave 

the cellphone on the shelf, in the desk, in the pocket, and 

shower in peace, I suppose. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when we’re looking at the use of phones, there 

are instances when it’s not appropriate to use the cellphone. 

And I think that’s, Mr. Speaker, according to my understanding 

of this legislation, based on the comments of earlier members 

and reading the legislation and reading some of the media 

around it, that’s where the motivation for this legislation takes 

place — the government taking the position that it’s not 

appropriate for drivers to be using a hand-held communication 

device at the same time as driving. And the idea, the thinking 

being that individuals should focus on the road, focus on safety, 

and that’s the safest approach. 

 

And this is an approach, Mr. Speaker, that has been adopted in 

other jurisdictions around the country, around the world. I know 

my brother-in-law from Northern Ireland when I was over there 

visiting family wouldn’t go anywhere near his cellphone when 

he was driving. If it buzzed, if the ringer went off, my sister 

would immediately pick up the phone and do the 

communication because of the fines and the restrictions in place 

in the United Kingdom about the use of cellphones. 

 

So this legislation that we see here is coming out of a similar 

thought, that it’s a safer and a proper way to conduct business. 

And so this legislation would bring in rules, as I understand it, 

Mr. Speaker, that would control the use of cellphones. It would 

require individuals to use a wireless earpiece or have a 

Bluetooth system within their vehicle. And I’ll go on record, I’ll 

let members know, that the other week I was given a Bluetooth 

earpiece and I was using it the other week, driving home to 

Saskatoon. Actually I think I remember talking to a colleague as 

I was using it. It was a bit tinny, Mr. Speaker, but it was still 

very good technology, and it made the communication work 

just fine and I was focusing on the road. 

 

So in general, in principle, Mr. Speaker, I do see the merit of 

this type of legislation. But of course when you’re looking at 

this type of legislation and the type of changes that occur, it’s 

important, Mr. Speaker, that we hear from all the people that are 

included. 

 

And it’s my understanding that, in general, police officers are in 

favour of this type of legislation because they think it will 

improve safety. And I imagine police officers have this opinion 



November 24, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3785 

because they spend time of course on the streets in our cities 

and they’ve been to accident scenes where perhaps a cellphone 

has been involved, has been one factor contributing to the 

outcome of the accident. So I could see why they would be 

moving this type of legislation. 

 

And there’s been some polling and some opinion about this 

issue with the public. And that varies. There’s been the informal 

anecdotal type of surveys and information that’s received 

through a common section on a website. 

 

For example, when CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] 

has a story up, individuals will put in comments. And it’s 

interesting because some of the comments are strongly in 

favour saying, there’s no way you can impose this kind of 

restriction. It’s the state interfering with my personal life, and 

I’ve been using a cellphone just fine for a long time and have no 

problems. And other people say, no, this is appropriate. It’s like 

a seatbelt law; it’s a safer thing to do. It’s an appropriate thing 

to do. It’s a smart thing to do. 

 

So there’s a variety of opinion. And it’ll be interesting to see 

with Saskatchewan people where everyone falls on this issue 

because it likely does vary because we live in a diverse 

province. The people have many different views. 

 

There’ll be some questions that we’ll have on this Bill in terms 

of implementation and when police officers will be ready to 

enforce this law, Mr. Speaker. And so I know I’m not the first 

member in the Assembly to talk about this piece of legislation. I 

know many members in the Assembly have addressed and have 

touched on some of the similar ideas that have been discussed 

by myself. 

 

But I think with that, Mr. Speaker, I will conclude my remarks 

by saying that in principle we’re in favour of this, but we 

certainly do have certain questions around it and look forward 

to the opportunity to learn more. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I 

will conclude my remarks, and this piece of legislation will be 

sent to committee. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion before the committee is the 

motion by the Minister Responsible for Crown Investments that 

Bill No. 116, The Traffic Safety (Drivers’ Licences and 

Hand-held Electronic Communications Equipment) Amendment 

Act, 2009 be now read the second time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

on behalf of government, I wish to designate that Bill No. 116, 

The Traffic Safety (Drivers’ Licences and Hand-held Electronic 

Communications Equipment) Amendment Act, 2009 be directed 

to the Crown and Central Agencies Committee. 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Crown and 

Central Agencies Committee. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 

have the committees have the time to do the important work of 

looking at these two Bills and to do supplementary estimates 

this evening, I move that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has moved that in order to 

accommodate the working of committee, this House do now 

stand adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. This Assembly stands adjourned until 

tomorrow afternoon at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 15:42.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3765 

  Lingenfelter ................................................................................................................................................................... 3765, 3766 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3765 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3766 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3766 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3766 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3766 

  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3778 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3766 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3766 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3766 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3767 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3767 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3767 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3767 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Recognizing Lorne Scott 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3767 

 The Grinches and the Whos 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3768 

 Children’s Discovery Museum 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3768 

 The Seat Belt Challenge 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3768 

 University of Regina’s Alumni Crowning Achievement Awards 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3769 

 Policy Renewal 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3769 

 Consecration of Chaldean Catholic Parish in Saskatoon 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3769 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Management of Provincial Economy 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3769 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3770 

 Consideration of Supplementary Estimates 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3771 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3771 

 Efficiency Secretariat 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3772 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3772 

 Employment and Training Issues 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3773 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3773 

POINT OF ORDER 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3774 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3774 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 119 — The Ticket Sales Act 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3774 

 Bill No. 120 — The Financial Administration Amendment Act, 2009 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3774 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3775 

MOTION UNDER RULE 59 

 Separate and Distinct Sitting of the Legislative Assembly 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3775 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3775 

 



 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 117 — The Hunting, Fishing and Trapping Heritage Act 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3775 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3776 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 99 — The Emergency 911 System Amendment Act, 2009 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3779 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3781 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3783 

  Krawetz (referral to committee) ............................................................................................................................................ 3783 

 Bill No. 116 — The Traffic Safety (Drivers’ Licences and Hand-held Electronic Communications Equipment) 

 Amendment Act, 2009 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3783 

  Krawetz (referral to committee) ............................................................................................................................................ 3785 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium Development 

Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

 Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

Government House Leader 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. James Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Capital Commission 




