




















































Hansard: November 15, 2010


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 10A  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 15, 2010, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5993 

 November 15, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce through you and to you 

to all members of the legislature today Mrs. Barbara Steuart and 

her friend, Miss Sandra Dunn, in your gallery. Mrs. Steuart 

comes from Tisdale and is a daughter-in-law to the late Mr. 

David Steuart, former member of the Saskatchewan Legislative 

Assembly for the constituency of Prince Albert-Duck Lake. 

 

On behalf of this Assembly, I want to extend my sympathies to 

you and your family on your loss and to express my gratitude 

for Mr. Steuart’s contribution to his constituency and to the 

province. I invite all members to join me in welcoming Mrs. 

Steuart and Miss Dunn to the Legislative Assembly today as we 

recognize Mr. David Steuart for his commitment to making this 

province a better place to live and to work for all. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 

to you and through to all members of the Assembly an 

individual seated in your gallery. I speak of Mr. Ray Van 

Dusen. If you’d please rise, Ray. Ray was a 26-year member of 

the Regina Police Service. I got to know Ray through his work 

as the community liaison officer with Regina’s North Central 

community. 

 

Ray has done a tremendous amount of work in through the 

inner city and is a real friend of neighbourhoods like North 

Central and Core, and is very fondly thought of there. He did a 

tremendous amount of work around housing, around 

community development through projects like the bylaw 

standards enforcement team, through the youth employment 

program; for those efforts, in part, won the Saskatchewan 

Centennial commemorative award medal. 

 

And another work that Ray was heavily involved in, Mr. 

Speaker, was the work around crime prevention through 

environmental design. And this past October in Calgary at an 

international conference, the international association for that 

approach to police work awarded Ray with a very prestigious 

plaque, a medal for that great work that he’s done in that regard. 

So it beat out 19 other countries to do that, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

quite an accomplishment. 

 

But it reflects on the work that Ray did through the inner city, 

and the work that he carries on as a member of the Regina 

Housing Authority, and work that he continues to do around 

housing generally and crime prevention through environmental 

design. 

So I wonder if all members could join me in welcoming and 

thanking a real crime fighter and community builder, Ray Van 

Dusen. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today on behalf of concerned citizens of Saskatchewan who are 

concerned over the conditions of our highways and their 

steadily deteriorating state. I’ll read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to commit to providing the 

repairs to Highway 310 the people of Saskatchewan so 

need. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 

Ituna, Saskatchewan. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

petitions on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan who support 

the Saskatchewan Seniors Association that represents 180 

seniors’ centres throughout the province, the vast majority of 

them located in rural Saskatchewan. These centres provide 

much-needed recreation and social activities as well as 

important health clinics and workshops. They have been facing 

skyrocketing costs of utilities, insurance, taxes, etc., and there 

may be as many as a quarter of them close within the next 18 

months. The closure of these centres will lead to the 

deteriorating mental and physical health of seniors, which will 

lead to additional stress on long-term care facilities and 

hospitals. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

We in the prayer that reads as follows respectfully request 

that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan to cause 

the Government of Saskatchewan to provide the 

much-needed funding to assist seniors’ recreation centres 

to remain open and active within their communities. 

 

And this is several dozen petitions, signatures from 

communities of Annaheim, Denzil, Unity, Estevan, Englefeld, 

Saskatoon, Liberty, Imperial, and Colonsay. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of eliminating poverty in 

Saskatchewan. And we know that freedom from poverty is an 

enshrined human right by the United Nations and that all 

citizens are entitled to social and economic security. We know 

Saskatchewan’s income gap between the rich and the poor 

continues to grow, and now one in five children in 



5994 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2010 

Saskatchewan live in deepening poverty. I’d like to read the 

prayer: 

 

We in the prayer that reads as follows respectfully request 

that the Government of Saskatchewan act as quickly as 

possible to develop an effective and sustainable poverty 

elimination strategy for the benefit of all Saskatchewan 

citizens. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 

the communities of Lanigan, Saskatoon, and Regina. Thank you 

so much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 

petition regarding the need for hospice and palliative care here 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that all Saskatchewan people deserve quality 

end-of-life and bereavement care; that hospice and 

palliative care is known to enhance the quality of life for 

those facing advancing illness, death, and bereavement; 

that a publicly funded and administered hospice and 

palliative care system including residential hospices 

would increase end-of-life care options for Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

We in the prayer that reads as follows respectively request 

that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan cause the 

provincial government to enhance and increase publicly 

funded and administered hospice and palliative care 

services, including in-home hospice services and 

residential hospices, in order to ensure that all 

Saskatchewan people have access to high-quality 

end-of-life care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are from 

the city of Regina. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a 

government ministry has directed SaskWater cut off supplies of 

water for domestic use to Furdale customers. The same 

government ministry has directed that customers may no longer 

use non-treatable potable water . . . to treat non-potable water 

using methods approved by SaskHealth. 

 

The Furdale residents, in dealing with good faith with 

SaskWater for over 30 years, have paid large amounts for their 

domestic systems and in-home treatment equipment as well as 

for livestock irrigation lines. And the alternative water supply 

referred to by the government ministry is a private operator 

offering treated, non-pressurized water at great cost with no 

guarantee of quality, quantity, or availability of water. Mr. 

Speaker, the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to withdraw its order to cut off 

non-potable water to the residents of the hamlet of 

Furdale, causing great hardship with no suitable 

alternatives; to exempt the hamlet of Furdale from further 

water service cut-offs by granting a grandfather clause 

under The Environmental Management and Protection 

Act, 2002 and The Water Regulations, 2002; and that this 

government fulfills its promises to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good residents of 

Saskatoon and Clavet. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I stand today to present a 

petition in support of occupational health and safety. Mr. 

Speaker, the true cost of human suffering or loss of human life 

cannot be measured in dollars and cents. Yet the government 

allows fines levied against companies for violations of The 

Occupational Health and Safety Act to be treated as tax 

deductible expenses, and also the government continues to 

allow companies to treat such violations and fines levied for 

them as a cost of doing regular business. Mr. Speaker, the 

petition reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to amend the laws so companies will not 

be allowed to get a tax deduction for fines levied against 

them under The Occupational Health and Safety Act and 

regulations, and to remove the existing cap on fines levied 

against such companies. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petition is signed by people of Major, Prince Albert, and 

Shellbrook. And I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once 

again to present petitions on behalf of concerned residents as it 

relates to our unprecedented mismanagement of our finances by 

the Sask Party. They have huge concerns as it relates to the 

negative fiscal trend line that we are experiencing — the two 

consecutive deficit budgets, the $4.2 billion of debt loading, 

debt growth that we see under the Sask Party. And the prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 



November 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5995 

These petitions today are signed by concerned citizens of 

Saskatoon. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition on the affordability of housing for 

Saskatchewan senior citizens. The prayer goes as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to act as quickly as possible to expand 

affordable housing options for Saskatchewan’s senior 

citizens. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, seniors have signed this petition, as well as 

other supporters. And they have signed this petition from all 

throughout Saskatchewan. I so present. Thank you very much. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Silver Springs. 

 

An Exciting Weekend of Saskatchewan Football 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

Yesterday afternoon, Mr. Speaker, the Rider nation was on full 

display. Rider fans everywhere were cheering their team on to 

victory. The game was a real battle, a heart-stopper at times. 

After two overtime possessions, the Riders snatched victory 

from the mouth of defeat. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at the end of the game the players all had the same 

response when asked, what made the difference? In two words 

— the fans. 

 

The home field crowd was largely responsible for at least three 

procedure calls against BC’s [British Columbia] offence. The 

sea of green at Mosaic raised the spirits of the Riders and 

changed momentum when the Lions were in the lead after the 

first half. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to congratulate the Riders on 

their big win. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatoon Hilltops made it a truly great 

weekend for Saskatchewan football fans. The Toppers were 

victorious over the Vancouver Island Raiders in the Canadian 

Bowl, 34 to 23, at PotashCorp Park. Congratulations to Coach 

Tom Sargeant, his assistant coaches, and all team members on 

their 14th Canadian championship. 

 

Thank you to the Hilltops, the Riders, and the fans of both these 

great teams for delivering an exciting weekend of Saskatchewan 

football. The Hilltops ended their season with a championship 

and, with the province behind them, the Riders will hopefully 

end their season at the Grey Cup. 

 

Now let’s turn Calgary’s McMahon Stadium into a home game 

this weekend, Mr. Speaker. Go green. Go Riders. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Rider Pride 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To join with 

the member from Silver Springs, it was an exhilarating game 

that launched our beloved Saskatchewan Roughriders to the 

Western final to battle Calgary next week. 

 

Our team persevered in overtime over the BC Lions at Mosaic 

Stadium on Taylor Field in yesterday’s home playoff game. 

Overtime heroics came from Regina’s hometown boy, Jason 

Clermont, who clinched the game with his TD [touchdown] 

reception. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s fair to say that our Roughriders are a model 

professional sports franchise in North America. They are a 

first-class organization from top to bottom, rich with local 

talent, and have the unprecedented support of our fans 

province-wide, far and wide, across Canada and abroad. The 

support and relationship that our team, the green and white, has 

with our communities and our hearts is unrivalled. It is 

displayed through the wearing of merchandise and with Rider 

pride displayed on main streets, in businesses, on homes, on 

vehicles, and in the discussions that dominate coffee row, our 

radio talk shows, and across the Internet. In fact during 

yesterday’s game, the word Riders was trending as the most 

popular phrase worldwide on Twitter. 

 

I ask all members of this Assembly to join with me to 

congratulate, thank, and wish well our team, the Saskatchewan 

Roughriders, and all of the fans across our fine province. And I 

remind you, Mr. Speaker, green is the colour. Football is the 

game. Let’s go, Riders. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress Hills. 

 

World Diabetes Day 

 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Members of the 

Assembly, November 14th was World Diabetes Day. According 

to the World Health Organization, more than 220 million 

people worldwide are living with diabetes. World Diabetes Day 

is celebrated on November 14th to mark the birthday of 

Frederick Banting who, along with Charles Best, was 

instrumental in the discovery of insulin in 1922, a life-saving 

treatment for diabetes patients. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this disease is a major health concern for many 

people in our province. Diabetes affects people of all ages and 

from all walks of life. This year, while building on the 

accomplishments achieved last year, the organizers of World 

Diabetes Day want the campaign to focus on promoting a 

healthy and an active lifestyle that will help limit the impact of 

the disease and its complications. 

 

In Saskatchewan a provincial advisory committee was 

established in 2001 to provide the Ministry of Health with 

advice on diabetes programs. This advisory body has been 

instrumental in the development of a number of excellent 



5996 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2010 

diabetes educational materials. 

 

Health promotion and disease prevention programs are already 

being promoted in Saskatchewan, but there is still more work to 

be done. New drug therapies are being added periodically, 

based on the advice of the government’s expert drug review 

committees, assisted by the national common drug review 

process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, fellow members, please join me in officially 

recognizing World Diabetes Day. Diabetes awareness benefits 

everyone. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Saskatoon Hilltops Win 14th Canadian Championship 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to congratulate the Saskatoon Hilltops, who proved yet 

again why Saskatchewan is the unquestioned hotbed of amateur 

football in our country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the two best junior football clubs in the country 

battled it out in the national championship game Saturday 

afternoon in front of an estimated crowd of 2,700 at Griffiths 

Stadium in Saskatoon. 

 

The Raiders from Victoria, BC were seeking to become the 

fourth team to join the three-peater club, while the Hilltops 

were looking to lay claim to their 14th Canadian title. 

 

The hometown team would not be denied. Head Coach Tom 

Sargeant, or Sarge, as he’s commonly known, just completed 

his 10th year as the bench boss of the Hilltops, and this is his 

5th national championship in that 10-year span. The Hilltops 

defeated the Vancouver Island Raiders 34-23 in the national 

final. 

 

Congratulations to Hilltop players Donovon Dale, defensive 

player of the game, and Ian Miller, offensive player of the 

game. 

 

Having experienced great success in the past, it is a credit to the 

entire Hilltop organization and is nothing short of a complete 

team effort. Having assembled another excellent coaching staff, 

it is an incredible accomplishment for Sarge, taking this 

talented football team and helping them reach their full 

potential. 

 

I’d be remiss, Mr. Speaker, if I didn’t also congratulate Tom’s 

wife, Kris, who is a passionate fan of the Hilltops and is a major 

contributor to the success of the team. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join me in 

congratulating the 2010 CJFL [Canadian Junior Football 

League] champions, Saskatoon Hilltops, a proud and successful 

community organization. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 

 

Hunting, Fishing and Trapping Heritage Day 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today has 

been proclaimed Hunting, Fishing and Trapping Heritage Day 

in Saskatchewan. This day affords us the opportunity to reflect 

on our province’s pioneers and reflect on the challenges that our 

forefathers faced. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s an honour for me to also be able to pay tribute 

to the people that are still making their living hunting, fishing, 

and trapping, especially our First Nations and Métis citizens. 

The hard work and dedication to a trade that takes decades to 

master shows true Saskatchewan grit. 

 

For generations, Saskatchewan residents have pursued these 

activities for food, for recreation, for commercial and cultural 

purposes. A diverse array of natural wildlife is amongst the 

wonderful natural resources in our province. Our province’s 

bountiful hunting opportunities make us the envy of those who 

are passionate about outdoor recreation. We have white-tailed 

deer, our provincial animal; mule deer, antelope, elk, moose, 

caribou, and bear; birds, such as grouse, partridge, ducks, geese, 

and even snipes. 

 

Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has some of the best 

fishing in the world. The productive lakes to the South and the 

deep, cold waters of the North have a variety of fish species that 

provide us with many recreational and economic opportunities. 

 

We also need to recognize those that support and protect our 

wildlife: the conservation officers, the trappers’ associations, 

the Wildlife Federation, and Ducks Unlimited. I would like to 

ask all members of this Assembly to join me in recognizing 

Hunting, Fishing and Trapping Heritage Day in Saskatchewan. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

50th Anniversary of Yevshan Ensemble 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, this past Saturday evening I, 

along with the member from Saskatoon Southeast, attended a 

banquet and dance at TCU Place to celebrate the Yevshan 

Ukrainian Folk Ballet Ensemble’s 50th anniversary. 

 

They honoured their founder, Nadia Pavlychenko, and we heard 

from her sister, Lucia Pavlychenko-Sotnikow, who for a time 

was their artistic director. Myron Kowalsky, former Speaker of 

this House, spoke of the early days as he was one of the original 

dancers of Yevshan. 

 

Today, Yevshan is under the guidance of Artistic Director 

Vitali Sorokotiaguine, and they have reached new heights of 

excellence in entertainment for not only audiences in 

Saskatoon, but Canada and abroad. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as part of the celebrations, the night previous 

Yevshan performed a concert accompanied by a live orchestra, 

the Zaporizhia Kozak Song and Dance Ensemble orchestra from 

the Ukraine. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the name Yevshan comes from a herb which 



November 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5997 

grows in the steppes of Ukraine, and many mythical powers are 

attributed to the herb. To Ukrainians, Yevshan is the scent of 

home. Ukrainian dance allows Ukrainians to take pride in their 

heritage, a heritage so inexplicably bound with dance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to recognize those many unsung heroes, 

board members, parents, and volunteers committed to Yevshan 

and Ukrainian dance. And I ask all members here to join me in 

wishing the best for this amazing organization, its dancers past, 

present, and future. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Carrot River Wildcats Win Championship 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

yesterday was a great day for Rider fans and players, and the 

quest continues for the Grey Cup. I have to admit, I was just a 

touch nervous at halftime, Mr. Speaker, but Saskatchewan has 

been known to stare adversity down before; example, 2007. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Riders were not the only football team playing 

on the weekend. Our own Carrot River Wildcats were on the 

field Saturday afternoon against the Plenty Wildcats, in the 

provincial 6-Man 1A championship. And, Mr. Speaker, the 

reason I am standing here speaking and the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose is not, is self-explanatory. His team lost. Mr. 

Speaker, it was well played by both teams, with the final score 

being 44-20 for Carrot River, proving once again that the 

people in northeast Saskatchewan — namely Carrot River 

Valley — have a will to win. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my little boy Morgan was on the team the first 

time the Cats won provincials in 2000. I congratulate the Carrot 

River Wildcat team on their fourth provincial championship in 

10 years. Mr. Speaker, I would be remiss if I didn’t congratulate 

head coach Corey Schmaltz, assistants Braidie Koshman, Mike 

Kochan, and Cameron Doerksen, who deserve a tremendous 

amount of credit for their untold hours of work and dedication. 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, it was a good weekend. Thank you. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Arrangements Regarding Long-Term Care Facilities 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, if the details of the Amicus deal is a matter between 

Amicus and the Saskatoon Health Region, and the government 

had no role — as the government claimed last week — why did 

the Sask Party government claim a third party interest in my 

FOI [freedom of information] request and censor most of the 

relevant information? The real question is, what is the Sask 

Party hiding? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, it certainly is a privilege 

to answer the question. The deal, the FOI that was put out, was 

put out by the Saskatoon Health Region. It was their decision to 

black out whatever material they chose to black out, along with 

the . . . also the agreement of Amicus themselves, Mr. Speaker. 

But I think it’s important that we look at this facility in context 

of what was done under NDP [New Democratic Party] 

governments’ watch. 

 

Mr. Speaker, under the NDP government for 16 years, not a 

new long-term care bed was ever opened in this province, Mr. 

Speaker, something that we won’t do. They replaced long-term 

care beds by building new ones for existing facilities, Mr. 

Speaker, but they didn’t put a new long-term care bed. In fact, 

Mr. Speaker, what they did do was close 136 long-term care 

beds in this province in the last five years of their watch. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, they’ve closed 88 this year 

alone. So, Mr. Speaker, either you’re an interested third party or 

you’re not. And it’s clear the provincial government’s 

fingerprints are all over this project and have been since the 

very beginning. When you look through the mostly redacted 

material, you see that as far back as October 19th, 2009, there 

was correspondence to the Minister of Health about this deal. 

And that’s just the little bit that we can see. 

 

So to the minister: if the Sask Party did not play a major role in 

this insider deal, why are they going out of their way to censor 

the truth, and what are they hiding? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, what we are not hiding 

is the fact that people are living right now in acute care settings, 

which is completely inappropriate. We are going to make sure 

that they have facilities in Saskatoon, around the province, so 

that they can age at the end of their life in proper facilities, Mr. 

Speaker, such as Amicus is offering in Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re going to allow seniors to age with their 

partners, Mr. Speaker, something that was never done under 

that government. This will be a state of the art facility that will 

service the seniors of Saskatchewan very, very well, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s a far cry from what was done under the NDP 

government, when all they did was close hospitals, close 

long-term care facilities, Mr. Speaker — absolutely 

inappropriate. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I didn’t ask the minister, what 

aren’t you hiding? I asked the minister, what are you hiding? 

 

And even the censored material released in response to my FOI 

request calls into question the government’s claim that there is 

no loan guarantee. An email dated May 12th between the 

Saskatoon Health Region officials contains an attachment 

entitled, ―Saskatoon Regional Health Authority loan 

guarantee.‖ This is followed by several pages whose contents 

were completely censored except for KPMG’s letterhead. Yet 

the government says there’s no loan guarantee. 

 



5998 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2010 

So to the minister: if this is not a loan guarantee, why has it 

been censored? What is that government hiding? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the Amicus . . . The 

agreement, Mr. Speaker, with the Catholic Health Ministry . . . 

The Catholic Health Ministry has offered . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I’d ask the member to allow the 

Minister of Health to respond to the question from the member 

from Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the Catholic Health 

Ministry has offered health care and provided health care in this 

province for many, many years, Mr. Speaker — decades — 

throughout this province, Mr. Speaker, in urban and in rural. 

They’ve offered very good service and they provided a great 

service to this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This is just an extension of the service that they have provided 

in past years, into the future, Mr. Speaker, so that seniors in 

Saskatoon no longer have to live in acute care setting which is 

completely inappropriate. They are living, they will be able to 

live in a facility that is state of the art, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, again, under the NDP government, what they did do 

was close long-term care beds — in the last five years, 136. 

We’re the ones that are having to reopen them in a new facility 

such as Amicus. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — You know, Mr. Speaker, this government 

continues to hide behind the Catholic Church and the Catholic 

Health Ministry, and we’re not going to let them get away with 

it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they threw $159 million out the door, out to 

various health regions for long-term care facilities, and they 

clawed that money back by telling them, take that money and 

use it for your debt. Now they have a new scheme in town. And 

what they’re doing is they’re putting that debt onto health 

regions who have to guarantee these notes. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the question is this: when this is all said and 

done, how much debt is going to be added to this province’s 

long-term debt because of these types of insider deals? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I find it absolutely 

astonishing that that member would stand and accuse the 

government of hiding behind the Catholic Health Ministry, Mr. 

Speaker, when the Catholic Health Ministry has offered health 

care services in this province for decades — in fact, decades 

when they were in power, Mr. Speaker. What was it then? 

 

Mr. Speaker, Amicus is doing a very good service through the 

Catholic Health Ministry for citizens of the Saskatoon area, Mr. 

Speaker. Those seniors will benefit from those services 

absolutely, Mr. Speaker. And as I said, under the NDP, I guess 

they would never enter into an agreement because they’d rather 

have seniors living in acute care settings, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

[14:00] 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The member from Regina 

Walsh Acres will have ample opportunity to participate in 

question period. The Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, they would far rather, 

instead of constructing new facilities or entering into new 

agreements, whether it’s the Catholic Health Ministry, whether 

it may be the Lutherans in the future, any third party 

not-for-profit, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Speaker, these are good 

agreements. This will be a great agreement for citizens in 

Saskatoon as we move them out of acute care settings into 

long-term care settings. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Supply of Physicians 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In 2007 there were 87 

physician vacancies in Saskatchewan. Today there are 123 

vacancies. That’s an increase of 41 per cent. Mr. Speaker, the 

Sask Party promised to fix the doctor shortage and they have 

failed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: will he admit it’s another broken 

promise, and he and the Sask Party are failing the people of 

Saskatchewan, especially in rural areas? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I’m absolutely amazed 

at that question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the number of 

physicians working today in Saskatchewan are far greater than 

what were working in 2007. 

 

That being said, Mr. Speaker, there’s more work to do. We have 

set aggressive goals in the past, Mr. Speaker. I know that party 

is foreign to setting targets and then trying to meet them. In fact 

I think it was the member from North Battleford said, there’s no 

use setting a target because we probably just won’t meet it. Mr. 

Speaker, not under this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve set an aggressive target for nurses. We’ve 

surpassed it in three years. Now we’ve turned our attention to 

physicians. We’ve got a physician recruitment strategy in place 

that will be addressing this in the future, Mr. Speaker. We’ve 

increased the number of medical seats. We’ve increased the 

number of residencies. We’re looking at a new assessment 

process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re going a long ways to addressing the 

physician shortage problem here in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 



November 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5999 

Support for Resident Physicians 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister’s going 

to be amazed again. The resident physicians are upset by the 

lack of respect they’ve received from the Sask Party. Residents 

are telling me, and I quote: 

 

I am deeply upset by the fact that for the entire 20 months 

that I’ve been working in the province as a resident, the 

Professional Association of Internes and Residents of 

Saskatchewan, PAIRS, has been without a contract. By 

refusing to recognize the importance of residents within 

the health care system, you, the Minister of Health, have 

alienated 300 potential practising physicians in the 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: how does refusing to negotiate a 

fair and competitive agreement with these 300 resident 

physicians give them any incentive to stay in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, under our government 

when we took power in 2007, there were 60 medical seats, far 

short of what needed to be. There were 60 residency positions, 

far short of what we needed to be. Under our government, 

we’ve increased the number of medical seats. We’ve increased 

the number of residency positions. By the end of 2011, there’ll 

be 100 medical seats and 120 resident seats. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we absolutely respect and admire the work that 

the residents do in the system. We know there are negotiations 

being conducted between government and PAIRS. Some of 

those negotiations take time. But what I will say is that the 

residents of this province have never seen the respect for 

themselves that they see under our government. They never saw 

it under that former government, Mr. Speaker, because I’ve 

talked to many of them. They’re ashamed of the NDP. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan residents are feeling 

unappreciated and unwanted, and they tell me, ―The only thing 

holding up negotiations is that the Ministry of Health has not 

provided a counter monetary offer.‖ 

 

Residents staff many of our hospitals 24-7. They’re often the 

first line of health care when a person goes to the hospital. 

Ontario, Alberta, and the Maritimes have all negotiated resident 

contracts on time and on schedule for decades, and those are the 

people we’re competing with. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: will the minister commit today to 

negotiating a fair and competitive contract with Saskatchewan’s 

300 resident physicians, or can he not afford to because of the 

Sask Party’s fiscal mismanagement? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, part of the physician 

recruitment strategy is to have ambassadors embedded within 

the College of Medicine and the residents, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, they are residents that bring information to us directly. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, when the federal government backed away 

from a loan guarantee from covering the interest of loans, Mr. 

Speaker, for residents in Saskatchewan, our government 

stepped forward, put $450,000 to ensure the interest would be 

covered on their student loans, Mr. Speaker — something done 

in Saskatchewan that isn’t done anywhere else in Canada, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the residents provide a great service. We’ve 

increased the number of positions in the province. We expect 

them to — because they take their residency position here — to 

work here, Mr. Speaker. I realize negotiations are in process. It 

takes a long time for those negotiations to have time to come to 

an agreement, Mr. Speaker. But I am quite confident that it will 

be a very positive agreement that will keep those residents here 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

State of the Provincial Economy 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, just like the Minister of 

Health, this Premier has made a habit of making claims about 

our economy that are simply not supported by the facts. This 

Premier pretended that our economy began to boom the very 

moment he took office. 

 

But with the latest information from Statistics Canada, we know 

now that there was absolutely no economic boom in terms of 

real GDP [gross domestic product] in 2008. The growth 

experienced in our nominal GDP was purely price related. That 

means there wasn’t a whole lot more economic activity. 

Everything was just simply a lot more expensive. 

 

So my question is this: why does this Premier keep pretending 

that he presided over an economic boom when the truth is that 

growth in our GDP in 2008 was simply caused by inflation? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Trade. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well let’s look at the facts, Mr. 

Speaker. The facts are, the facts are that the population of 

Saskatchewan is the highest that it has ever been, 1.045 million 

people. The province grew, Mr. Speaker, by 16,500 people in 

the last year, making Saskatchewan the fastest growing 

province of any in the country, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Just last month, another employment record with 5,200 people 

more working in Saskatchewan than a year ago, the second 

lowest . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I’d ask the members to allow 

the minister to respond to the question from the opposition. I 

recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — The second lowest unemployment rate 

in Canada, Mr. Speaker, at 5.1 per cent. There are more than 



6000 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2010 

6,500 jobs today posted on saskjobs.ca. Private and public 

capital investment’s projected at 2010 to a record $15 billion, 

Mr. Speaker — double 2004 which was $7.5 billion — much of 

which, Mr. Speaker, is in the potash industry because of the 

work of this government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, if one were to move 

beyond the Sask Party spin and actually look at some of the 

facts, they’d look . . . that unemployed individuals are up by 

10,000 people province-wide from when they took office, social 

assistance are through the roof, EI [employment insurance] 

recipients are way up, our trade balance is going in the wrong 

direction, we have two consecutive deficit budgets, and debt is 

massively on the rise. Those are some facts for that minister, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s no surprise that this Premier can’t manage our provincial 

finances and is racking up $4.2 billion of debt by 2014. He’s 

out of touch with reality. Last year under this Premier’s 

leadership, Saskatchewan experienced the third worst decline in 

real GDP in all of Canada. Only two provinces experienced 

sharper economic declines than we did. The reality, the facts, 

and the numbers do not support what this Premier’s been selling 

or pretending. Why is this Premier so intent on not sharing the 

facts of our economy with Saskatchewan people? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Trade. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well, Mr. Speaker, all we hear again 

and again from the NDP is negativity. We hear talking down of 

the economy from that member, from the Leader of the 

Opposition particularly. Mr. Speaker, let me read you a quote 

from The StarPhoenix over the weekend, a column by Les 

MacPherson. And I’m going to quote, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Why Lingenfelter’s stock is so low is no great mystery. 

At a time of unprecedented provincial optimism, he is 

campaigning as old Mr. Crankypants, the neighbourhood 

curmudgeon. He’s mean, he’s grumpy and he is doing for 

the NDP what a bedbug infestation does for hotel 

occupancy. 

 

That’s the record of the NDP. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — I’d hate, Mr. Speaker, for the truth to get 

in the way of that minister or that Premier, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, whether it’s the raw data straight from Statistics 

Canada or it’s the analysis contained in the Sask Trends 

Monitor, the truth about our economic performance — and it’s 

not hard to find and it’s not flattering of this Premier’s record 

— Sask Trends is telling us that there was no boom in terms of 

real GDP in 2008. It’s also revealed that we’ve had the lowest 

growth rate of all Western provinces over the past five years as 

a result of the major contraction under this Premier in 2009. 

 

But when we have a Premier who refuses to acknowledge these 

facts, and we have a Premier who says provincial debt is going 

down when the fact is that he’s adding $4.2 billion of debt by 

2014 . . . When will this Premier start acknowledging the truth 

about Saskatchewan’s economy and about our provincial debt? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Trade. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Again, Mr. Speaker, everybody in the 

province knows that the economy of this province is moving 

forward in a way that it has never had in the history of our 

province. All we hear though from members opposite is 

negativity. We hear doom and gloom from that member 

particularly, from the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Let me read another quote, Mr. Speaker, this one from the 

November 6th Leader-Post. And I’ll quote from Murray 

Mandryk: 

 

Two years of being caught up in petty bickering with his 

enemies, both real and imaginary, and of his tiresome 

dogma has put off voters. His no-holds-barred-attack 

approach and the nastiness he seems to have mentored in 

his younger Opposition MLAs has created a visceral 

negative reaction — especially when contrasted to Wall’s 

very evident likability. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ll read another good one, Mr. Speaker. This one 

from The StarPhoenix, Les MacPherson’s column: 

 

Dwain Lingenfelter’s ambition to be premier is supported, 

according to a recent poll, by less than 17 per cent of 

voters. This compares to 21 per cent of people in the 

province who are smokers, so it’s possible that the NDP 

might be better off with second-hand smoke as their 

leader than with Lingenfelter at 17 per cent. 

 

If I’ve ever seen an indictment of a leader’s leadership, that’s it, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this Premier had been 

elected at a time when Saskatchewan was at all-time highs in 

economic growth, economic development under the former 

NDP and the hard work of Saskatchewan people — something 

all Saskatchewan people were proud of. 

 

That Premier worked incredibly hard convincing Saskatchewan 

people that he would take it to new heights. Unfortunately his 

record has been something else. Saskatchewan business 

commentator, Paul Martin, pointed out in an interview on 

Friday that Saskatchewan has been last place of all Western 

provinces as it relates to growth. It has been dead last of all 

Western provinces, Mr. Speaker. 

 

How does this Premier reconcile his promises and rhetoric with 

his record? Last place in economic growth in Western Canada: 

that’s your record, Mr. Premier. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Trade. 



November 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6001 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure if 

there was a question in that rant, but what I’m going to do, Mr. 

Speaker, is apprise the members of the facts. The facts are that 

the population of this province is the highest that it has ever 

been at in the history of this province, over 1.045 million 

people; that we have the second lowest unemployment rate in 

the entire country right now in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Let’s contrast that with the . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. There’s a handful of members 

that are interfering with the minister’s opportunity to respond. 

I’d ask the members to allow the minister to respond to the 

question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Let’s contrast that positive news and 

that good news for the people of the province with the NDP 

record, Mr. Speaker, which was a record of out-migration, 

massive out-migration of our young people from Saskatchewan 

— who are now coming back under this government — the 

worst unemployment rate in the country, the worst job creation 

record in the entire country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, here in Saskatchewan right now, the people out 

there in the province know that this government is moving 

forward, that this government is getting the job done when that 

government didn’t. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Advertising Campaign 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. If the 

government’s new national advertising campaign is not about 

nothing but politics, then why are the ads running here in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Trade. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, the member needs to do 

her homework before she comes into question period and asks 

questions of that sort. The fact is that this ad campaign has been 

entirely running on networks based outside of the province. It’s 

running nationally. Of course there’s going to be splash back 

into the province, Mr. Speaker, in terms of ads running on 

national networks. I don’t know if the . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. The minister 

responsible. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I’m not sure if the member opposite is 

suggesting that we put a blackout on advertisements running on 

TSN [The Sports Network] during the football game. I think 

that would be somewhat silly, Mr. Speaker. But the fact is that 

this is a very positive ad campaign that’s designed to highlight 

that Saskatchewan is a wonderful place to live, do business, and 

work; that Saskatchewan is a growing province; that we have a 

fantastic climate for business. We have a great story to tell, Mr. 

Speaker, and we’re telling it. We feel that it’s the time that it’s 

necessary. And it’s unfortunate that the NDP don’t agree. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

[14:15] 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s a very simple question 

that the minister is avoiding. If the government is saying this is 

a national advertising campaign . . . And surprise, surprise, they 

started it just in time for a Roughrider football game — just 

happened, I’m sure, Mr. Speaker. But, Mr. Speaker, they could 

have excluded Saskatchewan from the buy. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the question is serious. If he is serious that this 

is a national campaign and not purely politics to bump up the 

Sask Party, why is he not excluding Saskatchewan from the 

buy? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Trade. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member again 

is factually incorrect. The first advertisement actually ran on the 

Hamilton Tiger-Cats and Toronto Argonauts game yesterday. 

I’m not sure if she watched that game. And the second ad 

actually ran on the Riders game. And I suspect, like many of 

her colleagues opposite, they didn’t watch that game either, Mr. 

Speaker. But I can tell them it was a great game with a great 

outcome. 

 

But the fact is that the ad campaign is designed to highlight 

Saskatchewan as a wonderful place to live, to do business, to 

work — something that we here in Saskatchewan all know 

already. We’re advertising that fact and telling that story around 

the country, Mr. Speaker, in contrast to the NDP, when they ran 

their Wide Open Future campaign and spent a very, very 

significant proportion of that advertising campaign right in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

We know, Mr. Speaker, already, as Saskatchewan people, what 

a wonderful place this is to live. But they did five and a half 

million dollars of their $8 million ad campaign in the 13 months 

preceding an election, the vast majority of which was spent 

right here in Saskatchewan. That’s not what we’re doing, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister’s having a bit 

of trouble with facts today, but we’ll ignore that for right now. 

So, Mr. Speaker, when the Premier was in opposition he 

complained bitterly that the then government was spending on 

marketing campaigns. Now in the year leading up to an election 

campaign, he’s spending $1.3 million this year alone on an 

advertising campaign that includes ads shown here in the 

province of Saskatchewan. And that’s nearly twice as much as 

been budgeted for the year after the election now. Wishful 

thinking — he figures he’s going to get elected again. 

 



6002 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2010 

Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier: if this campaign 

isn’t about politics, why is he spending twice as much in the 

year before an election as the year after? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Trade. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well as I indicated, Mr. Speaker, in my 

previous answer, their Wide Open Future campaign on which 

they spent $8 million — a three-year campaign — they spent 

five and a half million dollars of that $8 million in the 13 

months preceding a general election campaign, a significant 

proportion of which was spent right here in Saskatchewan. 

Again that’s something that we absolutely are not doing. In fact, 

Mr. Speaker, we brought in a law such that that sort of 

advertising campaign would be disallowed six months prior to 

the campaign. 

 

Let me read a couple of quotes, Mr. Speaker, about what people 

are saying about this advertising campaign. This is from Steve 

McLellan from the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce: 

 

Saskatchewan has an opportunity-rich economy that’s 

open for business investment. This province continues to 

welcome new business and new residents and we believe 

that the best way to attract more of both is simply to 

extend an invitation. This campaign will do that very 

well. 

 

All we hear from members opposite is negativity, talking down 

the economy. Not surprising from mister cranky pants. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. 

Order. Last week, the last part of question period, I asked 

members to be mindful of the rules and the words that they 

choose to use in the Assembly. And over the years, it’s been a 

long-standing tradition that Speakers and the members 

themselves have designed rules that have asked members to be 

mindful of the respect they show to other members. So I’d ask 

members again to keep that in mind in regards to the comments 

and the most recent comment that was made by the minister. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Trade. 

 

Real Growth, Real Opportunity Campaign 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. Real Growth, Real Opportunity — you’ll be seeing 

and hearing those words over the next three years. Today the 

Premier and I announced a new Government of Saskatchewan 

campaign to encourage investment and to attract professionals 

and skilled tradespeople to our province. Our goal, just as our 

slogan says, reminds people that Saskatchewan is experiencing 

real growth. Population in the province is at historic levels. Job 

numbers are among the best in the nation. We have one of the 

lowest unemployment rates in Canada. Individuals want to live 

and work here; families want to put down roots here; and 

businesses want to invest in our robust economy. 

As for opportunity, we have what the rest of the world wants — 

resource from potash to uranium. Saskatchewan also has 

cutting-edge technology and a thriving manufacturing sector. 

Whether you want to invest or are looking for a place to launch 

your career, you’ll find it right here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Unlike past provincial government campaigns, this is an 

external marketing campaign that will run outside of our 

borders on television, Internet, and print. Saskatchewan people 

know that our province is a great place to be. Our goal will be 

to make sure the rest of Canada knows as well. 

 

On the website www.thinksask.ca, you’ll find a dashboard that 

will show the positive economic growth in real time. 

 

Enterprise Saskatchewan will be funding this campaign. 

Enterprise has budgeted $1.3 million for the first year and 

$700,000 for the second year of the campaign. The budget for 

the third year will be determined upon evaluation of the success 

in years one and two. 

 

The Real Growth, Real Opportunity campaign is modest 

relative to other provincial governments. British Columbia 

recently spent $38 million on a campaign, while Alberta is 

spending $25 million. While modest, we believe our campaign 

will be successful. We have the fundamentals right — lower 

property taxes, lower income taxes, and one of the best business 

climates in Canada. This is not to mention one of the best 

lifestyles to raise a family in the nation. 

 

The campaign will be seen on the Business News Network, The 

Sports Network, and be read in publications such as The Globe 

and Mail and Report on Business. The first flight of ads began 

airing yesterday, Nov. 14, and will run until December the 12th. 

The second flight will run from February 21st to March 28th, 

2011. This campaign will focus on the province’s strong 

business climate. We will show to Canada our record of 

innovation and entrepreneurship. We’ll highlight real stories 

from real people that have had success right here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The campaign is innovative and exciting. It will tell the world 

we are open for business and investment and are becoming a 

destination of choice to live, work, invest, and do business. 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 

want to thank the minister for sending across a copy of his 

statement that he was making today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we listen to what the minister has to say in 

response to a number of the economic questions before the 

questions on this whole advertising campaign, I guess I have to 

question a number of issues. 

 

When the minister is talking about, talking nationally how good 

Saskatchewan is, and it is — we live here; we support the 

province — but there are issues that need to be dealt with. And 

if you’re going to recruit more people to the province, you need 

to make sure that the resources are there to provide the services 



November 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6003 

that those people need. And whether it’s housing, that’s going 

to be a big issue for anyone that is moving to the province, Mr. 

Speaker. You can go to any community right across this 

province, and you will know that there is a lack of affordable 

housing and issues with providing housing in all communities. 

It’s pretty commonplace. 

 

My colleague asked questions today on medical residents and 

problems that they are currently having, not having a signed 

contract for or agreement in place for the service that they 

provide. And this is 300 medical residents who have great 

opportunity here in the province of Saskatchewan, but who will 

not stay. They will look for other opportunities if they don’t 

have a signed agreement and are able to put down roots in this 

province. So, Mr. Speaker, we would urge the Minister of 

Health to really get at this whole agreement and sit down with 

medical residents and make sure that every effort is put in place 

to make sure that they stay here in the province because they’re 

needed. 

 

Also child care, housing, child care, medical services — these 

are all things that people will look at before they move to the 

province of Saskatchewan — and also opportunities. 

Unemployment numbers are up. It may still be low compared to 

or lower than other provinces across Canada, but 

unemployment rates have increased in Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we can also look at some of the other 

comments that the minister has made about this program. And 

there are some that are a little more cynical, that would believe 

that this is nothing purely than a political advertisement and a 

feel-good campaign in the province of Saskatchewan leading up 

to the next provincial election. It’s been done many times. 

We’ve seen the premier of British Columbia do this in BC 

before the last two elections. So we’ll have to see what the 

substance is of the ads that are being run. 

 

Mr. Speaker, none of us have any problem with promoting 

Saskatchewan, but we just want to caution the Premier and the 

government that you need to have the services in place. And, 

Mr. Speaker, $1.3 million. Can you imagine what Tourism 

Saskatchewan could do with $1.3 million to promote the 

province of Saskatchewan across Canada and around the world? 

They have the understanding. They have the knowledge. They 

have the contacts. Mr. Speaker, I’m sure they are more than 

capable of running a campaign of this type. 

 

So I wish the Premier had given a little more thought to this 

before he launched off . . . Well actually, a couple days ago they 

launched a program and started running commercials shown 

here in Saskatchewan, and I would assume across the country. 

But Mr. Speaker, more thought could’ve been given to address 

some of the other issues that are attached to this file. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Any further ministerial statements? I 

recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

before orders of the day, I would request leave of this Assembly 

for condolence motions, Mr. Speaker. And may I, Mr. Speaker, 

indulge members to provide leave for all five motions of 

condolence? Mr. Speaker, there is some that I wish to speak to 

specifically over and above the motion as well but, Mr. 

Speaker, I would request that leave at this time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has requested leave to address all 

of the condolence motions under one motion of leave. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the Premier. 

 

CONDOLENCES 

 

Darrel Verner Heald, Q.C. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

would move by leave of the Assembly: 

 

That the Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly and 

expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 

made to his community, his constituency, and to the 

province. 

 

Darrel Verner Heald, Q.C., who passed away on August 

8th, 2010, was a member of the Legislative Assembly 

from 1964 until 1971 representing the Lumsden 

constituency for the Liberal Party. Mr. Heald served as 

the attorney general, provincial secretary, and as the 

minister for Co-operation and Co-operative Development. 

 

Mr. Heald was born in Regina on August the 27th, 1919. 

He graduated from the University of Saskatchewan in 

1942 with a Bachelor of Arts and a Bachelor of Law. 

Following the completion of his post-secondary 

education, Mr. Heald served in the Royal Canadian Air 

Force during World War II. After the war he began to 

practise law in a firm that became known as Noonan, 

Embury, Heald, Molisky and Gritzfeld. 

 

Mr. Heald was active in the Regina community as a 

Mason, Shriner, and a member of the Kiwanis Club. He 

was a curler and football fan and was on the executive of 

the Saskatchewan Roughriders Club. In 1971, he was 

appointed to the Federal Court of Canada and served as a 

justice on both the trial and appeal divisions until he 

retired in 1999. 

 

Mr. Heald is survived by his wife of 59 years, Doris, and 

their children, Lynn and her partner, Mike; and Brian and 

his partner, Debra; and niece, Cindy Narum Fischer. 

 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 

this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 

members of the bereaved family. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has moved that, by leave: 

 

This Assembly records with sorrow and regret the passing 

of the former member of the Assembly, Mr. Verner 

Heald. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the Leader 



6004 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2010 

of the Opposition. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to join with the 

Premier, and if I may, I’d like to add a few words to the 

discussion and the words of condolence in the motion for Mr. 

Darrel Heald, the former member for the constituency of 

Lumsden who passed away August 8th, 2010. 

 

Mr. Heald was born in Regina, Mr. Speaker, in 1919 and 

graduated with a B.A. [Bachelor of Arts] and a Bachelor of Law 

from the University of Saskatchewan in 1942. He then served in 

the RCAF [Royal Canadian Air Force] during World War II, 

Mr. Speaker, and the service to his country, the province, and 

community of course are the hallmark of Mr. Heald’s life. 

 

After the war, he put his law degree to work, Mr. Speaker, 

beginning a successful law practice with the Regina law firm of 

Gerein, Heald and Molisky which later became Noonan, 

Embury, Heald, Molisky and Gritzfeld. 

 

In 1964, Darrel successfully ran for public office and was 

elected as a member of the Legislative Assembly representing 

the people of Lumsden, and he went on to serve as attorney 

general for the province in the government of Premier Ross 

Thatcher. In 1971 he was appointed to the Federal Court of 

Canada in Ottawa and served as a justice on both the trial and 

appeals division of the Federal Court until his retirement in 

1999. 

 

After enjoying the first few years of retirement in Ottawa, Mr. 

Speaker, I understand that Darrel and Doris moved to British 

Columbia to be closer to their family. Mr. Speaker, whether in 

the military or in the legal system or on the floor of this 

Assembly, Darrel Heald was one of the sought after, and sought 

to protect the rights and advancement of rights of his fellow 

citizens. And we owe him a great debt of gratitude for that. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I wish to offer the family, his beloved and 

loving wife of 59 years, Doris, and their daughter, Lynn, their 

son, Brian, and also Brian’s wife, Debra, and niece, Cindy 

Fisher, our condolences on the passing of Darrel Heald, a 

former member of this Assembly and representative of the 

people of Lumsden. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Thunder Creek. 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, if I may, I would like to add a 

few words to the condolence for Darrel V. Heald. 

 

I remember Darrel Heald first when he spoke to us at our grade 

8 graduation in Pense School in the early days of his political 

career. His message was one that encouraged us to be the best 

that we can be in whatever vocation we chose. I remember 

appreciating the way that he talked with us rather than speaking 

to us. And I remember thinking that this was a really nice man. 

 

I later learned that he was also a very exceptional man — 

lawyer, World War II air force veteran, Queen’s Counsel, 

politician, attorney general, Federal Court justice, and active in 

service clubs and community organizations. 

 

Mr. Heald was my MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] 

in what was at that time the Lumsden constituency, and at a 

time when I became active in politics and with the 

Saskatchewan Liberal Party of the day. Being a rather intense 

and impatient young man, I recall knocking on his door earlyish 

one Sunday morning — I thought it was earlyish, yet he later 

said that it was early — in any event, to inquire as to whether 

there might be any employment opportunities for me with his 

department. He was marvellous in putting me in contact with 

the appropriate individuals and later laughed about the incident 

and related to my friends, John and Lois Wood, that while my 

timing may have been inappropriate, he very much appreciated 

the initiative. 

 

I recall the respect Mr. Heald received from people in my 

community. And I know that the way he conducted himself and 

the way that he was regarded by good people, focused my 

interest on the political process at a very early age. Accordingly, 

Mr. Speaker, I add my voice to those expressing thanks to a 

great man for his contributions to his country, his province, and 

his community, and add my voice to those expressing sincerest 

condolences to Doris and the Heald family. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly is the 

motion presented by the Premier: 

 

That this Assembly records its sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly, Mr. Darrel 

Verner Heald, expresses grateful appreciation of the 

contribution he made to his community, his constituency, 

and to the province. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Alex Gordon Kuziak 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Once again, Mr. Speaker, thank you. And 

by the earlier leave, I will be moving a motion: 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former Member of this Assembly and 

expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 

made to his community, his constituency and to the 

province. 

 

Alex Gordon Kuziak, who passed away on May 14, 

2010 at the age of 101, was a Member of this Legislative 

Assembly from 1948 until 1964, representing the 

constituency of Canora for the Co-operative 

Commonwealth Federation. He served as the minister of 

Telephones and Telegraphs, the minister in charge of the 

Government Finance Office, the minister of Natural 

Resources and the minister of Mineral Resources. Mr. 

Kuziak was the first person of Ukrainian origin to serve in 



November 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6005 

a Canadian cabinet, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Kuziak was born on October 15, 1908 near Donwell, 

Saskatchewan in his parents’ farm home. He attended 

early schooling in and near Canora and high school in 

Yorkton and later in Saskatoon. He left Saskatchewan and 

worked in Detroit and Pontiac as a factory worker and a 

taxi driver. Upon return to Canada, Mr. Kuziak obtained 

his teaching certificate at the Moose Jaw Normal School 

in 1931. He taught in Canora until he met his wife, Ann, 

and then worked as the Secretary-Treasurer of the Rural 

Municipality of Keys. He also operated a real estate and 

insurance office in Canora and was a senior partner of the 

Canora Electric and Heating Co. After his years in office, 

Mr. Kuziak was elected as an alderman for the city of 

Yorkton in 1971 for one term. 

 

For his contribution to the province, Mr. Kuziak was 

formally recognized in 1999 with a Nation Builders 

Award to recognize community contributions of 

outstanding Ukrainian Canadians. 

 

Mr. Kuziak and his wife, Ann, were married on June 8, 

1935. They had four children, four grandchildren and 

three great-grandchildren. Alex is survived and sadly 

missed by his son, Myron, and his wife, Sara, of Neudorf; 

son, David, of Yorkton; daughter, Beattie Anne and her 

husband, Donald, of Theodore; as well as his 

grandchildren, Natalya, Nicole, Sara, Tanya and their 

spouses and their children – Alex’s great-grandchildren. 

 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 

this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 

members of the bereaved family. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion by the Premier: 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly, Mr. Alex 

Gordon Kuziak, and expresses its grateful appreciation of 

the contribution he made to his community, his 

constituency, and to the province. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the Leader 

of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to speak to the 

condolence motion introduced by the Premier for Mr. Alex 

Kuziak, former member for the constituency of Canora and one 

of the true pioneers of Saskatchewan and one of the major 

pioneers of the CCF [Co-operative Commonwealth Federation] 

and New Democratic Party in this province. 

 

He was born in the area that he would later represent in this 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker, in 1908. He took his early schooling in 

the Burgis district near Amsterdam north of Canora, and his 

high school education in Yorkton and in Saskatoon. Having 

spent a few years out of province, he returned to Saskatchewan 

in 1930 to attend normal school, and he obtained his teaching 

certificate in 1931. 

 

He returned to Canora to teach and taught school in Canora 

until he married Ann Jarman on June 8th, 1935. And following 

their marriage, he took a job as secretary-treasurer of the RM 

[rural municipality] of Keys with its office in Canora. 

 

His public service was diverse, Mr. Speaker, and he served on 

the Canora school board, Canora Union Hospital board, and on 

a number of different local co-op boards of directors. Active in 

the CCF from its formation, he was elected in Canora in 1948 

and re-elected in 1952. He was appointed to cabinet as minister 

of Telephones, in charge of government financial office and 

holding a number of positions in the Crown corporations in the 

province. After his re-election in 1956, Alex moved to the 

Mineral Resources portfolio where he remained until 1964. 

 

And he is also remembered, Mr. Speaker, for how the 

provincial parks system was expanded significantly under his 

stewardship, as well as for his instrumental work in the creation 

of the Saskatchewan fisheries co-operative, which he helped to 

expand and work with the northern fishery industry for many 

years in the cabinet of Saskatchewan. 

 

In 1965 Alex ran for, again, for the NDP candidate for the 

federal riding of Yorkton, but was defeated and was then 

elected as an alderman for the city of Yorkton in 1971 where he 

served one term. He became the administrator for the RM of 

Garry at Jedburgh until his retirement at the age of 65 in 1973, 

but then worked as a Saskatchewan investment fund salesman 

for 10 years after that. 

 

He spoke Ukrainian, Russian, English, and was an excellent 

orator and used his oratorical skills during many long political 

debates here in the Assembly. He was also, Mr. Speaker, the 

first person of Ukraine origin to serve in any Canadian cabinet. 

 

In addition to his long, distinguished career of public and 

political action, Mr. Speaker, he was involved in several 

sporting activities throughout his life, including marathon 

running, golf, curling, boating, fishing. He and his wife Ann 

travelled often, including car trips across Canada and the US 

[United States] and Mexico, and also travelled in Europe, 

Russia, and Ukraine. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is a provincial government building in 

Yorkton which is now named after Alex Kuziak and serves to 

remind us of the contributions he made to our province. But it is 

fitting as well that, with our motion here today we remember 

Alex Kuziak and everything he has done for our province. And, 

Mr. Speaker, I offer my condolences to his extended family and 

immediate family and also join with the Premier in this motion. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Canora-Pelly. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, I too would like to add a few words about Mr. 

Alexander Gordon Kuziak, and indicate that, as the Premier and 

the Leader of the Opposition have spoken, he was born near the 

town of Canora and attended a couple of small, one-room 

schools, Mr. Speaker, like many people at that time. He 

attended Wexford and Meadowdale, and then of course moved 

to the Canora Composite High School. He also attended the 

Nutana Collegiate in Saskatoon and then back at the Yorkton 

Collegiate in of course Yorkton. 

 



6006 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2010 

Upon completion of his education, Alex travelled to Detroit and 

worked as a factory worker there, and then moved later to 

Pontiac, Michigan where he was employed as a taxi driver. 

After two years he returned to Saskatchewan and obtained his 

teaching certificate at normal school in Moose Jaw in 1931. Mr. 

Kuziak taught school in the Canora area for the next four years, 

but in 1935 Alex changed his profession and began a career as 

the RM administrator for the rural municipality of Keys with 

their office located in Canora. 

 

While living in Canora, Alex was an active participant on the 

Canora school board, the Canora hospital board, and local 

co-operative boards. Mr. Speaker, during that decade of the 

’30s, that last half of the decade of the ’30s and into the first 

three-quarters of the ’40s, it was a lot of growth in many 

communities and especially in Canora. And Mr. Kuziak was 

active in the Canora Union Hospital, the consumer 

co-operative, the Canora Credit Union, and a number of 

Canora’s recreational facilities that were constructed during that 

time. 

 

Mr. Kuziak entered the life of provincial politics in 1948 as 

MLA for the Canora constituency. Alex and his family lived in 

Canora until 1952, then moving to Regina to accept the 

appointment to the provincial cabinet, serving as minister of 

Telephones and Telegraphs and government finance office. 

Four years later he was appointed minister of Mineral 

Resources. 

 

During his time as MLA and cabinet minister, he took pride in 

advances in such areas as highway building, development of the 

mining and timber industry, fostering rural electrification and 

gasification, and of course the modern health care system. 

 

After being defeated in the 1964 election, the Kuziak family 

moved to Yorkton, and Alex returned to his career as RM 

administrator, this time for the RM of Garry, until his 

retirement in 1973. Mr. Kuziak remained a resident of Yorkton 

during his retirement years. 

 

It is interesting to note that two of Mr. Kuziak’s children 

followed their father’s footsteps in their career choice of RM 

administration. Not only that but his son, Jerry, was RM 

administrator for the RM of Garry from 1974 to 1999 and his 

daughter, Beattie Anne, was administrator from 2001 to 2006. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the residents of now the 

Canora-Pelly constituency, which of course included all of what 

used to be known as the Canora constituency during the time of 

Mr. Kuziak’s tenure there as the MLA, I too want to express my 

condolences to all family members for the loss of their father, 

their grandfather, and of course a great person for the role of 

moving Saskatchewan forward. Thank you. 

 

[14:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — I want to join with the Premier, the Leader 

of the Opposition, and the Deputy Premier in extending 

condolences to the Kuziak family. Although Mr. Alex Gordon 

Kuziak was the MLA for the Canora constituency, he was a 

long-time resident of Yorkton and in fact being elected 

alderman in 1971. My family was contracted by the city of 

Yorkton since the mid-’60s for services, so we did have the 

opportunity to interact with Mr. Kuziak from time to time; more 

my father than I. 

 

We’ve heard the details of his long, distinguished career, Mr. 

Speaker, long-standing career, a very respected member of 

Canora area and the city of Yorkton. 

 

As we’ve heard, he fulfilled many ministerial duties with his 

MLA duties. He did contribute greatly prior to his elected life, 

and as we’ve heard, quite a bit after his elected life as well, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

As spoken about by, I believe, the opposition, the A.G. Kuziak 

Building prominently displayed in the middle of Yorkton with 

his name, is a long-time memory to not only his past career but 

his legacy to the future, Mr. Speaker. 

 

A close friend of mine actually worked with Mr. Kuziak as a 

bureaucrat from time to time, being on the odd road trip with 

him, and had nothing but good stories and good things to say 

about him: one of the most respected members of any political 

party that he had the opportunity to work with and work under. 

That goes a long way in saying the type of man Mr. Kuziak 

was. 

 

I’d like to extend thank you to the Kuziak family for the 

sacrifices that we all know a family has to make when they 

have a loved one serving public office. And on behalf of the 

city of Yorkton, the constituency of Yorkton, his former 

constituency of Canora, and the province, condolences on the 

loss to the family. May God grant you peace and comfort in this 

time. And I would like to join with the Premier, the Deputy 

Premier, and the Leader of the Opposition in this motion. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before this Assembly is: 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly, Mr. Alex 

Gordon Kuziak, and expresses its grateful appreciation of 

the contribution he made to his community, his 

constituency, and to the province. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Premier. 

 

David Gordon Steuart 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, if I may just before I move the 

motion in honour and in memory of Mr. David Steuart — who 

I’m sure we’ll call Davey for the rest of the debate, or Mr. 

Steuart — Mr. Speaker, I do have a few brief remarks to make. 

 

You know, I think most members in the Assembly would agree 



November 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6007 

that among the many honours that we have upon election, upon 

being asked by our constituents to serve, is the swearing-in 

ceremony that we enjoy usually with family and friends and 

sometimes with colleagues. Mr. Speaker, part of that 

swearing-in ceremony involves the signing of a pretty amazing 

book, the roll of members that have taken their seat in this 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

And when I had that first, when I first experienced that, I guess 

the last time I experienced that particular honour and pleasure, 

Mr. Speaker, I was thinking about all the names that might be in 

that book ahead of mine and thinking a little bit about the 

honour that I had, that we all have, to sign it as well, and 

thought of a few in particular that I knew of through my interest 

in politics, though maybe some not very directly. And one of 

them was Davey Steuart. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as someone who’s followed politics and been very 

interested in it for a very long time — a disturbingly long time, 

some would say — it’s hard, if you’re interested in 

Saskatchewan politics, not to learn about and know a little bit 

about the former deputy premier for the province of 

Saskatchewan, the former leader of the opposition, a former 

minister of Natural Resources, a former minister of Finance as 

well, the provincial treasurer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, his record in terms of serving the people of the 

province is paralleled by precious few in Saskatchewan’s 

history, Mr. Speaker, both in these files and in Prince Albert 

itself. In fact, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting — and in a moment 

I’m going to read the motion and note that he represented the 

constituencies of Prince Albert, Prince Albert West, and Prince 

Albert-Duck Lake — Mr. Speaker, it speaks to someone’s 

ability to continue to be re-elected; that his constituency, his 

home town would see its boundaries change and the 

constituency itself renamed three times. It speaks to a certain 

amount of longevity, Mr. Speaker, but maybe not to speak to 

landslides, but it certainly speaks to a hard-working candidate 

and MLA. 

 

And I happened to be in Prince Albert the Monday after he 

passed, and I had the honour to speak at a chamber of 

commerce function there and took an opportunity to say just a 

few words before I began whatever text I had for that day. 

 

And I also had a chance to visit with a number of people from 

Prince Albert. And if it’s true that you can measure someone, a 

man or a woman, by the esteem in which they’re held by their 

neighbours, by those that know them best, then nothing 

commended Mr. Steuart more to me that day than to hear from 

those in Prince Albert about how they felt about this leader, this 

very important person in the life and the history of the city of 

Prince Albert. 

 

Because the comments were glowing, and they were very 

sincere about his work on behalf of Prince Albert, about his 

commitment to specific projects some of them would mention, 

but just generally speaking how proud they were of their voice 

in Regina. That was Davey Steuart, Mr. Speaker. And this is 

from a community, this is from a city that’s had its share of 

pretty famous politicians. Three prime ministers — one very 

notable one from our province’s perspective in former prime 

minister John Diefenbaker — and yet in that pantheon is also 

named Mr. Steuart, the deputy premier and the MLA for those 

constituencies in Prince Albert. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it strikes me, as we look at the history of this 

legislature that, and maybe I haven’t done a full enough study 

of other legislatures, but that we may have been 

disproportionately blessed with great orators in Saskatchewan 

when you consider the likes of Tommy Douglas, for example, 

and then when you consider Davey Steuart who was very well 

known as one who could balance incisive commentary, 

intellectual debate, and also quite an acerbic wit when he 

needed that. Mr. Speaker, all of those things actually uplift 

debate. All of those things help a place like this to function and 

bring honour to it, to all members. And he did that as well. And 

we should mark that today that he made this legislature better, 

not just for the days that he was here, for the years that he was 

here, the 14 years, but also since then. Because of people like 

Davey Steuart, this particular legislature is a better place. 

 

I’ve been told of a few stories that involve Mr. Steuart, one by 

our MLA for Thunder Creek who I heard on the radio telling 

the story again about . . . as a young Liberal and someone 

involved in the party. And if I mess up the story, my apologies 

to the member for Thunder Creek. But my understanding is that 

he was at a political function with Mr. Steuart. And though their 

names are spelled differently, the member for Thunder Creek 

and Mr. Steuart, and though they weren’t related at all, Mr. 

Steuart, Davey Steuart introduced the MLA for Thunder Creek 

— a much younger version of the MLA for Thunder Creek — 

as his sheep-stealing relative from southern Saskatchewan. 

Pretty interesting introduction and it speaks to someone’s 

ability just to sort of break the ice. 

 

The member for Cannington has reminded me of a joke that Mr. 

Steuart used to tell to many and I think in the context of 

speeches as well when he would recount the story of a certain 

CCF member and himself kibitzing across the way, each of 

them inviting the other to join their party. And this would go on 

and on. And Mr. Steuart would ask the CCF member to join the 

Liberals, and the CCF member would tell Mr. Steuart he 

belonged with them. 

 

And then sadly, the health of the CCF member took a turn for 

the worse. And I think it was in a Weyburn hospital, how the 

story goes, that Davey Steuart went to visit him. And his friend, 

the CCF member said, all right . . . He wasn’t doing very well. 

It wasn’t going very well for the former CCF member. And so 

he said to Davey, he said, all right, I’ll buy the Liberal 

membership now. And Davey Steuart, quite taken aback said, I 

can’t believe it. After all those years, you’re going to finally 

join the Liberal Party. And the CCF member said, well I would 

rather that one of you go than one of our party go. Mr. Steuart 

apparently took quite a delight in this story. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is true that all of us stand on the shoulders of 

others who have gone before us. And some have 

disproportionately served — not because of opportunity; we 

each have the same opportunity — but because of their ability, 

because of their ability to draw others to them. 

 

And then, Mr. Speaker, some of them are able to serve 

disproportionately because they just leave things much better 

than they found them, that they are leaders in every sense of the 



6008 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2010 

word, and they choose this job — to serve the province — and 

do so in a very, very powerful way. And we honour such a man 

today when we pay our respects to Davey Steuart and offer our 

condolences to his family as well. And so therefore, Mr. 

Speaker, it is an honour that I would move, by leave of the 

Assembly: 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly and 

expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 

made to his community, his constituency, and to the 

province. 

 

David Gordon Steuart, who passed away on November 

5, 2010, at the age of 94, was a Member of this 

Legislative Assembly from 1962 until 1976, representing 

the constituencies of Prince Albert, Prince Albert West 

and Prince Albert-Duck Lake for the Liberal Party. He 

served as the minister of Public Health, the minister of 

Natural Resources . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, if I may just add parenthetically, not as a part of 

the motion — and it’s important for the House to note this — 

that right up until he was able to follow the goings-on in the 

province, he was very much interested in what was going on in 

terms of our potash industry in the province, from his home in 

British Columbia, which I think members should note. No 

doubt he watched it very, very carefully, all of the 

developments. Back to the motion, Mr. Speaker, also: 

 

provincial treasurer, deputy premier, and the leader of the 

opposition. Following his retirement from the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan, Mr. Steuart served as a 

senator in Ottawa until his 75th birthday. 

 

Mr. Steuart was born on January 26, 1916, in Regina, 

educated in Moose Jaw and Regina and later moved to 

Prince Albert with his family. Mr. Steuart served in the 

Royal Canadian Air Force from 1941 to 1945 as a 

navigator 423 Squadron in the United Kingdom. He was 

the president of Steuart Enterprises and first served the 

public as an alderman and then the mayor in the city of 

Prince Albert. He was first elected to this Assembly in 

1962 and re-elected in four subsequent general elections. 

 

Mr. Steuart and his wife, Eunice, were married on 

October 23, 1946. They had two children. Davey is 

survived and sadly missed by his daughter Lynne [who 

joins us today], son Robert and his wife Barbara, and 

three grandsons. 

 

In recording its own deep loss of bereavement, this 

Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 

members of the bereaved family. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has moved that by leave: 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly, David 

Gordon Steuart, and expresses its grateful appreciation of 

the contribution he made to his community, his 

constituency and to the province. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the Leader 

of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I 

would like to add a few words to the motion of condolence. 

 

And I appreciated the Premier’s words about Davey Steuart 

because Davey was a character. And while I didn’t have the 

opportunity to serve directly in the Assembly with him, I did 

get to know Davey both by reputation and also in person on a 

number of occasions. And I have to say that he was one of the 

most enjoyable political figures that I met and have ever met in 

my career in politics. 

 

And I remember, I think it was in about 1998, and at that time 

we had this habit of holding dinners, business dinners in the city 

of Regina. And the premier and I competed to see who could 

get the largest crowds, and Roy always got a couple of hundred 

extra, but we worked hard. 

 

And at one time Eric Berntson, the member then of the 

Conservative Party, came and spoke at my fundraiser. And it 

seems unusual in the era that we have here, but at that time a 

number of political figures from other political parties spoke at 

my fundraisers. And we had this idea that we would get a 

former leader of the Liberal Party, Davey Steuart, to come and 

speak. And I believe it was in 1998. And sure enough, Davey 

said, you know, pay for my airfare from British Columbia — I 

think he was living there at the time — sure, I’d love to come 

and speak at your fundraiser. And we probably sold an extra 

300 tickets as a result of having someone of Davey Steuart’s 

stature. And I’m not so proud I wouldn’t take Liberals’ dollars 

in fundraising. And sure enough, we sold to many Liberals in 

the city who wanted to see their idol and hero. 

 

[15:00] 

 

And I mentioned it to Davey before we’re in the back room 

waiting to go up on the podium. And so as he was thinking and 

thinking about this, he marched up with us up on the stage, and 

he was the first speaker. And he looked out over the crowd, and 

he identified several Liberal lawyer tables in the hall. And I 

won’t mention names, but all of us can imagine the most 

prominent Liberal law firms in the city. And he looked out over 

the crowd and he said, you know, when we form government 

we’re going to fire every darn one of you. And he brought the 

house down. 

 

And of course it was that spirit that Davey brought both to this 

Assembly and everywhere he went. And in talking with some of 

his friends, after he retired they indicated he was the most 

sought-after golf partner because of his stories that would occur 

while you were out for the four hours or, in many cases, five or 

six hours that it took because Davey would stop many times to 

tell stories, and anyone who was part of the foursome would 

enjoy. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, as I said, I’d like to add a few formal words 

of condolence to the former member for the constituency of 

Prince Albert, Prince Albert West, and Prince Albert-Duck 

Lake who passed away a few days ago on November 5th at the 

age of 94. And Davey leaves behind, Mr. Speaker, a record of 

decades of public service at many levels as well as a reputation 



November 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6009 

as a loyal and dedicated political warrior whose wit was one of 

the most lethal weapons that he had in his arsenal. 

 

He began his political career, Mr. Speaker, at the civic level in 

Prince Albert where he served two terms as mayor and also as 

president of the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 

Association. He dedicated many years of effort, Mr. Speaker, to 

the Liberal Party that he would one day lead. And he had a 

very, very close relationship with Premier Ross Thatcher as 

Davey had helped recruit him as leader, and they travelled the 

province to rebuild the Liberal Party starting in 1959. And it 

was Steuart who literally was at the side of the next premier, 

Ross Thatcher, through many, many miles as they travelled the 

province. 

 

And later on when they had been elected and were near calling 

the 1971 election . . . And this is a story. I don’t know whether 

it can be confirmed, but the thought was, Mr. Premier, that at 

the last cabinet meeting before the call of the 1971 election, 

Premier Thatcher came into the cabinet room and — Ross could 

be a difficult individual in cabinet meetings as I understand 

from other cabinet ministers — and he announced to the cabinet 

that he was going to call the election immediately, the ’71 

election. 

 

And Davey put up his hand and said, Mr. Premier, could I speak 

for a moment on that motion? And Ross indicated there wasn’t 

a motion, that he was going to be calling the election. And 

Davey said, well I’d like to have a word at any rate. And so 

Ross allowed him because they were very close friends. And 

Davey said, can you hold off for another week? And Ross said, 

why would you wait another week? And Davey said, there’s 

one group left in this province we haven’t alienated, but if you 

give me a week, I’ll look after it. And it often reminds me of 

politics, in our careers, that we should listen to the close advice 

of our friends. 

 

But he dedicated many years of effort, Mr. Speaker, to the 

Liberal Party. And though his 1960 bid to win a seat in the 

Saskatchewan legislature was unsuccessful, he won 

by-elections two years later and held on to the Prince Albert 

seat in the election of 1964 which brought his chosen leader to 

power and to the chair of the premier of the legislature. A 

trusted minister and ally of Premier Thatcher, Steuart served in 

a number of different portfolios including Health, Finance, 

Natural Resources, and he also served as deputy premier. 

 

Returned in opposition in 1971, Mr. Speaker, his party 

expressed its confidence in Mr. Steuart’s leadership by 

choosing him leader, and he fulfilled that role as leader of the 

opposition with wit and charm for which he is still remembered 

by many former NDP opponents, Mr. Speaker. Not long after 

the ’75 election, he was appointed to the Senate and represented 

Saskatchewan in the Red Chamber until his retirement in ’91. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan owe a great deal of 

debt to Davey Steuart for his decades of service at the civic, 

provincial, and federal levels of government, and so on behalf, I 

want to extend to family members and friends who are here 

today and all of the other family members on the passing of 

Davey Steuart. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with an 

honour and privilege, as I always say when I stand in this 

House, that today I get to speak on behalf of the memory of 

David Gordon ―Landslide‖ Steuart. 

 

I want to acknowledge daughter-in-law Barbara who came to 

the Legislative Assembly today for a tour. She hadn’t been in 

the building for a number of years, but their good friend, Sandra 

Dunn, and I was allowed and afforded the time to speak with 

her over lunch to get a personal perspective of Davey — more 

than I had back in Prince Albert over the last weekend speaking 

to some constituents, some good friends, and some former 

campaign workers with Davey. I’ve had the honour and 

privilege to have some of his old workers on my team as well, 

so I got some insight into Mr. Steuart over the weekend. 

 

But what’s paramount from the Premier and the Leader of the 

Opposition is Mr. Steuart had a commitment to service, to the 

citizens of Prince Albert, to the province, to the country of 

Canada — both as a member of the air force but later on as a 

member of the Senate. And those are the roles that I believe he 

was destined to fulfill. 

 

We heard that in 1951 he sought and won a seat as a city 

alderman in Prince Albert at the ripe old age of 35. But before 

that, he served the citizens of Prince Albert, working in the 

family business as well, and I’m sure that his spark for politics 

and political life started at a younger age than that. And I can 

imagine some of the debates that may have taken place in the 

family household with his brothers and dad, and I’m sure that 

they had stories to tell as well they could today. 

 

We look at the fact that when Mr. Steuart did serve in Prince 

Albert, and later as a mayor, I was told this weekend that he 

took a very bold initiative. He had an issuance of a debenture in 

Prince Albert to expand infrastructure. At the time, La Colle 

Falls was a burden to the taxpayers of Prince Albert, and Davey 

had the insight — a visionary I’d have to call, understanding 

how this works now with my current ministerial roles — to look 

at how infrastructure supports a thriving community, how it can 

grow based on infrastructure investment. 

 

So in 1955 he did that, and that was a turning point in Prince 

Albert. Because at the time, if you know Prince Albert, there 

was a very small strip of pavement and about a block off each 

side in Prince Albert were sidewalks. Very little pipes and other 

pavement in the area. And he took it upon himself to begin that 

adventurous measure to help Prince Albert grow and to make it 

what it is today, which is a home that I have in Prince Albert. 

And I truly love my city because of the work of Mr. Steuart. I 

believe that’s made it what it is. 

 

We got to know Davey Steuart in Prince Albert. Not me 

personally; I wish I would have. There are many people in my 

life that you look back and think, it would have been a great 

honour to have time with and spend and talk to, and he’s one of 

them. But a lot of people that I worked with during my 

campaign three years ago regaled stories and told about the 

landslide name. And when I was able to win and serve Prince 

Albert Carlton, they used that name with me. And I said no, 

that’s not fair. It’s not fair at all. It truly is Davey Steuart’s 



6010 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2010 

name, not mine. 

 

Mr. Steuart was a family man as well. He was very committed 

to his wife, Eunice, and to Bob, his son, and Lynne, his 

daughter. And as we all know, this job takes a lot of time away 

from our families, but he committed as much time as possible to 

his family; on a regular basis took them on Easter holidays to 

ensure that they were together. And he gave time back to his 

family. 

 

There’s a bit of a story that I think is interesting that everyone 

knows about or talks about Mr. Steuart’s wit, his quick tongue, 

and his oratory skills. But Barbara said today that a lot of that 

came from Eunice; a lot of that wit came from Eunice. As all of 

us have a great spouse that supports us in this role, she was very 

quick with those words and there are a couple of times when, as 

some of us do, we tell our spouses we’ll be home at a certain 

time and we come home later than we should. And she met him 

at the door and had a couple of words to say to Mr. Davey 

Steuart, and he realized who the boss was in the family. And he 

never lost that either. 

 

Later in life we also know that Davey had the opportunity to 

have grandsons, and he took a very active role in that as he got 

older. Golf was his game of choice, I understand. So like many 

of us . . . We take up the game. We leave our spouses at home 

as golf widows. But he gave back to his grandsons, assuring 

that as they got older he always was there for them, taking them 

golfing, buying the golf clubs as they got older, and sharing 

special times with them. He was very committed to his family 

on that level as well. 

 

One thing that struck me talking to Barbara at lunchtime today 

was that Davey took a stance that he was not an important man, 

very humble in his service to the people of Prince Albert, 

Saskatchewan, and Canada. He said that he was not an 

important man. He never saw himself that way. I think that 

bodes well on how he carried himself, not just in the province 

but in the Legislative Assembly — how he served his 

constituents time and time again; that his cause was to a greater 

being, which was the service to all. And he never looked at that 

as a way to better himself. 

 

When he worked in this Legislative Assembly — I think some 

of us will be able to understand this — he talked about . . . The 

family viewed this as an interesting sideline. That there was the 

Bugs Bunny cartoon where he, Ralph the sheepdog, and Sam — 

I think was the coyote — and they walk into work and punch 

the time clock and say, morning, Ralph. Morning, Sam. Do 

their job. Punch out. And they go away and they talk. Davey 

Steuart looked at his job here that way. In this Chamber, it was 

business for sure. But this was just part of the job. 

 

He left this Chamber and he regaled stories and kept friendships 

for many, many years after. And that’s a message, I think, to all 

of us that bodes well, that if we can keep that amongst ourselves 

. . . In here it’s a job. Yes, it’s business. But outside of here, if 

we can take that stance and try to be civil and friends with each 

other, we could do a lot of good work for this province. And I 

hope I will never forget that. And if I ever do, I think it is time 

for me to step down, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I guess just in closing, I do want to say that we have to thank 

his daughter Lynne, his son Bob, daughter-in-law Barbara, 

grandsons Matthew and Lisaun, Graham and Kristy, Owen. 

He’s survived by his brother J.W. ―Jack‖ and his wife Betty, 

and several nieces and nephews. We want to thank them for 

letting us share that time with Davey as he served 

Saskatchewan and Prince Albert and the government and the 

country of Canada. 

 

He has a closing quote I want to say, but there’s another story I 

think should . . . I’d be remiss if I didn’t mention it. That one 

time when he was in service in Prince Albert as a Member of 

the Legislative Assembly, he got a phone call at home, and 

Eunice answered the phone. And then someone was 

complaining about roads and infrastructure, and much as it 

happens today. Eunice said, call the mayor; it’s his 

responsibility, not Davey’s responsibility. So municipal affairs 

was also one of those things back in the time where 

municipalities were responsible for roads, and Eunice stood by 

her man and made sure that he had time alone away from 

business as well. So that’s very important. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I think the quote I’ll say here is 

important for all of us to remember. And I’ll take my seat after 

that. 

 

If everyone does not take it upon himself to work his own 

special way to make our society a little better, then we 

have failed not only our country, but ourselves as well. 

 

[15:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m honoured to take 

to my feet today to help in some way to honour Davey Steuart. 

Davey Steuart moved to Prince Albert from Moose Jaw with his 

family, was elected to city council in 1951, and later served two 

terms as mayor. He also served as president of SUMA 

[Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association]. He was a 

member of the Saskatchewan Liberal Party executive and 

helped former MP [Member of Parliament] Ross Thatcher win 

the Liberal Party’s leadership convention in 1959 and later 

became president of the party. 

 

He failed in his 1960 bid to win a seat in the legislature, but 

won in a by-election two years later and retained the Prince 

Albert seat in the 1964 provincial election that brought the 

Thatcher Liberals to power. Steuart was appointed minister of 

Health in the provincial cabinet, implementing the 

government’s system for user fees in health care in 1965. 

Became minister of Natural Resources and deputy premier, and 

in 1967 became minister of Finance. 

 

Steuart was elected party leader in December of 1971, served as 

leader of opposition for four years, and was appointed to the 

Canadian Senate in December of 1975 and served until his 

retirement in 1991. 

 

Mr. Speaker, his legacy in Prince Albert is almost unbelievable 

in the fact that no matter which political party you normally 

support, he has the respect of virtually everybody in that city. 

And it’s something that in today’s political climate is very 



November 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6011 

difficult to do. But, you know, virtually everybody that you’ll 

talk to will speak very openly and glowingly about Mr. Steuart. 

 

Now as a child in Prince Albert of five and six and seven, I used 

to play at the Dave G. Steuart Arena. And at that time you don’t 

really know why it’s named that or too much about it, but it was 

always my favourite rink. It was a little bit small but a very 

comfortable place to play. I think that in terms of the way I 

played in that rink, it’s almost as if Mr. Steuart was looking 

down because I played with a feistiness and was never a very 

big hockey player, but I’ve been told that I used my tongue as 

sharply as my stick. And I’m sure I did Mr. Steuart proud in 

that rink at times. 

 

It’s not until you grow up and years later, you understand 

legacy and what it means. And again, Mr. Steuart’s legacy in 

Prince Albert is tremendous and it’s that way for a number of 

reasons. 

 

But one is that he was never afraid, on a provincial stage, to 

defend the interests of the people of Prince Albert. There are 

many stories of . . . that people will tell you about. No matter 

where he was in the province, he defended Prince Albert’s 

interests. 

 

He was not afraid of being a Liberal either. He was a strong 

Liberal when . . . before it was immensely popular. And it was 

his courage and wisdom and wit that helped bring the Liberal 

Party to power. Certainly he’s exceedingly highly regarded by 

all. 

 

One of his tremendous legacies is, of course, his wit, and I’m 

not sure if all members here will remember the quote, but upon 

the defection of a couple of high-profile members from the 

Liberal Party to the Progressive Conservatives, he made the 

very cutting statement that the IQs [intelligence quotient] of 

each party both went up today. And it’s that ability to cut right 

to the core in a very humorous way that helped make him very 

popular. 

 

So for so many reasons, I’d like to thank Mr. Steuart for the 

work that he’s done for the province and specifically for the 

people of Prince Albert. I’d also like to thank his family for the 

sacrifice that they made while he was as busy as he was on the 

political stage. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Isn’t it an honour for 

those of us who speak today and those of us who are listening to 

just reflect on what leadership is about and on Davey Steuart’s 

life? And as we celebrate someone who sat in a different party, 

led a different party than anyone in here is a part of, and yet we 

only hear kind words about Davey Steuart. Mr. Speaker, that’s 

because Davey Steuart earned those remarks. 

 

He earned them here. He earned them throughout the Liberal 

Party, throughout Prince Albert certainly, and throughout all of 

Saskatchewan. Davey Steuart was a fine leader. 

 

I’m going to be fairly short in my intervention today, Mr. 

Speaker, but I wanted to simply say that I come from an era 

when Davey Steuart was, politically, the enemy. I can recall 

growing up and, as a teenager, listening to Davey Steuart, and I 

listened with admiration. And I often listened with frustration 

because he was such an eloquent speaker. He had such a great 

way of getting his message across, and it wasn’t always to the 

favour of the political party that I’ve always supported. But the 

point is Davey Steuart was always adamant that he spoke his 

truth and, frankly, spoke the truth. He spoke it well and he 

spoke it with a great deal of passion. 

 

Davey Steuart was so passionate in his speaking that my cousin 

Harold and I actually crashed the Liberal leadership party, Mr. 

Speaker, where Davey Steuart got elected to be Liberal leader. 

We crashed it thinking it would be fun to see. And I’ve got to 

tell you there’s two things about that Liberal leadership that has 

stuck with me all these years later. One, it was obvious that 

Davey Steuart was incredibly well liked by Liberals there. He 

was incredibly well respected. He was confident and poised in 

his own ability, and the leadership was his to lose. That was 

obvious from there. The second thing that I — both my cousin 

Harold and I — learned at the Liberal leadership convention 

was the Liberal Party has an awful lot of nice people in it. And 

it was a good lesson for a then 17-year-old me to learn. The 

Liberal Party was chock full of just wonderful, thoughtful 

people. 

 

Obviously I didn’t choose to join the Liberal Party, Mr. 

Speaker, but I came away from that with a new-found respect 

for what serving the province was and public service, what that 

was all about. I owe Davey Steuart — and others, but today it’s 

Davey Steuart — I owe Davey Steuart a debt of gratitude for 

his part in my political awakening, if you like, and I am grateful 

for that on a personal level. And I know that our province is a 

better province by far for the leadership that Mr. Steuart 

provided. So with that I’ll take my place. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The question is the motion presented by the 

Premier in recognition of the life of Mr. Davey Steuart that, by 

leave of the Assembly: 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly and 

expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 

made to his community, his constituency, and to the 

province. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Frederick John Thompson 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m sure it’ll be an 

honour for a number of members to join in tribute to former 

member Fred Thompson who passed away in July of 2010. 

 



6012 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2010 

Mr. Speaker, when I first had a chance to work in this building, 

first as a summer student and then as a ministerial assistant, Mr. 

Thompson was one of the opposition MLAs who participated 

obviously in question period on a regular basis. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I can remember with clarity that when it came to 

northern issues there were certainly few in the legislature that 

were his match in terms of raising those issues on behalf of the 

constituents of Athabasca and on behalf of northern 

Saskatchewan in general, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Perhaps he was uniquely qualified for his time in politics on 

account of his being a three-time provincial boxing champion, 

Mr. Speaker. But I think it’s true that in this case, members on 

both sides of the House got to know Mr. Thompson very well. 

A number of members on that side of the House served with 

Mr. Thompson while he was a member here, as did you, sir. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, a number of us got to know Mr. Thompson 

because in later years he remained involved in politics, not in an 

elected position, but he was involved in helping our party. I 

think prior to the 1999 election, shortly after the formation of 

the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Thompson felt that there were 

some ideas here that were worthy of his support and furtherance 

and got involved with our party. 

 

I remember chatting with him early on as a relatively new 

MLA. He was attending a golf tournament, a fundraising golf 

tournament that we were hosting, and at that time, Mr. Speaker, 

his career had evolved to the point where he was also a golf 

instructor. He was teaching golfing. And I noticed that he took 

particular pity on my swing when he saw me at the golf 

tournament. That gave me a chance to strike up a conversation 

which I valued greatly because, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned off 

the top, my only observations of Mr. Thompson was when . . . 

from one of the galleries or on television when I would be 

monitoring question period or debate in the Assembly on behalf 

of my minister, and it was Mr. Thompson that was effectively 

making a particular case in terms of his shadow cabinet duties 

or his constituency of Athabasca. 

 

And I think we can all agree that whatever the evolution of his 

own political views, one thing remained constant — that was 

his dedication to the people of Athabasca, to northern 

Saskatchewan in general, and to First Nations and Métis issues, 

Mr. Speaker, in the province and throughout his careers. I 

believe he was a champion of those causes and for that we owe 

him a debt of gratitude. 

 

And as has been mentioned with respect to the others that we 

have honoured today, we want to thank the members of Mr. 

Thompson’s family for sharing him with the Legislative 

Assembly and with the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I move that by leave of the Assembly: 

 

That the Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly and 

expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 

made to his community, his constituency, and to the 

province. 

 

Fred John Thompson, who passed away on July 7, 

2010, was a member of this Legislative Assembly from 

1975 until 1995, representing the constituency of 

Athabasca for the New Democratic Party. 

 

Mr. Thompson was appointed the associate minister of 

Economic Development in 1995 and served as the caucus 

critic for the Department of Parks, Saskatchewan Forest 

Products, and Northern Affairs issues. He was a member 

of the Public Accounts Committee and spent many years 

on the Crown Corporations Committee from 1976 to ’78 

and 1981 until 1991. 

 

Mr. Thompson was born on May 21, 1935, and grew up 

in Big River, Saskatchewan. He later moved to Buffalo 

Narrows where he started a mink ranch, fished, and 

trapped. He met his wife, Therese, here and together they 

had three children. 

 

Mr. Thompson was a three-time provincial boxing 

champion and used that experience and knowledge to 

teach boxing as well. He also coached hockey, baseball, 

and gymnastics, and at the age of 63 became a 

professional golf instructor. 

 

Fred is survived and sadly missed by his wife of 49 years, 

Therese, and their three children, Robert, Thomas, and 

Rodney. 

 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 

this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 

the members of the bereaved family. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly is the 

motion by the Premier to recognize the contribution of Fred 

John Thompson to this Assembly. That by leave of the 

Assembly: 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly and 

expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 

made to his community, his constituency, and to the 

province. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the Deputy 

Premier.  

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the opportunity 

to rise and say a few words on the condolence motion moved by 

the Premier. 

 

Fred Thompson was elected first in 1975 and I had the 

opportunity to be elected in 1978. So when I first came to the 

Legislative Assembly, of course Fred was not in cabinet at that 

time, and I took a great liking to Fred because he was a 

northerner, quite isolated from Regina, and of course at that 

time being from the Shaunavon constituency down on the 

Montana and Alberta border, I felt some of the isolation as well. 

 

And being a new member, Fred took me under his wing and 

taught me some of the dos and don’ts in the Legislative 

Assembly. And as strange as that might seem, we became very 

close. And during that period, between ’78 and 1982, we talked 

a lot about being in government and the possibility of working 

in cabinet. But neither of us foresaw the impending doom that 



November 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6013 

was coming in 1982. And I remember after the defeat of 1982, 

Fred and I were both re-elected, along with six others. So we 

went from being a majority government to sitting on this side of 

the House with only eight members. And Fred was a pillar of 

support in that caucus. 

 

And I remember that going out in the evenings, because we sat 

many nights at that time, and Fred Thompson and Allen Engel 

and Murray Koskie and I would often go and have dinner 

together. And we usually went to a little restaurant on the way 

to the airport — it’s still there — called The Chimney, and 

Spiro, the owner, is still there. And we would soothe our hurt of 

being a small opposition by having a few beverages and have 

dinner, and then we would have to return to the Assembly at 7 

o’clock. 

 

[15:30] 

 

And Murray was a very tough operator and very supportive as 

well, but when we divvied up the bill every night to pay for our 

meal, of course we divided it four ways. And Freddy had a very 

sharp pencil in making sure that the bill was divided exactly in 

quarters. And what we didn’t realize at the time, Murray was a 

heavy smoker, and he would get Spiro to bring him a package 

of cigarettes, and that got tucked into the bill somehow. And for 

two years, we split Murray’s cigarettes. And I remember when 

Fred found out about it, he was horrified that Murray would do 

that. And he spent the rest of the two years between ’82 and ’86 

figuring out ways to collect his money back from Murray 

Koskie. 

 

But it tells you of the kind of spirit that there is in a caucus and 

how close you become, especially when you’re a small working 

group in opposition or in a cabinet where you become very 

close. 

 

And Fred was also a very good card player and a very good 

boxer. And at that time we played cards quite often in the 

evenings, after the House ended, with members of the 

government and I can remember times that Fred . . . People 

knew when to respect him, because even though he was small 

in stature he was a very, very successful boxer, and you could 

tell by Fred’s tone when it was time to back off and let him 

have his say. And a few members in government will remember 

Fred for that as well. 

 

But at the end of the day Fred was a very, very compassionate 

man. He represented his constituency very ably and will be very 

much missed. And I know at his celebration of his life in 

Buffalo Narrows a number of our members attended, and I 

know Therese and the boys will miss Fred very, very much. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, in rising to say a few words on the motion, I 

just want to put on the record that Fred Thompson represented 

the constituency of Athabasca and he passed away on July 7, 

2010, and his service of remembrance I had the privilege to 

attend, along with a number of other friends and fellow 

colleagues in Buffalo Narrows. 

 

Freddy Thompson was born May 21st, 1935 and was raised in 

Big River, Saskatchewan. He served, Mr. Speaker, as a member 

of the Legislative Assembly here from 1975 to ’95. He was 

appointed minister of Economic Development in 1995, Mr. 

Speaker, and he also served as caucus critic in the department of 

Parks and Saskatchewan Forest Products. 

 

As I mentioned, Mr. Speaker, when I began my remarks, I had 

the honour to attend his service in Buffalo Narrows and we 

travelled along the long road that would faithfully allow Fred to 

move back and forth between Regina and his constituency of 

Athabasca. And as we gathered there, Mr. Speaker, along with 

Doug Anguish, one of his other colleagues who spoke at the 

celebration, friends and family, and we spent time, Mr. Speaker, 

giving thanks for Fred’s life and his friendship. 

 

And so in closing, Mr. Speaker, I want to join with the Premier 

and others in offering my condolence to Therese, the boys, and 

the extended family of Fred Thompson. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I also 

join in paying tribute to Fred Thompson who represented 

Athabasca for 20 years and it gives me great honour and great 

pride to speak of him. And I want to speak in generally five 

areas I’ve known Fred. And certainly some of the attributes and 

some of the strength he had was of course his family. And one 

thing that I noticed early in my political career was his class, 

very classy individual, certainly his endurance as an MLA, his 

strength, and finally his legacy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Fred Thompson was a very, very strong family 

man. He loved his family, all of his family. And when your 

brother calls you his best friend, you know how well he was 

loved and certainly honoured by his family because he took 

good care of them. 

 

I spoke to his brother and to his son briefly on the phone and I 

mentioned the fact that we were going to pay tribute to Fred, 

and others that passed, in the Assembly today. And his son, Rod 

Thompson, took a few moments to write a letter. And I’d like to 

share that letter with the Assembly if I may. And these are Rod 

Thompson’s words: 

 

If Dad were here in the Assembly today, he would say 

thank you. Thank you for the opportunity to represent 

both the people of Athabasca and the people of 

Saskatchewan, and for being part of the great democracy 

and the rich history that is Saskatchewan. 

 

Dad knew early how important the role of government is 

and how it affects the lives of people, and to be able to be 

part of that and to represent the great people who call 

northern Saskatchewan home for so many years, was truly 

a privilege and an honor. 

 

As his family we are extremely proud of the role that Dad 

played in government and of the leadership that he 

provided to so many including ourselves. 

 

Dad was a proud father of three very rambunctious boys 

and a husband of 49 years. 

 

He was also the oldest brother and a role model of five 

equally rambunctious boys on a small farm in Big River, 

Saskatchewan. 



6014 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2010 

Dad served in the Canadian Military and was awarded the 

prestigious ―Cock of the Walk‖ recognizing him as a top 

male athlete in the Navy. He was a three-time provincial 

boxing champion who inspired his brother Ron’s 

professional boxing career. He was a mink rancher, a 

commercial fisherman, a trapper and a regular man like so 

many in the north. 

 

Dad was a natural leader, but had never intended on 

playing the role that he did in politics, but he came along 

at a time when the people of northern Saskatchewan 

needed leadership. And he felt a strong responsibility to 

represent those who couldn’t represent themselves. 

 

We want to thank this Assembly and the people of 

Saskatchewan for acknowledging Dad’s role and his time 

spent here. And we hope and pray that those that have 

passed through this Assembly continue to remind you of 

the great privilege that is bestowed upon you and inspires 

all of you to represent the people of Saskatchewan with 

honor and pride as our father did. 

 

In memory of Fred John Thompson 

May 21, 1935 - July 7, 2010. 

 

These are the words of his son, Rodney. And certainly I think 

some of the words that Rod spoke, no question that we 

obviously all agree. And certainly as a fellow northerner, I 

again reiterate Fred’s great love for his family. That was really 

important to him. 

 

I often spoke of his class as a MLA and as an individual. When 

I was interviewed upon Fred’s death, that was the first thing 

that come to my mind, was the fact that Fred was always a class 

act. As a young man, I remember Fred visiting my father on 

numerous occasions. And he always came across as a kind and 

patient and very intent individual that was there to listen to what 

people had to say, and never to anger and always willing to 

listen to some of the concerns and points that my father raised 

and many others around him. 

 

The other thing I mentioned in the interview was the fact that 

Fred had incredible endurance, because as the MLA from 

Athabasca, the travel schedule that we have as probably being 

one of the MLAs that’s the furthest away from the Assembly. 

At one time I clocked the kilometres from my house to the 

Assembly steps here, going through Meadow Lake. It came to 

806 kilometres, and I’m doing this on paved roads. Fred did it 

on gravel roads in the early ’70s. And the time that was 

demanded of him to travel not only here, but to be here the 

many, many weeks and days and months he was away from his 

family, it always has an effect, as many other MLAs would 

know, on not only your heart but certainly your mind as well. 

 

If you’re a strong family man, being away from your family is 

very, very tough. And that’s one of the things that I also thought 

of when I was doing the interview, is Fred’s endurance. He 

travelled many, many miles. And finally on his strength, Mr. 

Speaker, I can tell you that again, when I became the MLA I 

really wanted to emulate Fred. I wanted to be smart, fair, and 

strong. And I also wanted to be a boxer, but I got so many 

lickings, I decided I couldn’t do that. So a lot of people don’t 

realize that a lot of us younger people looked up to Fred and we 

learned off of him. We learned how to be fair and patient and 

certainly be responsible. 

 

And as I look at his strength as well, my father noticed what I 

was doing. And he said, Buckley, you’re trying hard, but you 

can never be a Fred Thompson. So just do your own thing and 

be your own person because that’s a tough road to travel. 

 

And of course, Mr. Speaker, Fred and my father are very close 

friends. And they were born in an era where men were men, and 

Fred had a lot of respect from many, many men. And it wasn’t 

because, as I learned later, because of his prowess as a boxer, 

but more so because of his fairness and certainly for his respect 

and compassion for his fellow northerners. 

 

I would finally point out that when he was ill and in poor health 

I went to visit him. And I walked into the hospital in Saskatoon 

and I walked into his room, and he was sitting there in fairly 

rough shape. And I walked up to him I said, Fred, do you know 

who I am? And he said, hi Buckley. Sorry, Mr. Speaker, but 

those were his words. And he put out his hand to shake my 

hand, in the hospital, and I just told him that he was a good 

man. That’s all I said. Fred, you’re a good man. I said a prayer 

and then I left. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the reason why it’s important on this final 

point is to recognize him for his family, his class, his 

endurance, his strength; it’s also because of his legacy. As a 

young man I remember the northern mining industry in its 

infancy. Fred helped build the northern mining industry that 

today is flourishing and employs many, many people. And it’s 

changed the lives of many, many families. 

 

I remember the crews working on the roads to bring paved 

roads to northern Saskatchewan. I remember the schools, Mr. 

Speaker, that were built. And I remember the bridge at Buffalo 

Narrows that when I, as the Minister of Highways, wanted to 

rename the bridge Thompson Bridge in honour of Fred. But the 

problem was Fred named that bridge the Pioneer Bridge, which 

was named after the many people that he worked with and lived 

with and struggled with in his years in northern Saskatchewan. 

And who am I to take his name off the bridge, even to honour 

him? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I say to his family that it is an honour sharing 

this chair with Fred Thompson. And I pay tribute to his family, 

to his class, to his endurance, to his strength. And I’ll finally say 

to his family on his legacy, which I think every MLA would 

dearly love to hear, that the work that your father, your brother, 

and your husband did for the North and his constituency will 

benefit many, many families for many, many years to come. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour today to 

speak about a former colleague of mine, Fred Thompson. Fred 

served in the . . . I was first elected in 1986, which in many 

ways is a lifetime ago, Mr. Speaker. Fred was an old hand at 

politics at being elected at that stage. 



November 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6015 

But I want to share the first time I met Fred in this building. I 

was just a nominated candidate, the newly minted candidate for 

a constituency at the time called Regina North. And I thought it 

would be a good thing to come and see how the caucus operated 

for their daily routine. And they generously invited me in and 

said how I was an equal and I was a colleague with the gang of 

eight. And I want to say that I shared the party loyalty, but that 

gang of eight did some incredible work. 

 

And Fred Thompson was a part of that. He was actually 

chairing the meeting the day that I participated. I participated 

silently, watching in awe as these eight MLAs spoke in what 

seemed like code because they had the whole question period 

and the rest of the day all sorted out in about 10 minutes flat. 

They just were an incredibly cohesive group by that stage. Of 

course they’d been three years under the microscope or under 

the gun or under whatever you want to call it. But at the end of 

the meeting, Fred Thompson, who was chairing the meeting, 

turned to me and he said, do you have anything to add? And he 

called me by name. And of course what do you add to that 

particular meeting? 

 

Anyway the point is Fred Thompson was a very inclusive 

gentleman right from the very first time I met him. And I 

couldn’t help but admire Fred. I couldn’t help but be pleased to 

believe that he and I were going to be colleagues in the 

not-too-distant future. And colleagues we were, having served 

from ’86 to ’95 when Fred Thompson chose to retire from 

politics. That was indeed an honour. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there was one thing that happened that’s a little bit 

. . . I say it with some regret and a bit of a smile. But we were 

touring the North, and we toured some of the uranium mines up 

there. Fred was on that tour. I was on that tour and a significant 

number of our colleagues were as well. And it was a real eye 

opener and interesting to watch. 

 

And of course the whole nuclear cycle, the uranium mining and 

nuclear power debate was a big issue. It always or it seems like 

it always has been in the New Democratic Party. It’s been an 

issue that we choose, we choose to all have our views, but our 

views are not unanimous on this side of the House, to put it 

mildly. We run the full gamut from people who are absolutely 

pro-nuke to people who are absolutely not. 

 

And Fred and I found ourselves on opposite sides of the nuclear 

fence. And I’ve got to say, it’s the only thing that I know that I 

just was diametrically opposed in view to Fred Thompson. He 

was a man that was easy to admire and easy to follow in his 

basic beliefs. He was a good man. 

 

Anyway after the tour, I did an interview. And I inadvertently 

or mistakenly made a comment about nuclear power and I said, 

and even Fred Thompson would agree. And of course Mr. 

Thompson did not agree. And Fred and I had an exchange of 

words for which I said I was very sorry, and indeed I was. And 

I continue to be sorry to this day for having put words in Fred 

Thompson’s mouth because he did not agree with my case 

there. 

 

But in the spirit of being a colleague and a gentleman, Fred and 

I shook hands and he never mentioned it again. And I’ve never 

mentioned it in Fred’s presence. Maybe now if he’s watching 

from above, he’ll know that I’ve always carried that memory, 

and it was something that I learned. And I am indeed sorry for 

having misrepresented and misspoken about what Fred might 

believe in. 

 

On a happier note, Fred Thompson and I did a parliamentary 

exchange to Washington, DC [District of Columbia]. And what 

a great time that was for Fred and I to see what life was like in 

that great nation south of us in their national capital. And what a 

difference it is from Regina to Washington, DC, but what a 

huge, even bigger, greater difference it is to go from Athabasca, 

from Buffalo Narrows to Washington, DC. And of course we 

talked about that and our shared experiences, and it was a nice 

way for me to get to see yet a different side of Fred Thompson, 

but a very, a very gentlemanly and a very good side. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I am about to take my place, I can’t help but 

reflect that Fred Thompson was a distinguished Saskatchewan 

person. He was a very thoughtful person. He was a family 

person. He was a politician, and he was a gentleman. 

 

I see his picture — I happen to have the obituary here — and I 

just want to congratulate the family for choosing that particular 

picture of Fred Thomson with the jacket over his shoulder and 

the tie. And that’s the Fred Thompson that I will always 

remember — thoughtful, a part of a community, a family 

person. And I’ll remember him with a great deal of fondness for 

the rest of my life. 

 

It was an honour to serve with Fred, and I know that our 

Saskatchewan . . . Certainly Athabasca is a better constituency 

for Fred’s service; our province is a better province for Fred’s 

service. And I know that the New Democratic Party is better for 

his service as well. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion presented by the Premier in recognizing the life of Mr. 

Fred John Thompson. 

 

By leave of the Assembly: 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly and 

expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 

made to his community, his constituency, and to the 

province. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Premier. 

 

John Vern Wall 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

privilege to offer a few thoughts on John V. Wall today, the 

former MLA for Swift Current. Mr. Wall passed away earlier 



6016 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2010 

this year, in April. And, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of ties 

between he and I, though we’re a little different in age 

obviously, Mr. Speaker. And it goes beyond the name. We’re 

not related, at least for the record, although if you play the 

Mennonite game long enough, you might indeed find some 

family ties. But as far as our family is aware, we weren’t 

directly related. 

 

But I benefited much from my relationship with John Wall. He 

was my principal in grade 8 and 9 at W.A. Beatty Collegiate in 

Swift Current, a junior high at the time. And, Mr. Speaker, like 

so many in this Assembly, I can point to a number of teachers 

and principals who had a very positive influence in my life. 

Some of those same teachers and principals, maybe Mr. Wall 

included, may offer the thought that I didn’t learn as much from 

them as I could have. But my recollections and my memory of 

Mr. Wall as the principal at the junior high are very positive, 

and so let me begin there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you will know as someone who served with Mr. 

Wall that from a physical standpoint, Mr. Wall could be an 

intimidating person. He was a tall fellow, and when he needed 

to get your attention, certainly as a principal and no doubt as a 

debater, although I didn’t have any direct experience with him 

in that regard, he could get at least our attention in terms of 

from his voice, not just his stature, when he was a principal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he spent a lifetime educating young people in my 

hometown of Swift Current. And his family was involved in so 

many ways in the community, as was Mr. Wall himself. And he 

spent a number of years as the principal at the junior high where 

I went, at W.A. Beatty Collegiate — a number of very effective 

years, if you talk to those who taught with him and on his staff. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity to serve on the students 

council of that particular junior high in a number of different 

capacities. And I won’t get into the details, but some of those 

capacities I didn’t think I was executing as well as others 

probably thought, certainly as the SRC [student representative 

council] adviser thought, who happened to be the principal. And 

Mr. Wall took it on himself to, in a very positive way, offer 

some correction, offer some constructive suggestions on how I 

could do a better job in the office for which I had run in the 

student council elections. 

 

And that’s the kind of principal he was. And though he might 

be at first blush for a grade 8 student coming into junior high — 

an already intimidating experience — he might have been a 

little intimidating himself, we soon found out that he had a big 

heart and a warm way about him, one of a long-time and 

effective educator, and also a leader in education. 

 

And I admit that I would have lost touch with Mr. Wall, 

obviously, after moving away from junior high and going to 

high school in Swift Current at the comp, but there I got to meet 

his son Jason — Jason, his oldest son, who I proudly count as a 

friend. Jason now lives with his family in Saskatoon and was 

good enough to help organize our class reunion not long ago 

and emcee it. And Jason, not unlike his dad, was well thought 

of by all the students, well liked and well loved by all his fellow 

students. And just not very long ago, as a result of that reunion, 

we’ve had a chance for some reminiscence. 

 

And I also got to know in later years, I knew Laurie, obviously, 

his daughter — Gay and John’s daughter — and then Jeff as 

well, another son who’s still in Swift Current, very much 

involved in the city of Swift Current at Elmwood Golf Club, 

and been involved in various ventures along the way, in 

businesses. And Jeff too continues in the tradition of John and 

Gay in giving back to their community. 

 

And I think that’s how people remember John. It’s part of the 

reason why John was able to be successful in politics as well, 

Mr. Speaker. As we know, it’s a difficult proposition to gain a 

nomination, especially in a constituency that’s currently held by 

that party, as was the case for John. It had been ably represented 

by John Penner, who had to retire for health reasons. And no 

doubt to get that nomination was not an easy proposition. But 

John was able to do it, John Wall was able to do it in large 

measure because of the high regard that he was held in and 

because he was prepared to do the work. 

 

And then, Mr. Speaker, when I was director of business 

development for the city of Swift Current, I had the chance to 

work with his office as the MLA for Swift Current, as did a 

number at city hall, of course. The constituency of Swift 

Current is mostly the city, although there’s rural areas north and 

south, but principally the city. And so there is a close 

relationship, I would say, between the council, the city council, 

the city administration, and the MLA in terms of their 

relationship with the provincial government. And John Wall’s 

office was always available to city. More than that, often 

proactively, John would offer to help on certain issues to the 

councillors and to the senior administrators at city hall if he felt 

there was something that the provincial government could be 

assisting with the city. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, obviously that speaks very well for any of 

us. For any of us as MLAs, if we’re known as representatives 

here in Regina to whom constituents can go for help, to whom 

you can go and easily access some services, that of course is a 

great reputation to have as an MLA. 

 

John continued to be involved in the life of Swift Current, both 

before and after his time as an MLA. I would say, Mr. Speaker, 

notably, that he served with my dad on the Mennonite heritage 

committee. That was a committee that was established to try to 

attract or try to bring some heritage buildings, Mennonite 

heritage buildings, to the city of Swift Current to establish a bit 

of a tourist attraction, but mostly to make sure that some of that 

heritage was preserved. 

 

And so John Wall and my dad, who’s interestingly also named 

John Wall — and more on that in a moment — and a number of 

others, Corny Unger and Mr. Neufeld . . . Well the member for 

Martensville will know most of the surnames I mentioned, but 

they worked very hard to, for example, located Sommerfeld 

church which is now on the site there. They worked very hard 

to locate a house and a barn in the Mennonite tradition, which 

was that they would be adjoined together, Mr. Speaker. That 

was also there as well. And there was also a summer kitchen 

and a number of other great Mennonite heritage assets. 

 

[16:00] 

 

The reason they are there today for people to enjoy, for people 



November 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6017 

to learn about the Mennonite heritage, is because of that 

committee. And I think John V. Wall was one of the founding 

members of it, as was my dad, John Wall without a middle 

initial. It was thought by some to be too worldly to have a 

middle name or initial, and so my dad doesn’t have one. 

 

But by them and others, the reason that that asset is there to 

celebrate and record that history is because John V. Wall was 

interested in things beyond politics. And he was very much 

interested in politics, to be sure. He was very much interested in 

education but when it came to the Mennonite heritage site or 

when it came to the Prairie Pioneer Kiwanis Club, which is a 

very important service club in our community, he was a 

stalwart. I think he served as president of that as well. 

 

And so I also want to say this, is I campaigned against John 

Wall in the very first election that I ran in, so there were a lot of 

Wall lawn signs around Swift Current. Different colours, to be 

sure, but a lot of them. And I remember going to one door in 

particular, Mr. Speaker, knocking on the door, and a lady came 

to the door. And I introduced myself and went through my little 

campaign spiel. And the lady stopped me kind of in the middle 

of it and said, I can’t believe you’re running against your own 

dad. 

 

And I think I had a chance to tell that to Mr. Wall later, to John 

V. Wall later, and he got a kick out of it because I think he also 

approached politics in a way that some have remarked here that 

we should probably all be aspirants to, which is to be able to be 

engaged in debate in a fairly compelling and maybe even 

sometimes aggressive way in this place, but then to have a spirit 

of non-partisanship outside of this Assembly. I think that’s an 

important gift as well that we can recognize from Mr. Wall. 

 

So he was my principal. His kids are friends, certainly 

acquaintances. And then he was a fellow candidate in an 

election. And then, after that obviously, Mr. Speaker, a 

constituent who remained very involved in the community. And 

again, our community is better for his service, better for his 

involvement in Swift Current, and I just want to acknowledge 

that today. 

 

I also want to thank the family, and recognize Gay and Laurie 

and Jason and Jeff because they shared their dad, in more ways 

than politics, but through his involvement in the community and 

education. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would move, by leave of the Assembly: 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly, and 

expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 

made to his community, his constituency, and to the 

province. 

 

John Vern Wall, who passed away on April 22, 2010, 

was a member of this Legislative Assembly from 1995 

until 1999, representing the constituency of Swift Current 

for the New Democratic Party. Mr. Wall served on the 

Standing Committee on Non-Controversial Bills from 

March 1996 until May of 1999. 

 

Mr. Wall was born on March 13th, 1938 in Swift Current, 

Saskatchewan. He attended various elementary schools in 

Swift Current and completed high school at the Swift 

Current Collegiate Institute. Mr. Wall obtained his 

teaching certificate at the Moose Jaw Normal School and 

completed his Bachelor of Education at the University of 

Saskatchewan in 1968. He was an elementary 

schoolteacher from 1957 to 1967, and a middle years 

principal from 1967 until he retired from teaching in 

1988. He was then elected to the Assembly in 1995. 

 

After this time in the Assembly, John was an active 

member in many service clubs, community organizations, 

and served on the board of directors of the then Western 

Savings Credit Union. 

 

John is survived and sadly missed by his wife of 48 years, 

Gay; three children, Jason, Laurie, and Jeff, their spouses; 

eight grandchildren; and his siblings, Vic, Les, Ralph, and 

Leona and their spouses. 

 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 

this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 

members of the bereaved family. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion presented by the Premier recognizing the life of John 

Vern Wall. By leave of the Assembly: 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly and 

expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 

made to his community, his constituency, and to the 

province. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the Leader 

of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a privilege to rise to say 

a few words on the condolence motion moved by the Premier. 

And the former member from the constituency of Swift Current, 

Mr. John Wall, who passed away on April 22nd of this year . . . 

Mr. Speaker, I’m not going to speak very long because I know a 

number of my colleagues are going to add their comments 

because John of course worked with a number of members of 

our caucus and also, I think, taught one or two of them. 

 

And it’s true that John had a big impact on people, whether it 

was in the classroom or in the caucus when we attended. And 

while he was a very jovial, good-natured fellow, you always 

knew when he was serious. He spoke in a very eloquent, 

pointed manner in caucus and got his view across and could win 

many, many debates. 

 

John was born in 1938 in Swift Current, Mr. Speaker, the 

community that he would later represent here in the Assembly. 

He pursued a career in education, Mr. Speaker, obtaining his 

certificate in teaching at Moose Jaw Normal School and walked 

into the classroom for the first time teaching at the age of 19, 

and would later complete his education degree at the University 

of Saskatchewan in 1968 with an education degree. He taught 

elementary school for a decade, Mr. Speaker, from 1957 to ’67, 

and was at W.A. Beatty Junior High for nearly two decades 

until his retirement from teaching in 1988. 



6018 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2010 

He answered the political call, Mr. Speaker, and was elected to 

the Assembly in 1995 and served until 1999. After retiring from 

politics, John remained active in his community and many 

service clubs and communities and organizations and boards of 

directors, board of directors of the Western Savings Credit 

Union. He was also, as an educator and a volunteer and a 

service club member and as a Member of the Legislative 

Assembly, John Wall served the people of Swift Current and 

the province of Saskatchewan in many ways. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I know at the celebration of his life in Swift 

Current, the hundreds of people who came out and not only for 

the service but stayed around to tell stories and reminisce about 

the life of John Wall, you know that he was successful in more 

than a political way; he was a true community member and 

people truly loved him. 

 

So on behalf of the caucus, I want to extend my condolences to 

his wife, his members of his family, his children, and also to his 

many grandchildren. And I just want to say that on behalf on 

the caucus, again, I extend condolences to all and to all the 

people of Swift Current on the loss of an important resident, a 

father, a former member of the Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am truly 

honoured this afternoon to stand and reflect upon the life and 

accomplishments of John Wall. I, like the Premier, first met Mr. 

Wall as a teacher. He was my homeroom teacher in grade 8. He 

was the principal. He was an individual who truly made a 

difference in many, many people’s lives. I had the experience 

first-hand to see the difference that he can make as both a 

teacher and an individual in our community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as a homeroom teacher, he had the responsibility 

of meeting with each of the students as they were going through 

the academic year and talking with students about what they 

could do better and what they should do better in their various 

classes, Mr. Speaker. And John Wall was the type of individual 

who always encouraged everybody to do much better than what 

they were doing. Mr. Speaker, he was an individual who cared a 

great deal about every single student he taught, and it was very 

clear in how he dealt with each and every student. It was very 

clear in how he brought his enthusiasm for education and his 

enthusiasm for life to the classroom. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, he told every single student that you could 

be anything you wanted to be, you could accomplish anything 

you wanted to accomplish, and that you were only limited by 

your willingness to work hard. And, Mr. Speaker, many, many 

students that had Mr. Wall as a homeroom teacher, as a 

principal, learned that work ethic was incredibly important if 

you wanted to achieve things in life and that we all started from 

different places in life and we all had different skills and 

abilities and attributes. But at the end of the day, if you worked 

hard, if you cared, you in fact could accomplish great things and 

accomplish anything that you wanted to accomplish. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I think many, many students had the opportunity to 

learn from Mr. Wall that you had abilities you didn’t think you 

had and that you could accomplish things that you didn’t think 

you could. 

John Wall also had an enthusiasm for life that I think very few 

people ever have. Every single day, he had that enormous smile 

on his face. He had nothing but positive things to say to those 

around him. Whether it was to students in the school . . . and 

Beatty Collegiate was a tough secondary school, had grade 8 

and 9 where children were at, in many ways, their years where 

behaviour wasn’t necessarily the most paramount thing on their 

mind. And in that environment, he always had a smile on his 

face. He always looked to the positive. He always tried to install 

. . . instill in others, pardon me, Mr. Speaker, that each day you 

could do something positive, each day you could do something 

worthwhile. And if you tried to do that, when all those days 

added up, you would have success. 

 

He was an individual who . . . If you had him actually teach you 

a class . . . and I did. I had grade 8 math with John Wall as my 

instructor and teacher. And he worked very, very hard to ensure 

that every student enjoyed the class and that your learning 

experience was more than just an academic experience of sitting 

in the classroom and learning the basics. He wanted to make 

sure that you truly enjoyed going to school, that you truly 

enjoyed your opportunity to learn, and that in doing so you 

actually had an experience that you enjoyed so that education 

wasn’t something you had to do. It was something you wanted 

to do. 

 

And I, like many others who had Mr. Wall for a teacher, 

changed our view of education. Up until grade 8, quite frankly, 

I wasn’t one that cared a great deal about what your marks were 

or what you accomplished. I didn’t care about what those marks 

might mean as far as your educational opportunities down the 

road. But he took the time to make sure that we understood that 

the things we did today could make a difference in your future 

and that the work ethic you learned today would definitely 

make a difference in your future. And I can tell you, it made a 

difference in my attitude towards school, my attitude towards 

getting good grades, and the importance of working hard in 

school and the importance of getting that education towards a 

future. 

 

Now Mr. Wall had that impact on many, many students. And 

I’ve talked to many students that had Mr. Wall as a homeroom 

teacher, years down the road, and seen the success that they’ve 

achieved, the success that they’ve had by having that inspiration 

that he worked so hard to bring forward to every student in the 

school, to all those that he had contact with, and that desire that 

he had. And he stated it many, many times that at the end of our 

life on this earth that we will have made the world a little better 

place by our contributions to it and that if we smiled every day 

and if we worked hard every day we would make a difference 

whether we thought we would or not. 

 

And he was that type of individual who always wanted you to 

think about the best, always wanted you to believe that you 

could achieve those things when many others thought maybe 

you couldn’t, and wanted you to work continually to try to 

achieve the best outcome for yourself, and in doing so, you 

would make the world a little better place. 

 

[16:15] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the environment at Beatty Collegiate, where 

he was the principal, was not always the easiest when you have 



November 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6019 

grade 8 and 9 students and you’re in competition with another 

junior high school. There was always immense competition 

between Beatty and Irwin, the two junior high schools in the 

city of Swift Current. And it was in everything from sports to 

dances to activities throughout the city of Swift Current. And 

there was tremendous competition. And it was a different age 

and time than it is today, Mr. Speaker, and that competition 

sometimes boiled over at sporting events and boiled over at 

other events. 

 

And so one of the things that the principal had to do is he had to 

attend all these events. And you would never see a football 

game or a basketball game or, for that matter, a school dance 

either at Irwin or at Beatty that the principals of both had to be 

there. And that was to ensure that the differences of opinion 

between grade 8 and 9 students didn’t boil over into other types 

of activities, and keep the students in line. Mr. Speaker, I’d 

have to admit I was among those that he had to keep in line at 

times. And I’m sure my colleague from the constituency of 

Swift Current was also there and one of those that had to be 

kept in line at times as well. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the short of it is that John Wall made a 

significant difference in people’s lives, both as an educator and 

then later when he was elected to this Assembly. I had the 

honour of being elected for a short six weeks. I was elected in 

June of 1999 and served with John Wall until the election in 

September of 1999 — a very short period of time. The House 

never sat during that period of time. But it was indeed a rare 

honour for me to sit and serve with somebody that I had such 

great respect for as an educator, as a person who cared so 

deeply for those that he attempted to educate over the years, and 

somebody who cared so much about this province, about the 

community of Swift Current, and about the people that he 

represented. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, John Wall I considered both a teacher, a 

friend, and a colleague. But above all, John Wall was an 

individual who was inspired by the concept that each day he 

could make a difference for somebody else, a positive 

difference for somebody else, and throughout his life John Wall 

achieved that. And for those reasons, he was an exemplary 

individual. His children and family had that benefit on a daily 

basis, and they turned out to be exemplary children. His family 

serves him well today, is a credit to him as a father. And, Mr. 

Speaker, John Wall made a significant difference in this 

province to many people. 

 

For those reasons, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join with the Premier 

and the Leader of the Opposition and I think many of my other 

colleagues in giving my condolence to his family, to his friends, 

and those who knew John Wall as a teacher and as a friend. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour to join 

in and be allowed to make a few remarks for the condolence 

motion for Mr. John Wall. 

 

The Premier explained in his remarks that he isn’t related to Mr. 

Wall, but I in fact am through marriage. My mother-in-law 

Colleen is first cousins with Gay, John’s wife. Gay’s mother, 

Sina, was a sibling to my wife’s grandfather, Sidney Olson, in 

the Stewart Valley area around Swift Current. And I know 

representatives from my family were at the funeral, and I too 

had the privilege to be at the funeral in Swift Current a few 

months ago. 

 

While I didn’t know Mr. Wall personally, attending the funeral 

gave me a chance to get a snapshot of his life. And from that 

very large event, when there was so many people — a real 

cross-section of the Swift Current and area community who 

were in attendance — it was clear that Mr. Wall was 

appreciated as an educator, that he had made a significant 

contribution through many service clubs in the Swift Current 

area. I know there were many Good Sams who were there. 

There was a lot of discussion as well about his role as a 

legislator and the contributions he made to the province and to 

the Swift Current area. 

 

But what really stands out the most for me, Mr. Speaker, were 

the remarks that family members made about the type of father 

and grandparent Mr. Wall was. And there were many stories 

shared from the grandchildren’s perspective about how Mr. 

Wall loved playing games, his great sense of humour, how he 

truly treasured his grandchildren, and enjoyed spending time 

with them as much as he could. And I know, Mr. Speaker, 

while we may talk about his contributions as an MLA or as a 

teacher, to the family members what stands out is his 

contributions as a grandpa and as a dad. And I think that’s 

perhaps the most important thing that any of us would want to 

be remembered for at the end of the day. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, my remarks are brief, but I wanted to say, on 

behalf of the Olson clan around the Stewart Valley area and 

beyond and on behalf of my family, I’d like to extend 

condolences to Gay and to the entire John Wall family. And I 

know that they’ll have those precious memories of their 

grandpa for many years. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I served with John Wall 

in this very legislature throughout John’s entire career. And I 

was blessed to represent Regina Coronation Park or Regina 

Albert North as it was called, and he was blessed to represent 

Swift Current. 

 

I figured it out what happened to our John Wall. I think there 

was . . . The member for Athabasca won, incidentally, with a 

record of 91 or 93 per cent of the vote. It was an all-time record 

for the highest vote for a person with that name. But I think in 

Swift Current, I think that the Wall vote was more than 93 per 

cent in that one particular election. Unfortunately the John that 

represented the NDP got . . . when they counted it, I think they 

must have mixed the votes a little bit, Mr. Speaker. And any 

way . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Keep working on it, yes. 

 

Today it is my honour to say a few words in memory of my 

friend, John Wall: my friend who I knew as a teacher; I knew as 

a politician; I knew as a very witty, personable person; I knew 

as a community leader and a person very much caring about his 

Swift Current and his province. 



6020 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2010 

John Wall, as was pointed out by the member for Regina 

Dewdney, was a terrific, terrific and caring principal and 

teacher. And lucky were the students that would have John’s 

smiling, supportive countenance, day after day after day, 

encouraging them that there is more that they could do and 

more that they could be. And that life is good, and if you just 

work hard and seek as much enjoyment as you can in life, 

things are good, and you’ll leave the world a better place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity to golf a few games with 

John Wall. He was also a golfer, although both John Wall and 

myself should never have ever thought of giving up our day 

jobs to become professional golfers. There were moments when 

it took not only his sense of good humour but mine as well for 

us to get through our golf games. But it was always a treat and 

always a pleasure to spend some time with John Wall. 

 

John had an ability, Mr. Speaker, to get his way, and you didn’t 

even realize he was getting it. John Wall wound up getting the 

then government caucus to meet in Swift Current. And we all 

thought it was a great idea. We thought it was a great . . . Of 

course Swift Current is a nice city; there’s no question about 

that. But there’s lots of nice places throughout the province that 

we could’ve gone to. But John Wall asked for the caucus 

meeting to be moved to his fair city, and we went. He had that 

ability. And I know I remember from many caucus meetings 

that we shared, whenever John spoke, he had something 

important to say. He had something to contribute, and he 

always did it in a very positive way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I note that my friend and former colleague, John 

Wall, continues even after his passing to encourage us all to do 

and to be better. I too want to share in passing on my 

condolences to Gay and the entire family and friends of my 

friend, my colleague, John Wall. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 

to join with colleagues on both sides of the legislature in 

extending our condolences to Gay Wall and members of her 

family on the recent passing of her husband and father and 

grandfather, John Wall. Mr. Speaker, when John Wall came 

into the Assembly in 1995, he had some pretty big shoes to fill. 

His predecessor, John Penner, had also been a teacher and a 

principal for the city of Swift Current. And when John Penner 

wasn’t able to run in the 1995 campaign, there were people in 

the Swift Current area that went to work and asked John Wall to 

take a crack at the nomination and represent the people of the 

city of Swift Current. 

 

When John Wall came to the legislature and came into our 

caucus, I think there’s only a couple of words to describe him. 

He was a very tall, imposing man who had a smile that would 

warm the hearts of your worst enemy. He was a jocular man, a 

kind man, and always had good things to say to people even in 

the thrust and parry of debate. 

 

What I will remember about John Wall were not all of the 

debates that took place in this Assembly, but I will remember 

being the minister of Education from 1995 to 1998 when John 

Wall was a member of this Assembly. I was the minister. And 

he was always interested in advancing public policy in our 

province. And he was particularly interested in the children’s 

action plan that our government brought into the province in the 

1990s, where we were trying to coordinate services to children 

and young people. And it was something that John Wall was 

particularly interested in seeing advanced in the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I became the minister of Health in 1998, I 

think it’s fair to say that there were a number of heated issues in 

the province, least of which was the need to merge 44 or 45 

collective agreements into five. This meant taking all of the 

various nursing collective agreements, creating one collective 

agreement, taking all of the support staff. They had, I think, 

three different unions representing the workers — SEIU 

[Service Employees International Union], SGEU 

[Saskatchewan Government and General Employees’ Union], 

and CUPE [Canadian Union of Public Employees], and then 

health sciences. So the job of the Department of Health and the 

minister of Health was to try and merge these collective 

agreements. I think it was seen as a pretty daunting task. 

 

John had a particular nickname for me, which I won’t share 

with the House, but I will say this: that he said, you’re going to 

be able to do this. You know, because I wasn’t sure that this 

could done. He said, you’re going to be able to do this; I have 

no doubt about that. And I just want his family to know that I 

always appreciated the support that John Wall gave not only 

myself, but other members of the Romanow cabinet who were 

trying to advance public policy at a time when we didn’t have a 

lot of money, at a time when we still had to deal with debt, and 

at a time when, you know, there were various . . . I think at one 

stage there was a recession in the economy. These were not 

easy times. 

 

[16:30] 

 

But John Wall always had the interests of his constituents. He 

was supportive of his colleagues, and he always tried to 

advance the cause of good public policy, particularly for 

children and young people. And for that I will always 

appreciate John Wall’s time in this Assembly. With that, Mr. 

Speaker, I’ll take my seat. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion presented by the Premier in recognition of the life of 

John Vern Wall, by leave of the Assembly: 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly and 

expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 

made to his community, his constituency, and to the 

province. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Government 



November 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6021 

House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 

Assembly I move: 

 

That notwithstanding Rule 8(2) of the Rules and 

Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 

an audio-video record of the oral tributes, together with a 

Hansard transcript and resolutions adopted, be 

communicated in memory of the deceased to the bereaved 

families on behalf of the Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved, 

by leave of the Assembly: 

 

That notwithstanding rule 8(2) of the Rules and 

Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 

an audio-video record of the oral tributes, together with 

the Hansard transcript and the resolutions adopted, be 

communicated in memory of the deceased to the bereaved 

families on behalf of the Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 84 through 99. 

 

The Speaker: — Answers to questions 84 through 99 are 

tabled. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 144 — The Litter Control Amendment Act, 2010 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

after my remarks, I will move second reading of The Litter 

Control Amendment Act, 2010. 

 

The Litter Control Act was originally passed in 1973. Its 

purpose is to provide the provincial government with the 

legislative authority to address litter-related issues, to create 

related regulations, and to establish a provincial beverage 

container collection and recycling program. 

 

In 1988, The Litter Control Act was amended to create the 

program for recycling designated containers. Designated 

beverage containers include non-refillable alcohol, wine, beer, 

soft drink, water, tea, and juice containers. The program 

imposes the obligation to pay and collect a refundable deposit 

and an environmental handling charge on any designated 

beverage container. The money that is collected through the 

program is the funding source for the beverage container 

collection and recycling program operated by SARCAN. 

 

Last spring this legislature passed amendments to The 

Environmental Management and Protection Act that will see 

the incorporation of The Litter Control Act into The 

Environmental Management and Protection Act. At this time 

however, amendments to the existing litter control Act are 

needed to address a lawsuit related to environmental handling 

charges. 

 

The claim asserts that the environmental handling charges 

collected by the province under The Litter Control Act are 

actually a tax and not a fee. The proposed amendments 

retroactively negate the lawsuit and future lawsuits. But more 

importantly, the amendments will provide clarity to the original 

intention of the government regarding environmental handling 

charges for the purpose for the provincial beverage container 

program. 

 

On December 31st, 2009, a law firm issued a statement of claim 

against the province. The statement of claim is seeking to 

recover the environmental handling charges imposed and 

collected under authority contained in The Litter Control Act. 

The claim is brought on behalf of a restaurant company that 

purchased liquor for resale on its premises. The statement of 

claim contends that the vendor should not be subject to the 

environmental handling charges because they do not meet the 

definition of a purchaser as stated in the Act. 

 

In the Act, a purchaser is defined as a person who purchases a 

beverage in a designated container for one of three purposes. It 

could be purchased for his or her own consumption. It could be 

purchased for consumption by other people at the purchaser’s 

expense, or it could be purchased on behalf of or as an agent for 

a principal who desires to acquire a beverage in the designated 

container for consumption by the principal or by other people at 

the principal’s expense. 

 

The claim also contends that the rates of the environmental 

handling charges do not correspond to the costs associated with 

the collection and recycling of beverage containers. 

Furthermore, the statement of claim asserts that the beverage 

container program’s environmental handling charges are a 

legislatively unauthorized tax and an indirect tax. 

 

In 1998 the Supreme Court of Canada ruled that a fee must be 

related to the cost of the service delivered to be constitutionally 

valid. If this relationship does not exist, the fee is a tax and must 

be authorized in legislation and not through regulation. 

 

Since 1998, the province has retained surplus environmental 

handling charges within the General Revenue Fund. The suit is 

seeking restitution of the environmental handling charges paid 

and associated damages. This single claim of $2,200 is not 

significant in its amount. However if this lawsuit included all 

vendors who purchased liquor for resale on their premises — 

bars, casinos, clubs, and restaurants, etc. — the estimated 



6022 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2010 

amount of the claim is substantial. In fact it could be well over 

$1 million. A potential financial liability of approximately 

$350,000 per year would be at risk every year the legislation is 

not changed. 

 

The statement of claim was reviewed by lawyers in the Ministry 

of Justice and Attorney General. They are of the opinion that 

the action has merit, because since 1998 the province has 

consistently recovered significantly more revenue than was 

actually required to operate the beverage container recycling 

program. They are also of the opinion that it is probable a court 

would consider the environmental handling charges to be a tax. 

 

The Ministry of Justice and Attorney General has concluded 

that retroactive amendments to The Litter Control Act and 

changes to the relevant sections of The Environmental 

Management and Protection Act were required to address the 

situation. The appropriate changes to The Environmental 

Management and Protection Act were introduced and passed as 

House amendments in this Assembly last spring. The 

amendments being proposed in The Litter Control Amendment 

Act would ensure that the environmental handling charges are 

collected legally and would also clarify who is responsible for 

paying them. 

 

The original wording of The Litter Control Act is unclear as to 

whether it is the beverage or the container that is the subject of 

an environmental handling charge. The amendments in this Bill 

will provide necessary clarity to the original intent by 

specifying that it is the purchaser of the container who is 

responsible for paying, not the consumer of the beverage. In 

addition, a change is needed that establishes the environmental 

handling charges for specific container types within the Act. By 

setting out the values of the environmental handling charges in 

the Act, it ensures that the charges are valid if they are 

characterized by a court as a tax. 

 

These amendments are required to cover the transition period 

until the new environmental management and protection Act is 

proclaimed and The Litter Control Act is thereby repealed. 

 

The government’s ability to collect environmental handling 

charges is essential to the operation of the province-wide 

beverage container recycling program. This is a program that 

the citizens of this province take full advantage of and which is 

integral to the protection of our environment. The 

environmental handling charges are used to fund the work of 

the Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation Centres and in 

particular its recycling division, SARCAN Recycling. 

SARCAN has been contracted by the government to collect and 

recycle beverage, designated beverage containers and to provide 

deposit refund services under the program. 

 

The statement of claim that I described could potentially 

jeopardize the financial viability and sustainability of the 

beverage container collection and recycling program, which has 

been in operation in the province since 1988. A successful 

claim could have a negative impact on the operation of SARC 

[Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation Centres] and its 

recycling division. 

 

The proposed amendments to The Litter Control Act will not 

result in changes to the operation of the beverage container 

collection and recycling program. Rather they will ensure that 

the legislative and regulatory intent for the administration and 

operation of the program is maintained. Businesses that were 

obligated to collect and remit the environmental handling 

charges and refundable deposits prior to the implementation of 

the amendments will remain obligated to do so if the proposed 

amendments are enacted. 

 

In addition, the proposed amendments will have no effect on 

consumers as the amount of the environmental handling charges 

remain the same as they were prior to the amendments. If the 

proposed amendments are approved, any future revisions to the 

amount of the environmental handling charges will be achieved 

through amendments to the Act. 

 

I reiterate, the proposed amendments will not result in a change 

in policy. They will rather ensure that the original legislative 

and regulatory intent for the administration and operation of the 

beverage container collection and recycling program is 

maintained. Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Litter 

Control Amendment Act, 2010. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for the 

Environment has moved that Bill No. 144, The Litter Control 

Amendment Act, 2010 be now read the second time. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member for 

Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I thought 

maybe I was on the wrong Bill for a minute there, but I think I 

am, by the minister’s comments. I want to thank the minister for 

his comments. He was fairly thorough in making explanation as 

to what the changes are on Bill 144, and it’s important to make 

sure that the integrity of The Litter Control Act and the system 

of environmental handling charges and refundable deposits is 

maintained. 

 

I don’t think anyone in Saskatchewan hasn’t travelled 

somewhere else. And I remember quite clearly . . . Previously, 

Mr. Speaker, before being elected, I worked in retail. And if 

you ever tried to explain to an angry customer environmental 

handling charges — what they were used for, how they were 

calculated or how they were collected, and also deposits — it 

was fairly time consuming many, many times, Mr. Speaker, 

when the legislation was first put in place and many people 

didn’t understand the importance or maybe didn’t appreciate the 

importance of having the environmental charge and also the 

deposits attached to containers in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

But I remember quite clearly being away in a different province 

which did not have deposits at the time, and there wasn’t quite 

the emphasis that there is nowadays on recycling, and I was 

shocked by the amount of pop bottles, cans, containers that 

were overflowing out of garbage cans. It was just something 

that we very seldom ever saw and see here in Saskatchewan 

because people are quite conscientious, and there are people 

that spend time picking up bottles and cans that are discarded. 

And it’s an important part of keeping our province clean and the 

environment clean and also recycling materials that are without 

a doubt reusable, and saving landfill and saving the 

environment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, so it’s interesting, the minister’s comments on The 



November 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6023 

Litter Control Act and the amendments being proposed. 

 

And I guess when I was first looking at the background 

information, wondering why environmental handling charges 

were being left in the legislation but yet deposits . . . Well 

environmental is moving from regulation into legislation, but 

the specific recyclables is left in regulation and also the 

amounts of deposits that are attached to those containers is left 

within the regulation. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we know that the existing legislation allows 

the government to increase or decrease both the environmental 

handling charges and the refundable deposits, but that this 

proposed Bill moves the schedule of environmental handling 

charges for containers into the legislation and takes away the 

government’s ability to change those in regulation, so it would 

have to be brought to the legislature. So there was a number of 

questions as to why that was being done. It does though allow 

the government to continue to set the refundable deposit by 

regulation or by cabinet order. 

 

I think the biggest questions that arose out of this piece of 

legislation when my colleagues and I were having discussion on 

it was the whole idea of the provision that it introduces which 

prevents anyone from suing the government to recover 

environmental handling charges, and that it’s retroactive to 

April 1st, 1998, which is somewhat unusual. And I would have 

to say, Mr. Speaker, that it is, I think, a fairly serious matter to 

change the law retroactively and to limit people’s rights to take 

legal action. 

 

[16:45] 

 

Now there could be a very good reason for this, but we need to 

really look at the legislation in detail and discuss and consider, I 

think, the implications of this retroactivity provision that’s in 

this piece of legislation. And that’s a fairly big red flag when 

you’re talking about retroactivity that goes back 12 years. It’s a 

fair length of time. 

 

Now we had done a bit of supposing and wondering why this 

may be in place or why the minister is looking at putting it in 

place, and we felt that it could be the result of a court decision. 

There was one a number of years ago, and I think the minister 

referred to it, that went to the Supreme Court that talked about 

service fees collected for specific purposes could not exceed the 

cost to government of delivering that service. He also referred 

to one that was ongoing, a court case that was ongoing. 

 

So all of these need to be considered when we look at this piece 

of legislation. And I wondered first-hand, I guess, if this was 

going to be part of the government’s new . . . They have talked 

about a provincial recycling program, and if the changes are 

necessary for that. But it truly just sounds like the minister is 

addressing the issue of the court challenge and the legal aspects 

of the operation of this piece of legislation. 

 

But it is going to be interesting when we see the proposals that 

are put forward for the provincial multi-material recycling, how 

that will affect municipalities and how it will affect 

communities and if it will actually meet the needs of those 

communities. Because it is a large task, and there are different 

expectations from different communities and different 

municipalities. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it’s just the first couple of steps have been 

taken. I’m sure that we will see on this piece of legislation . . . 

The minister made the comments about The Environmental 

Management and Protection Act, which it will be rolled into 

eventually. So while we’re dealing with this issue specifically 

today, which looks like it does just deal with the legal aspect of 

the environmental handling charges, I’m sure this Act will be 

back before this legislature in the not too distant future as we 

move ahead with other plans and other commitments that the 

government has signalled that they want. 

 

That being said, Mr. Speaker, there . . . My colleagues have a 

few other comments on this piece of legislation and I’m sure 

there are other questions that we need to . . . and information 

gathered and questions for committee. But as of today I’ll 

adjourn debate so other colleagues will have an opportunity to 

rise and make comment. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 144, The 

Litter Control Amendment Act. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 148 — The Animal Protection 

Amendment Act, 2010 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Agriculture minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, at the end of my remarks I will move second reading 

of Bill No. 148, The Animal Protection Amendment Act, 2010. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the vast majority of Saskatchewan livestock 

producers provide exceptional care for their animals. They 

recognize that providing feed, water, and shelter is the humane 

thing to do. In addition, Mr. Speaker, they make their living 

raising livestock. Properly caring for their animals benefits their 

bottom line. 

 

While there have been instances of animal abuse, I am pleased 

to say that these cases are rare. However when animal neglect 

occurs, it hurts the industry as a whole. It casts a black eye on 

all farmers and ranchers in Saskatchewan and raises our 

agriculture profile in a negative way. 

 

In 2009 the Saskatchewan Society for the Prevention of Cruelty 

to Animals prepared a report which noted an increase in the 

number of serious investigations involving livestock neglect. At 

least seven animal neglect investigations resulted in charges 

being laid last year. For example, Mr. Speaker, in March of last 

year, over 200 head of cattle were found deceased, and another 

288 head were seized from a farm near Outlook. While the 

court imposed a fine of $5,000 to each individual involved in 

the case and prohibited them from owning livestock for 10 

years, this government and the livestock industry believe such 

extreme cases warrant even further recourse. Other animal 

neglect cases last year involved other livestock such as horses, 



6024 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2010 

and others involved pets such as dogs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is very concerned every time we 

hear of a case where animal welfare is threatened. Animal 

owners have a responsibility to provide adequate care for their 

animals, and we know that the vast majority of animal owners 

fulfill this responsibility and do provide the necessary care. 

 

However if there are cases where people can no longer care for 

their animals, there are options available. They can call the 

Saskatchewan SPCA [Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to 

Animals], or they can often call on neighbours or friends for 

their support, or they can call our Ministry of Agriculture staff 

to discuss options. Mr. Speaker, neglect is certainly not an 

option. 

 

Consequently the Ministry of Agriculture, in co-operation with 

the Saskatchewan SPCA, have taken a number of steps in order 

to decrease incidences of animal neglect and abuse. These steps 

included a review of The Animal Protection Act, 1999 and 

consultations with a wide range of livestock groups during the 

winter of 2009-2010. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Act was last reviewed 10 years ago. A lot has 

changed in agriculture in that time, and so we felt it was 

important to review this legislation. The review and 

consultations resulted in a clear recommendation to increase the 

penalties for people convicted of animal neglect. 

 

A further round of consultations took place in 2010. We 

received written statements from 15 livestock organizations 

supporting changes to The Animal Protection Act. The letters of 

support were received from the Saskatchewan SPCA, the Farm 

Animal Council of Saskatchewan, the Saskatchewan 

Cattlemen’s Association, the Saskatchewan Stock Growers 

Association, the Saskatchewan Cattle Feeders’ Association, the 

Saskatchewan Veterinary Medical Association, the 

Saskatchewan Bison Association, Saskatchewan Egg Producers, 

Saskatchewan Livestock Association, the Dairy Farmers of 

Saskatchewan, the Saskatchewan Horse Federation, Sask Pork, 

the Sask Sheep Development Board, the Chicken Farmers of 

Saskatchewan and the Livestock Marketers of Saskatchewan. 

 

While views differed on the amount of maximum fine, all 

organizations supported the overall concept to increase both the 

monetary penalty and the maximum prison term that may be 

imposed by the courts for those convicted of animal neglect. 

The Ministry of Agriculture is committed to maintaining a high 

standard of animal health and welfare in Saskatchewan. 

 

With respect to protecting animals in comparison to similar 

legislation in other provincial jurisdictions, Saskatchewan 

currently has the oldest set of penalty standards among the 

provinces, places in the lowest quarter regarding the maximum 

fine available to the courts when sentencing offenders, and 

ranks as one of the lowest provinces regarding prison terms 

available to the courts when sentencing convicted offenders. 

 

The Animal Protection Amendment Act, 2010 will address these 

issues. It will create a deterrent in order to reduce incidence of 

animal neglect and abuse, and it will bring us in line with the 

regulations in other parts of the country. In fact the new 

proposed penalties would put Saskatchewan among the leaders 

in the country in animal protection. 

 

The proposed changes include increasing the maximum 

court-imposed fine for contravention of the Act or regulation 

from $5,000 for a first offence and $10,000 for a second 

offence, and subsequent offences to $25,000 for each offence. 

The maximum imprisonment period will also increase from six 

months to a maximum of two years. Mr. Speaker, as I said, 

these new penalties are among the strictest in the country. In 

comparison to our neighbours, both Alberta and Manitoba have 

maximum fine levels of $20,000. No other province has higher 

maximum imprisonment terms than what we are proposing. 

 

In addition to increasing penalties, the new legislation broadens 

the scope of who can be held accountable under the Act. 

Currently the Act states, ―no person responsible for an animal 

shall cause or permit that animal to be or to continue to be in 

distress.‖ We are changing it to state, no person, including any 

person responsible for an animal, shall cause or permit an 

animal to be or to continue to be in distress. Mr. Speaker, this 

proposed amendment is important, as it will ensure in 

legislation that all people, not just those responsible for the 

animals, are held accountable if an animal is neglected. The 

Saskatchewan SPCA has been especially supportive of this 

amendment. 

 

This legislation also ensures the courts can prohibit convicted 

offenders from owning animals for any period of time. This 

includes life. Owning animals, whether livestock or pets, comes 

with responsibility, and prohibiting these convicted of abuse 

from owning animals in the future is a potential consequence of 

ignoring those responsibilities. Mr. Speaker, these proposed 

amendments are important in addressing the issues of animal 

neglect and abuse. 

 

We also recognize that animal welfare management is 

important. The Ministry of Agriculture provides funding to the 

Saskatchewan SPCA on an annual basis to support the 

investigation of welfare complaints involving livestock. In 

order to better help Saskatchewan SPCA support activities 

directly related to animal welfare management, the Ministry of 

Agriculture is increasing its annual maximum funding 

contribution over the remainder of its agreement with the 

Saskatchewan SPCA. 

 

The ministry will increase its funding to the Saskatchewan 

SPCA by up to $90,000 this fiscal year and up to $150,000 in 

2011-2012 and 2012-2013. This represents a funding increase 

of 111 per cent since 2007-2008. It is imperative that the 

Saskatchewan SPCA is able to respond to animal neglect 

complaints in a very timely manner. This new funding will help 

them with the overall resources necessary to effectively 

investigate these complaints. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our ministry has an excellent working relationship 

with the SPCA, and we value and appreciate the service they 

provide. I hope this increased funding will help them carry out 

the good work that they do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, taking care of our animals is not only the humane 

thing to do. It is also important in the relation to market access. 

On a national and international basis, more countries and 

companies are looking to animal welfare as a factor in market 



November 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6025 

access and consumer preference. We certainly do not want the 

few producers who do not take proper care of their animals to 

restrict access for the majority of producers who do provide 

adequate feed, water, and shelter. Nor do we want to go easy on 

individuals guilty of animal neglect. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the agriculture industry and I believe that we need 

to implement stronger penalties for cases of animal abuse. 

People that do not take animal welfare seriously need to hear 

that message. I have already received several emails and phone 

calls to our office supporting these amendments. One case of 

animal abuse is too many. And this new legislation will help 

our industry better prevent cases of animal neglect. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 148, The Animal 

Protection Act, 2010 be read a second time. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Agriculture has 

moved that Bill 148, The Animal Protection Amendment Act, 

2010 be read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? I recognize the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

listened with interest to the minister’s second reading speech on 

Bill No. 148, The Animal Protection Act and the amendments 

that are being proposed. Mr. Speaker, obviously there’s a lot 

more to this Bill than on first glance. When you look at it, it’s 

not even a full page for heaven’s sakes. 

 

And the big point is where it used to be the responsibility purely 

of the owner. But it talks about ―no person responsible for an 

animal shall cause or permit the animal to be or to continue to 

be in distress.‖ And I think many people are aware of a couple 

instances that happened across the province — and the minister 

referred to a couple of them — and whether it was actually the 

owner or some other person who was responsible for the 

distress that the animals may have been in. And the really 

outdated definition that . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The time being 5 o’clock, this House 

is now recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly recessed until 19:00.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5993 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5993 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5993 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 5993 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5993 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5994 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5994 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5994 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5994 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5995 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 An Exciting Weekend of Saskatchewan Football 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5995 

 Rider Pride 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5995 

 World Diabetes Day 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5995 

 Saskatoon Hilltops Win 14th Canadian Championship 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5996 

 Hunting, Fishing and Trapping Heritage Day 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5996 

 50th Anniversary of Yevshan Ensemble 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5996 

 Carrot River Wildcats Win Championship 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5997 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Arrangements Regarding Long-Term Care Facilities 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5997 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5997 

 Supply of Physicians 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 5998 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5998 

 Support for Resident Physicians 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 5999 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5999 

 State of the Provincial Economy 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5999 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5999 

 Advertising Campaign 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6001 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6001 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Real Growth, Real Opportunity Campaign 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6002 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6002 

CONDOLENCES 

 Darrel Verner Heald, Q.C. 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6003 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6004 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6004 

 Alex Gordon Kuziak 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6004 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6005 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 6005 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6006 

 David Gordon Steuart 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6006 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6008 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6009 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6010 



 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6011 

 Frederick John Thompson 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6011 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6012 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6013 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6014 

 John Vern Wall 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6015 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6017 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6018 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6019 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6019 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6020 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6021 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 144 — The Litter Control Amendment Act, 2010 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6021 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6022 

 Bill No. 148 — The Animal Protection Amendment Act, 2010 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6023 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6025 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5993 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5993 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5993 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 5993 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5993 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5994 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5994 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5994 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5994 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5995 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 An Exciting Weekend of Saskatchewan Football 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5995 

 Rider Pride 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5995 

 World Diabetes Day 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5995 

 Saskatoon Hilltops Win 14th Canadian Championship 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5996 

 Hunting, Fishing and Trapping Heritage Day 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5996 

 50th Anniversary of Yevshan Ensemble 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5996 

 Carrot River Wildcats Win Championship 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5997 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Arrangements Regarding Long-Term Care Facilities 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5997 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5997 

 Supply of Physicians 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 5998 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5998 

 Support for Resident Physicians 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 5999 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5999 

 State of the Provincial Economy 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5999 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5999 

 Advertising Campaign 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6001 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6001 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Real Growth, Real Opportunity Campaign 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6002 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6002 

CONDOLENCES 

 Darrel Verner Heald, Q.C. 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6003 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6004 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6004 

 Alex Gordon Kuziak 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6004 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6005 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 6005 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6006 

 David Gordon Steuart 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6006 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6008 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6009 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6010 



 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6011 

 Frederick John Thompson 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6011 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6012 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6013 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6014 

 John Vern Wall 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6015 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6017 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6018 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6019 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6019 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6020 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6021 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 144 — The Litter Control Amendment Act, 2010 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6021 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6022 

 Bill No. 148 — The Animal Protection Amendment Act, 2010 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6023 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6025 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


